Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - b_2.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 June 17, 1995

 BEHAVIOR

 Moods and the muse

 A new study reappraises the link between creativity and mental illness

 By BRUCE BOWER

 The 19th-century poet Lord Byron endured what he called "savage moods." From 
childhood on, he careened between periods of wretched 
despondency and fiery, increasingly irrational urges and thoughts. His volatile 
temperament frequently set off sparks of poetic imagination, 
inspiring him at one point to write of "the apostle of affliction, he who threw 
enchantment over passion, and from woe wrung overwhelming 
eloquence."

 Byron expresses a widespread intuition that creativity and genius feed off 
mental turmoil. The ancient Greeks, for instance, believed in 
divine forms of madness that inspired mortals' extraordinary creative acts or 
performances. Modern scientists have conducted more than a dozen 
studies documenting a higher rate of mental disorders, particularly 
disturbances of mood such as depression and manic depression, in painters, 
poets, musicians, and novelists.

 An editorial in the April American Journal of Psychiatry, written by 
psychiatrists Peter C. Whybrow of the University of Pennsylvania in 
Philadelphia and Nancy C. Andreasen of the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics in Iowa City, cites this evidence as supporting an 
association between mood disorders and creativity.

 Some researchers take this argument further, arguing that mood disorders 
sometimes enhance or otherwise add punch to creativity (SN: 5/7/94, 
p.302). Yet they acknowledge that individuals who navigate relatively calm 
emotional waters can also wash onto the shores of artistic 
greatness.

 Even with that caveat, the linking of mood disorders to innovative thinking 
relies on a view of creative eminence that exaggerates its tie to 
mental maladies, argues Arnold M. Ludwig, a psychiatrist at the University of 
Kentucky Medical Center in Lexington. New data indicate that 
emotional stability typifies innovative people in certain disciplines, such as 
architecture and the sciences, and occurs in a good many people 
in artistic fields as well, Ludwig asserts. Byronic sufferings engender 
creative breakthroughs only when accompanied by a particular suite of 
personal attributes and circumstances, he says.

 Ludwig describes this "template for greatness" in The Price of Greatness: 
Resolving the Creativity and Madness Controversy (1995, Guilford 
Press).

"Mental illness is not the price people pay for their creative gifts," the 
Kentucky psychiatrist holds. "While mental disturbances may provide 
individuals with an underlying sense of unease that seems necessary for 
sustained creative activity, these disturbances are not the only 
source for inner tension."

 Ludwig derives his argument from a 10-year investigation in which he gathered 
extensive biographical information on 1,004 deceased men and 
women who had lived during the 20th century and gained prominence in the arts, 
the sciences, public office, the military, business, or social 
activism.

 Ludwig developed a creative achievement scale to measure the relative eminence 
of each person in the sample. The scale contains 11 items, 
some of them carrying more weight than others. Key elements of eminence include 
recognition and reputation after death, worldwide appeal of 
creative works, the setting of new directions and demonstration of foresight in 
a field, influence over colleagues and the public, originality 
in creative efforts, and the extent of innovative accomplishments over a 
lifetime.

 Ludwig avoided the temptation to diagnose specific psychiatric disorders from 
written accounts of people's lives. Instead, he used 
biographical information to classify certain broad categories of symptoms as 
"definite" or "probable." These included alcohol- and 
drug-related problems, depression, mania, incapacitating anxiety, bizarre 
delusions and other psychotic symptoms, bodily preoccupations, and 
suicide attempts.

 About one-third of the eminent poets, musical performers, and fiction writers 
in Ludwig's study suffered from serious psychological symptoms 
of some kind as teenagers, a rate that ballooned to about three-quarters when 
they reached adulthood. Teenagers destined for other arenas of 
creative achievement usually displayed good mental health. As adults, however, 
psychological disturbances affected one-half to two-thirds of 
eminent artists, composers, nonfiction writers, actors, directors, musical 
performers, social scientists, architects, and athletes.

 Prominent natural scientists, politicians, explorers, soldiers, and 
businesspeople had the lowest rates of adult mental conditions among 
those studied, ranging from one-quarter to one-third.

 In particular, 46 to 77 percent of poets, fiction and nonfiction writers, 
painters, and composers encountered periods of serious depression, 
at least twice the rate observed in persons in other fields. Mania appeared 
most often in actors, poets, architects, and nonfiction writers, 
with lifetime rates ranging from 11 to 17 percent. The severe mood swings that 
make up manic depression afflict a little less than 1 percent 
of the general population.

 Some professions draw out emotional turmoil, while others tamp it down, Ludwig 
contends. Fields that tolerate ambiguity and flexibility in 
creative expression, such as painting, poetry, and fiction writing, more 
readily accept practitioners with mental disorders and allow them to 
wrestle with their inner demons in their art. Fields that emphasize accumulated 
knowledge and structured means of exploration, such as 
science, attract and promote people with calmer temperaments.

 As a case in point, Ludwig notes that 28 percent of eminent representatives of 
artistic fields in his study suffered from symptoms of serious 
psychological conditions--often mania or excessive alcohol or drug use--at the 
time their careers first took off. Although this finding 
implies that such disturbances benefited creativity, the same pattern 
characterized only 3 percent of eminent scientists, whose lifetime 
creative accomplishments reached the same heights as those of the artistic 
group.

 To discriminate among the ingredients blended into a life of creativity and 
innovation, Ludwig compared the 250 most eminent and 249 least 
eminent members of his sample. The "upper elite," essentially the superstars of 
their fields, consists of people such as painter Pablo 
Picasso, playwright Tennessee Williams, physicist Albert Einstein, and 
architect Le Corbusier. The "lower elite," comprising champions and 
innovators who had less profound influences within and outside their fields, 
includes businessman J.P. Morgan, writer Dorothy Parker, baseball 
player Jackie Robinson, and philosopher-anthropologist Pierre Teilhard de 
Chardin.

 More than half of the upper elite suffered from pronounced symptoms of mental 
disorder, particularly depression, excessive alcohol use, 
extreme reactions to stress, and bodily preoccupations, compared to about 
one-third of the less eminent. However, a statistical model based 
solely on the length and severity of these symptoms during a person's lifetime 
correctly placed only 63 percent of people into the appropriate 
upper and lower elite groups, according to Ludwig.

 A more elaborate model that incorporated eight personal characteristics 
accurately sorted out 92 percent of the creative superstars from the 
less eminent. The presence of these eight elements of eminence greatly boosts a 
person's chances of achieving lasting fame, Ludwig maintains, 
although poorly understood social and historical forces probably decide whether 
one's full creative potential is realized.

 Truly great creative achievers, in Ludwig's model, usually display special 
talents or abilities as children; receive support for developing 
those qualities from parents, who often have creative or aesthetic bents as 
well as emotional difficulties of their own; harbor an ingrained 
contrariness and opposition to established beliefs, which frequently 
antagonizes other people; possess a capacity for solitude and 
self-reliance; face physical trials early in life, often a life-threatening 
illness or physical disability;emblazon their works and 
achievements with a personal and distinctive style; exhibit an unyielding drive 
for dominance and supremacy in their chosen discipline; 
experience a restless, driven state of psychological unease that finds relief 
through creative problem solving.

 Euphoric, energizing bouts of mania or other signs of mental disorder that are 
not too severe or incapacitating may provide the psychological 
unease associated with creativity, the Kentucky psychiatrist points out. 
Eminent people who stay free of emotional troubles apparently stir up 
a sense of psychological unease when they feel the need for creative tension. 
This tactic may pleasantly jolt mood and behavior, much as mild 
mania does, according to Ludwig.

 The existence of a multifaceted template of creative greatness raises 
important questions, he adds. These include the extent to which innate 
talent shapes stellar achievements and the role played by early physical 
illness and disability in the lives of eminent people.

"Given the presence of the rest of the template, chronic physical ailments may 
give someone a heightened sense of urgency to leave a mark on 
the world and achieve immortality through creative greatness," Ludwig 
speculates.

 Ludwig's focus on creativity in a broad array of endeavors strikes a 
responsive chord in researchers who consider studies only of painters, 
poets, and fiction writers to be limited. "This is the first well-done, 
properly controlled study on this issue," contends Robert S. 
Root-Bernstein, a biologist and historian of science at Michigan State 
University in East Lansing. "It shows that mental illness is not a 
necessary precursor or concomitant of creative eminence." In his book 
Discovering (1989, Harvard University Press), Root-Bernstein argues that 
psychological unease and creative tension often stem from a piercing awareness 
of a mismatch between conventional wisdom or a predominant 
theory and one's own observations. Those who become eminent in a field grapple 
with and take inspiration from such insights, he argues.

 The tendency of highly creative painters and writers to work on their own, 
with little or no emotional support from colleagues and friends, 
may accentuate their symptoms of mental disorder over time, Root-Bernstein 
believes. In contrast, scientists often work in groups and receive 
a fair amount of encouragement.

 However, the emotional downside of scientific eminence comes with age, the 
Michigan State researcher says. Scientific productivity usually 
peaks by young or middle adulthood, and the decline thereafter can be steepest 
for the most eminent investigators. Moreover, scientists have a 
hard time dealing with the loss of power and social contacts that accompanies 
retirement, according to Root-Bernstein.

 He thus find it no surprise that Ludwig's investigation documents a sudden, 
steep rise in the suicide rate of all eminent scientists (from 
the superstars to the lower elite) at age 60 that stays elevated through age 
70. The proportion of suicides by older scientists slightly 
exceeded that of their same-age counterparts in the arts.

 Much remains unknown about the extent to which mood disorders such as manic 
depression, which can lead to suicide, affect topflight 
scientists and other highly creative people outside the arts, remarks Kay R. 
Jamison, a psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine in Baltimore. Jamison finds the results of Ludwig's study intriguing 
but suspects his biographical method may miss many instances of 
mild manic depression at the highest levels of eminence, especially in fields 
outside the arts. In her book Touched With Fire: 
Manic-Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament (1993, Free Press), 
Jamison refers to manic depression as "occasionally an exhilarating 
and powerfully creative force, more often a destructive one."

 Mild episodes of mania boost the fluency and frequency of thoughts, she 
argues. For instance, mildly manic patients spontaneously use unusual 
words and creative sound associations, such as rhymes and alliteration, more 
often than emotionally healthy controls. And in written drills, 
manic patients show a heightened facility for listing synonyms and performing 
other word associations. Mania produces other effects conducive 
to creative accomplishment, Jamison notes, such as the ability to work long 
hours without sleep, to focus on ideas intensely, to maintain bold 
and restless attitudes, and to experience deeply a variety of emotions.

"The manic-depressive temperament is, in a biological sense, an alert, 
sensitive system that reacts strongly and swiftly," the Baltimore 
scientist contends. "This is important for creativity in the arts, the 
sciences, and leadership."

 Mild mood fluctuations seem to benefit everyday creativity as well, asserts 
Ruth Richards, a psychiatrist at the University of California, 
San Francisco.

 In one study, Richards and her coworkers found an abundance of everyday 
creativity in people who suffer from mild mood swings, as well as in 
mentally healthy relatives of manic-depressives (SN: 9/3/88, p.151). Creativity 
dropped in people with full-blown manic depression, but it 
still exceeded that for healthy controls with no family history of mood 
disorders.

 Levels of everyday creativity were assessed from the quality and quantity of 
innovative accomplishments at work, at home, and in hobbies.

 Genes involved in manic depression may have been preserved through natural 
selection because they give carriers of the condition's milder 
form the advantage of enhanced creativity, adaptability, and work output, 
Richards theorizes.

"I wouldn't be surprised if many of the highly eminent people Ludwig studied, 
including the scientists, had a family history of mood 
disorders," Richards remarks. "But he's done away with the notion that all 
eminent people have some form of psychopathology."

 Available evidence indicates that alcoholism, mild mania, and depression 
indeed occurred often in the mothers, fathers, and siblings of the 
eminent individuals in Ludwig's sample who also suffered from those conditions. 
But plenty of room remains for the influence of other factors 
on great creative feats, Ludwig asserts.

"There are 10,000 ways to get to originality," Jamison notes. "Some people just 
have incredible imaginations. That doesn't mean they have a 
mental disorder.

 copyright 1996 



