Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - as_2.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 June 24, 1995

 ASTRONOMY AND SPACE SCIENCES

 The little bang

 Was Our Galactic Backyard the Scene of Past Violence?

 By RON COWEN

 Cannibalism, collisions, crashes?

 The environs of the Milky Way and its galactic neighbors don't seem a likely 
place for acts of cosmic violence. These galaxies move serenely across the sky 
with nary a hint of any past trauma.

 But about 8 billion years ago, one or more pairs of galaxies may have smashed 
into Andromeda, the spiral galaxy nearest the Milky Way. Andromeda probably 
devoured one or two of the intruders; the others managed to flee. The Milky 
Way, a mere bystander in the melee, gravitationally grabbed several small 
galaxies that had originally belonged to Andromeda.

 Such a hubbub in our galactic backyard, though fascinating in its own right, 
may have a broader significance. Combined with the recent discovery of 
additional dwarf galaxies a few million light-years from the Milky Way, it 
might help astronomers obtain a better estimate of the total amount of 
mass--both visible and dark matter--in nearby galaxies. This, in turn, would 
provide a new clue to the age of the universe Astronomers caution that they 
have yet to prove this violent episode actually took place. But several lines 
of evidence suggest that some kind of cataclysmic event did occur in our neck 
of the cosmic woods several billion years ago. Researchers call it the Little 
Bang.

 Unlike the Big Bang, which most astronomers believe sparked the birth of the 
cosmos and left behind a universal whisper of radiation, the Little Bang made 
no definitive mark on our galactic neighborhood. However, a team of astronomers 
that includes Gene Byrd of the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, Marshall 
McCall and Kimmo Innanen of York University in North York, Ontario, and Mauri 
Valtonen and Jia-Qing Zheng of Tuorla Observatory in Pikkio, Finland, cite 
several clues pointing to past violence. Consider, notes Byrd, the large 
galaxies Maffei 1 and IC 342. These bodies reside just beyond the Local Group, 
a collection of about 30 galaxies that includes the two superpowers--the Milky 
Way and Andromeda--and their satellite galaxies.

 In our expanding universe, all bodies tend to move apart at a rate that 
increases with their separation. But superimposed on this general trend are 
small-scale motions caused by the gravitational tug of one galaxy on another. 
Given their proximity to the Milky Way, Maffei 1 and IC 342 seem to be moving 
away more rapidly than cosmic expansion alone would dictate.

 Simulations by Valtonen and his colleagues indicate that when the first pair 
of galaxies crashed into Andromeda some 8 billion years ago, the galaxy 
captured one and ejected the other. The same thing happened when the second 
pair collided with Andromeda. The two ejected galaxies, former members of the 
Local Group, were IC 342 and Maffei 1.

 In the same way that firing a bullet gives a gun an opposing kick, the ejected 
matter would have prompted massive Andromeda to recoil slightly in the opposite 
direction. This could explain why Andromeda now moves toward our galaxy at 120 
kilometers per second, while IC 342 and Maffei 1 recede in nearly the opposite 
direction at speeds of 170 and 145 km per second, respectively.

 Byrd cautions that because Maffei 1 and IC 342 reside in dust-shrouded 
locations behind the Milky Way, astronomers still don't have an accurate 
measure of their distances. If they lie farther from the Milky Way than he and 
his colleagues have assumed, all bets are off. There would be no need for a 
Little Bang to account for their speed.

 Other clues support the collision scenario. Andromeda's own anatomy provides 
several. Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope in 1993 revealed that the 
center of Andromeda sports twin peaks--two regions of concentrated light 
emission instead of one. This double nucleus suggests that Andromeda merged 
with another galaxy sometime in the past.

 In addition, astronomers have long known that Andromeda's center has a lower 
than expected density of globular clusters--closely packed groupings of elderly 
stars. What's more, the distribution of globular clusters in Andromeda has an 
unusual feature. In many galaxies, clusters nearer the center have higher 
concentrations of elements heavier than helium; those in Andromeda don't.

 These findings support the view that Andromeda suffered a major collision and 
merger, whereas our galaxy did not, Valtonen and his collaborators assert. They 
argue that collisions and mergers could have ripped apart globular clusters at 
the center of Andromeda, thus accounting for the reduced number of clusters 
there. The events may also have scattered the clusters, scrambling the usual 
correlation between heavy-element concentration and proximity to the galaxy's 
center.

 Three members of the Local Group--all of them satellite galaxies of the Milky 
Way--display some unusual properties that can be explained by a past encounter 
with Andromeda, Byrd notes. The Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, our galaxy's 
biggest satellites, orbit the Milky Way faster than gravity alone requires. In 
other words, they have more angular momentum than astronomers would expect. 
Another satellite galaxy, Leo I, speeds away from the Milky Way at 177 km per 
second, far faster than any other satellite moving toward or away from the 
galaxy.

 The team proposes that these lightweight galaxies represent debris that 
Andromeda hurled toward the Milky Way in the aftermath of the Little Bang. Once 
they escaped the clutches of Andromeda, the three ejected bodies may have moved 
into a region of space dominated by the Milky Way's gravity. Trading one master 
for another, the galaxies became enslaved to the Milky Way about 6 billion 
years ago, the researchers calculate.

"The new view of the Local Group can provide a reason for the departure [from 
Andromeda] and explain the clouds' angular momentum problem," the researchers 
reported in the June 1994 Astronomical Journal. The high velocity of Leo 1 
could have a similar explanation, they note.

 The recent discovery of two galaxies that appear to be close companions of 
Maffei 1 may shed further light on the chain of events that led to its showdown 
with Andromeda. Analysis of the motion of these two galaxies may help 
astronomers measure the mass of Maffei 1--both its visible stars and glowing 
gas and the far larger component of invisible, or dark, matter.

"[By] knowing the amount of matter out there around Maffei 1, it will be 
possible to quantify better its past gravitational interactions with the 
Andromeda galaxy and the Milky Way," says codiscoverer McCall. One of the 
objects, thought to be a spiral galaxy, may also help firm up estimates of the 
distance to Maffei 1. This, in turn, would provide a better estimate of the age 
of the universe inferred from the current positions and velocities of galaxies 
near the Milky Way. McCall and Ronald J. Buta, also at Alabama, report their 
discovery in this month's Astronomical Journal.

 Three years ago, the astronomers were studying the brightness of Maffei 1, 
using a 60-centimeter infrared telescope atop Arizona's Kitt Peak to see 
through the Milky Way's dust. Only after lengthy analysis of these images did 
the team make its accidental discovery of the two objects. "It was like 
shucking an oyster and finding two pearls inside," says McCall.

 The two faint bodies, labeled MB1 and MB2, lie about 10 million light-years 
from Earth. Last year, another team of astronomers discovered an additional 
galaxy in the same part of the sky, although this one may lie farther from 
Maffei 1 than MB1 and MB2 (SN: 11/5/95, p.292).

 MB1 may be a spiral and appears to measure about 17,000 light-years 
across--making it about 15 percent of the Milky Way's size.

 The close association of MB1 and MB2 with Maffei 1 leads McCall and Buta to 
believe that Maffei 1 is tearing material from its two satellites. Radio 
observations of MB1, taken with the 100-meter Effelsberg telescope near Bonn, 
Germany, support that view. (MB2 wasn't detected at radio wavelengths.) Walter 
K. Huchtmeier of the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy in Bonn found 
that MB1 contained relatively little hydrogen gas. The researchers suggest that 
Maffei 1 has gravitationally stolen the missing gas. Byrd calls the findings 
"an embarrassment of riches."

"On the one hand," he says, the two galaxies "will provide a better distance 
estimate to Maffei 1. But [with more galaxies to consider] it will be harder to 
reconstruct the details of the interaction with Andromeda."

 Deducing the age of the universe from the interactions of local galaxies is a 
two-step process, says Byrd. Valtonen and his colleagues began with the 
standard assumption that all bodies that have interacted since the birth of the 
universe once lay near each other. That time is considered the beginning of the 
universe.

 Astronomers simulating the past motion of galaxies near the Milky Way can't 
turn the clock all the way back to the Big Bang in one fell swoop, however. The 
Little Bang gets in the way. "Maffei 1 and IC 342... are near enough to 
[Andromeda] and massive enough to have had a significant influence on the 
dynamics of the Local Group in the past 10 billion years, upsetting efforts to 
determine... the age of the universe through Local Group timing," write Buta 
and McCall.

 After accounting for the kick Andromeda received in the aftermath of the 
Little Bang, Valtonen and his colleagues continued their backwards 
extrapolation, calculating that the Milky Way and Andromeda were intimate 
neighbors 15.5 billion years ago. The Big Bang occurred at this time, Valtonen 
reported last October at the University of Maryland's annual astronomy meeting 
in College Park.

 The notion of the Little Bang remains controversial. Using a novel technique 
based on statistical fluctuations in the brightness of a galaxy, John L. Tonry 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and his colleagues estimate that 
Maffei 1 lies about 13 billion light-years from Earth. That's too far, he says, 
for the large galaxy to have collided with Andromeda 8 billion years ago. The 
Little Bang "is a fun idea, but I think it's wrong," Tonry adds.

 McCall notes that astronomers still don't know the distance to Maffei 1 with 
certainty. Even if the galaxy resided slightly farther away than Tonry 
calculates--up to 16 billion light-years--it might still have smashed into 
Andromeda, McCall maintains.

 Byrd adds that even if Maffei 1 lies too far away, its neighbor, IC 342, may 
qualify as a Little Bang participant. "From the point of view of the dynamics, 
it's easier to figure out what happened in the past if there's just one galaxy 
[to account for] instead of two." Moreover, he says, "the double nucleus of 
Andromeda indicates that something happened, even if these two galaxies [Maffei 
1 and IC 342] are not ejected debris from a collision."

 For now, McCall and his coworkers want to work on getting accurate distances 
to IC 342 and Maffei 1. To estimate how far away Maffei 1 lies, they focus on 
its newly discovered close companion, the spiral galaxy MB1. The rotation of a 
spiral galaxy indicates its true luminosity: The faster it rotates, the 
brighter it is. By comparing the true brightness of MB1 to its apparent 
brightness in the sky, the researchers can, in theory, determine its distance.

 In practice, they will have to estimate the amount of dust obscuring that 
galaxy from ours, a factor that reduces further the amount of light reaching 
Earth. That's a tricky business, but the fate of the Little Bang hangs in the 
balance.

 copyright 1996 


