Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ee_2.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 April 6, 1996

 EARTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES

 Health in the hot zone

 How would global warming affect humans?

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 Paul R. Epstein, a specialist in tropical public health, knows too well the 
kinds of diseases plaguing the tropical latitudes of this planet. While working 
in Mozambique during the late 1970s, the physician endured a withering bout of 
cholera that he caught by eating infected shellfish. During the same trip, his 
wife and two children came down with malaria, even though they were taking 
prophylactic drugs.

 What concerns Epstein, a researcher and clinician at the Harvard School of 
Public Health in Boston, is that many millions of uninitiated people will 
endure similar lessons, as cholera, malaria, and other scourges spread in the 
coming decades. The unwanted education would come courtesy of global warming, 
which could allow diseases to reach into previously unscathed areas.

"I think climate change is a very big threat," says Epstein. "It's a major 
wake-up call. Climate change is already a factor in terms of the distributions 
of malaria, dengue fever, and cholera. They are changing their distributions 
right now."

 Epstein is not alone. In a soon-to-be-released report, the United Nation's 
World Health Organization examines the health effects of global warming--the 
predicted planetary fever caused by emissions of carbon dioxide and other 
heat-trapping gases. The report calls climate change one of the largest public 
health challenges for the upcoming century. Last year, the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reached a similar conclusion, finding that 
"climate change is likely to have wide-ranging and mostly adverse impacts on 
human health, with significant loss of life."

 The issue extends beyond tropical illnesses. Deaths caused directly by heat 
would increase during the ever more oppressive summers. Dwindling agricultural 
yields in the tropics could leave tens of millions more people facing hunger 
and starvation.

 Armed with such alarming forecasts, Epstein and his colleagues have taken 
their information on the road. They have sounded the alert at dozens of 
conferences in the last 2 years.

 The new focus on health could bolster the message of climatologists, whose 
warnings have received a cool reception from the public recently. Global 
warming predictions have tended to be abstract and easily ignored. Scientists 
speak of globally averaged temperature and worldwide sea level rise, factors 
removed from everyday life. The concern about health threats may put a human 
face on climate change. Temperature and mortality

 For evidence that heat can kill, one need look no farther than Chicago. When a 
summer heat wave hit the eastern and midwestern United States last year, it 
left more than 500 dead in that city alone.

 By matching daily summertime temperatures with mortality records in different 
cities, Laurence S. Kalkstein of the University of Delaware in Newark has shown 
that heat waves raise death rates. Although people may cope with gradually 
climbing summer temperatures, most climate models also predict increased 
intensity and frequency of heat waves. Kalkstein therefore anticipates an 
upward spiral in the number of heat-related deaths.

 The problem is expected to strike most severely in large urban centers located 
in the midlatitudes. By the middle of the next century, giant cities like 
Shanghai and New York could face several thousand extra heat casualties each 
year, he wrote in the Sept. 30, 1995 Lancet.

 During winter, however, warming could have the opposite effect in some 
regions. One British study, cited in the IPCC report, concluded that by 2050, 
warming of 2@ to 2.5@C will save 9,000 lives each year in England and Wales. 
Most of these people would otherwise have died from heart disease and stroke, 
problems exacerbated by blood's tendency to clot in colder temperatures. The 
lives saved would more than balance the increase in deaths from Britain's 
relatively mild heat waves, says Anthony J. McMichael, lead author of the IPCC 
chapter on human health and a researcher at the London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine.

 The United States, though, should not bank on comparable benefits from global 
warming. The country's large size--with most regions situated far from any 
coastline--makes it more susceptible to extreme hot spells. "Scientists in the 
United States expect that there will be more losses in the summer than gains in 
the winter," says McMichael. Tropical trouble

 Though heat can kill directly, global warming is expected to claim even more 
of its victims through an indirect influence on disease, particularly on 
vector-borne microbes, which hitch a ride inside insects and other organisms.

"Many diseases are extremely sensitive to climate," says Jonathan Patz of the 
Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health in Baltimore. "Now that the 
climatology community says that climate change is real, we know that there are 
going to be shifts in the distribution of many diseases."

 In the Jan. 17 Journal of the American Medical Association, Patz, Epstein, and 
their colleagues reviewed how global warming could encourage emerging 
infectious diseases to spread. Malaria, they note, generally does not afflict 
regions with annual average temperatures below 16@C, because lower temperatures 
inhibit the parasite. As minimum temperatures climb, the disease could spread 
into previously malariafree regions.

 At present, 45 percent of the world has conditions that permit malaria 
transmission. The IPCC estimates that warming of 3@ to 5@C could expand the 
zone of potential transmission to include 60 percent of the globe. Temperatures 
will reach this point sometime in the 22nd century, according to model 
forecasts. The IPCC predictions call for global average temperatures to rise 1@ 
to 3.5@C by 2100.

 Although malaria has the potential to envelop large parts of the world, the 
IPCC panel found it unlikely that the disease will run rampant through the 
United States and other developed countries. These nations have the 
infrastructure to combat malaria, both by eliminating mosquito breeding sites 
and by treating cases. Although many parts of the United States and Europe 
already have climates that could support malaria, the disease was wiped out in 
these areas in the 19th century.

 The predicted consequences of global warming would fall most heavily on 
tropical regions, where malaria could spread in both latitude and altitude. "A 
relatively small increase in winter (minimum) temperature would likely 
facilitate the spread of malaria into large urban highland populations that are 
currently malariafree and immunologically naive, such as Nairobi, Kenya, and 
Harare, Zimbabwe," Patz and his colleagues contend in their recent article. 
Because residents of Nairobi and Harare have little immunity to the disease, 
malaria would claim an inordinately large number of people in such cities.

 One study by researchers in the Netherlands estimates that climate change will 
cause 1 million extra malaria deaths per year by the middle of the next 
century. But such numbers represent little more than a guess, warn researchers. 
Epstein points out that the ongoing spread of drug-resistant malarial strains 
is likely to make the situation worse than current expectations.

 Other vectorborne diseases also have the potential to expand their ranges in a 
warmer world. Dengue fever has already shown its ability to respond to changing 
conditions. In Mexico during a heat wave in 1988, the mosquito species Aedes 
aegypti carried dengue fever from an altitude of 1,000 meters up to 1,700 
meters.

 Recent warming helped spark an outbreak of dengue that burned through Latin 
America this summer. By the end of September, the disease had infected 140,000 
people from Argentina all the way through South and Central America, eventually 
reaching into Texas. More than 4,000 people died. "This was a hell of a summer. 
It was quite a massive epidemic," says Epstein. Waterborne scourges

 Future trouble will also come from the seas. According to the IPCC, global 
warming should make the oceans a more hospitable home for cholera and harmful 
algal blooms.

 In 1991, cholera emerged in Peru for the first time this century. The 
water-borne illness spread through coastal cities and waterways, eventually 
reaching most countries in South America. In its first 18 months, the epidemic 
infected 500,000 people and caused 5,000 deaths.

 The cholera plague struck while an El Nino was warming the waters of the 
equatorial Pacific, a correlation not lost on researchers interested in health 
and climate change.

 Scientists know that water temperature affects the spread of cholera. The 
bacterium that causes the disease often hitches a ride inside tiny marine 
animals called copepods, which feed on algae. When the water warms, algae bloom 
and copepod populations soar. The whole chain leads to an outbreak of cholera. 
In Bangladesh, for instance, the incidence of cholera tends to rise when water 
temperatures do.

 Scientists can't prove that the 1991 El Nino triggered the South American 
cholera outbreak, but climate change is likely to encourage epidemics in the 
next century, says Epstein.

 Harmful algae also find favor in warmer seas. In the past few years, 
scientists have tracked a global epidemic in coastal blooms of toxic plankton 
that can afflict humans who consume fish or shellfish.

"Given that many of these harmful algae [thrive at higher temperatures], 
warming trends and global climate change will promote increased activity and 
also cause them to continue to expand and extend their ranges," says JoAnn 
Burkholder of North Carolina State University in Raleigh. Greenhouse warming 
will work together with other factors that are currently contributing to the 
algal invasion. Sewage and agricultural fertilizers abet these plankton by 
pouring nitrogen into coastal waters, stimulating the growth of plants. 
Overharvesting reduces the fish populations that keep algae in check.

 Threats such as cholera and malaria, however, may pale in comparison to the 
risk of food shortages caused by global warming. Although increasing 
concentrations of carbon dioxide might actually boost global food production in 
the near future, prolonged warming and precipitation shifts will probably lower 
agricultural yields in many developing countries, according to the IPCC. Such 
countries have fewer resources to adapt to changing conditions, and their 
climates are already marginal for certain crops.

 One recent study predicted that climate change will put 40 million to 300 
million extra people at risk of hunger in 2060. This population would join the 
640 million others expected to face food shortages by that date even without 
climate change.

 Beyond climate concerns

 As the vast range in hunger estimates demonstrates, scientists are only taking 
their first steps toward assessing how greenhouse warming will actually affect 
people. In its report, the IPCC admits that its health forecasts are fraught 
with uncertainty, notably, how much the climate will change, exactly how 
diseases will respond, and to what extent various countries will be able to 
protect against future risks.

 Complicating the picture even further are the myriad other threats to health, 
especially in developing countries. Increasingly crowded cities, poor 
sanitation, limited supplies of potable water, and violence all cause major 
harm today and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future. In fact, some 
public health researchers worry that the growing emphasis on global warming 
could dilute appreciation of some more important, but perhaps less provocative, 
factors currently eroding health around the world.

"My concern is that you can be distracted by what is in fashion," says Vilma 
Santana, an epidemiologist at the Federal University of Bahia in Salvador, 
Brazil. "I think the major issue is poverty. One of the most consistent 
findings of epidemiological research is that poverty is positively associated 
with disease."

 Others echo Santana's concern. "Most of my colleagues in Africa feel that in 
the face of populations without water, toilets, basic access to education, and 
jobs, global warming is the least threat," says epidemiologist Carolyn 
Stephens, a colleague of McMichael's.

 Those concerned about global warming counter that climate will interact with 
and exacerbate many of these seemingly unrelated problems. For instance, shifts 
in rainfall may displace rural populations, thus squeezing even more people 
into crowded cities, where infectious diseases thrive. More frequent droughts 
would make water even scarcer than it is today.

"My argument is that climate change is making a bad situation even worse," says 
Patz. He and Stephens agree, however, that climate change will 
disproportionately burden developing countries. In this way, warming will exact 
the greatest price from populations that can afford it least.

 copyright 1996 


