Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - aa_1.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 April 29, 1995

 ANTHROPOLOGY AND ARCHAEOLOGY

 African finds revise cultural roots By BRUCE BOWER 

 New evidence indicates that people living in Africa 90,000 years ago carved 
barbed bone points to spear fish and even organized annual fishing expeditions. 
This discovery challenges the widely accepted theory that the complex thinking 
and behavior necessary for major cultural changes arose in Europe no earlier 
than 35,000 years ago.

"What's exciting is that we're seeing strategic planning for subsistence by 
people who lived so long ago," says Alison S. Brooks, an archaeologist at 
George Washington University in Washington, D.C. "Humans in Africa invented 
sophisticated [tool] technologies long before their European counterparts, who 
have often been credited with initiating modern culture."

 Brooks and John E. Yellen, an archaeologist at the National Science Foundation 
in Arlington, Va., directed excavations between 1986 and 1990 at a location in 
eastern Zaire called Katanda. Work there yielded eight barbed bone points, 
three unbarbed bone points, and a dagger-shaped bone, Brooks and her colleagues 
report in the April 28 Science. These artifacts were made by grinding a rib or 
limb bone from a large mammal on a stone anvil or with a stone grinder, the 
researchers hold.

 Prehistoric Katanda toolmakers cut a row of three-edged barbs on one side of a 
bone point and carved rings around the base so that it could be fastened to a 
wooden shaft. Comparable bone implements in Europe date only to 14,000 years 
ago, Brooks says.

 Excavations also unearthed the bones of many animals. Remains of large catfish 
turned up in particular abundance. These fish spawn in shallow water during the 
rainy season, which is probably when the Katanda people made visits to the 
area, armed with bone-tipped spears, Brooks argues.

 Clusters of artifacts and animal bones at Katanda resemble the debris produced 
by modern hunter-gatherer families living in the same area, she notes. Current 
residents still fish, although they now use boats. At other archaeological 
sites, evidence for organized fishing extends back no earlier than 20,000 years 
ago.

 Brooks and her colleagues assign an age of at least 89,000 years to the 
Katanda finds, based on analyses of uranium content and breakdown in several 
mammal teeth and measurements of the stored radiation dose in quartz sand just 
above the artifacts.

"This is a highly significant discovery," asserts Jack W. K. Harris, an 
archaeologist at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J., who directs an 
Ethiopian excavation (SN: 4/15/95, p.237). "Technological innovations that gave 
people a reliable food source occurred much earlier than we thought -- and in 
Africa rather than Europe."

 An early form of sedentary living may have emerged at Katanda around 90,000 
years ago, with settlements set up during annual periods of intense fishing, 
Harris contends.

 copyright 1996 


