Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - b_1.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 May 20, 1995

 BEHAVIOR

 Chimp the hunter

 These apes are cute and clever -- and they're vicious predators

 By BRUCE BOWER

 The morning sun shimmers above Tanzania's Gombe National Park, sending its 
parched breath across the October landscape. Dry summer months have left the 
vegetation wilted and many fruit trees bare. A group of 33 chimpanzees -- all 
members of the Gombe-based Kasakela community -- wends through woods and 
scattered clumps of trees searching for food, scanning the vicinity with a 
hungry urgency.

 Chattering and movement by red colobus monkeys in a nearby tree attract the 
chimps' attention. Several adult and adolescent males saunter to the base of 
the tree. Increasingly vocal colobus males form a protective wall in front of a 
cluster of young monkeys and adult females, some of which hold babies.

 The largest chimp pulls himself into the tree and heads toward the monkeys. 
Like heat-seeking missiles, colobus males launch themselves at the intruder and 
sink their teeth into his back and arms. Two monkeys go flying as the robust 
chimp thrusts them off his body and plunges forward. He rips a colobus infant 
from its mother's embrace and heads back to the ground.

 Over the next hour, chimps carry off a few more infants and kill them quickly 
with bites to the head and neck. Several adult monkeys put up fierce resistance 
and are flailed against tree branches or the ground until they hang limply from 
an attacker's powerful arms. The chimps' series of assaults yields a total of 
seven colobus victims.

 For much of the remaining afternoon, the hunting party huddles around its 
kills and consumes virtually all traces of them -- flesh, internal organs, 
bones, and even hair. Male hunters eat 1 to 2 pounds of meat apiece and dole 
out smaller amounts to selected onlookers. Several females with swollen hind 
pouches, which signal their sexual readiness, copulate with male hunters before 
receiving a share of meat.

 Craig B. Stanford, an anthropologist at the University of Southern California 
(USC) in Los Angeles, watches this scene of unbridled carnivory from a safe 
distance. Scientists know relatively little about the extent to which wild 
chimpanzees engage in such hunts and why, at times, they ruthlessly sate a 
hunger for fresh meat. Thus, Stanford meticulously records how the hunt unfolds 
and who gets how much when it's over. Yet he also feels pangs of anguish and 
helplessness.

"I was seeing some monkeys I had come to know well through years of fieldwork 
being ripped to pieces and eaten," Stanford points out, as he recalls the 
chimps' bloody midday repast.

 Such scenes occur with surprising frequency, according to Stanford and his 
coworkers, who include famed Gombe chimp researcher Jane Goodall. The chimps in 
Stanford's ongoing studies kill 75 to 175 colobus monkeys each year, as well as 
smaller numbers of young bushbuck antelope, bushpigs, and other prey that 
usually weigh less than 20 pounds each. Kasakela chimps collectively eat as 
much as 1,200 pounds of monkey meat annually. Meat makes up about 3 percent of 
the chimps' diet.

 Field observations of Gombe chimps conducted from 1982 through 1991 have 
generated the largest record of primate hunting to date, Stanford notes. Enough 
evidence on chimp hunting now exists to compel scientists to look more closely 
for clues to the predatory tastes of early hominids, or members of the human 
evolutionary family, he asserted in March at the annual meeting of the American 
Association of Physical Anthropologists in Oakland, Calif. The first hominids, 
who evolved around 5 million years ago, may often have hunted small game in a 
chimplike manner, Stanford suggests.

 Researchers vary in their willingness to treat chimp behavior as a reflection 
of ancient hominids' habits. Nonetheless, Stanford's view challenges the 
theory, which has gained prominence in the past decade, that early hominids 
obtained fat and meat predominantly by picking over the carcasses of large 
animals killed by lions and other premier predators.

 During the 1960s and 1970s, many anthropologists supported a "man the hunter" 
theory, which envisioned groups of cooperative male hunters as the driving 
force for human evolution. However, the same researchers downplayed previous 
attempts to portray ancient hominids as "killer apes," devoted to the brutal 
slaying of big game and enjoying a meat-rich diet.

 Man the hunter scenarios have been attacked for their neglect of the 
evolutionary role played by women. But evidence that humans do not hold a 
monopoly on hunting among primates has gone largely unnoticed.

 Goodall first reported Gombe chimps' penchant for catching and eating small 
prey in 1968. Separate research teams have also observed chimp predation of red 
colobus monkeys and other animals in Tanzania's Mihale Mountains and in the Tai 
Mountains of western Africa's Ivory Coast. "Stanford has seen things that other 
investigators have missed, because he also looks at chimps' meat eating from 
the point of view of their major prey, the colobus monkeys," says William C. 
McGrew, an anthropologist at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, who also 
conducts research at Gombe.

 A key insight of Stanford's investigation is that the proportion of meat in 
chimps' diet rises sharply in the dry months of late summer and early fall, 
reaching a level near that of some human foraging societies. At Gombe, nearly 
40 percent of colobus kills occur in August and September. During that time, 
adult and adolescent chimps consume from 1 to nearly 4 ounces of meat daily. 
This suggests that some degree of planning, beyond random opportunities that 
arise during foraging expeditions, goes into hunting.

 Dry season hunting does not spring from the sheer hunger of animals facing 
shortages of other foods, Stanford asserts. For instance, chimps do not spend 
more time during summer months foraging for oil palm nuts and other plants that 
remain abundant and contain a far richer concentration of calories than monkey 
meat.

 However, colobus prey provide dietary fat that the chimps evidently crave, the 
USC anthropologist argues. Kasakela chimps typically first consume a monkey's 
brain, which contains a dense supply of fat. They then suck out the fatty 
marrow of long bones before moving on to meat and other body parts. Chimps hunt 
for social as well as dietary reasons, Stanford contends. Sexual politics, in 
particular, influences decisions about whether to attack a particular group of 
monkeys and how meat gets shared, he maintains.

 Males make nearly all the monkey kills at Gombe, but females may be the 
"driving force" behind chimp predation, according to Stanford. The presence in 
a hunting party of females in heat encourages more males to join the expedition 
and increases the chances of a hunt taking place. And a group of 10 or more 
adult and adolescent males nearly always bags some prey, whereas a lone hunter 
captures a colobus about 30 percent of the time.

 Still, male meat seekers act largely on their own during and after the kill, 
even in the largest hunting parties, Stanford notes. Each animal eats much of 
what he catches and gives the rest to those females who provide sex in return, 
as well as to selected family members and friends.

 Females apparently have good reason for acceding to hunters' meat-for-sex 
demands, McGrew notes. Gombe females who regularly obtain generous shares of 
meat produce more offspring that survive past infancy than other females, he 
finds.

 Japanese researchers working in the Mihale Mountains have reported that a 
dominant male in one community distributes meat to his male allies and 
withholds it from rivals. Further studies at Gombe will examine whether meat 
sharing helps to forge alliances between males, Stanford says.

 In a provocative extension of his findings, Stanford argues that human 
ancestors living more than 4 million years ago may have hunted in much the same 
way as chimps do now. Early hominids killed prey for reasons at least as 
complex and politically charged as those of Gombe chimps, he theorizes. Most 
early hominid hunters were probably males who hunted within a core area of a 
larger foraging territory, the pattern shown by Gombe chimps, Stanford asserts. 
Other likely characteristics of hunting by hominids, in his view, include 
increased meat eating during lean, dry months; a preference for consuming the 
brain and marrow of prey; meat sharing by members of a hunting party; and the 
use of meat to gain political and sexual advantages.

 Fossil finds in Ethiopia of the earliest known hominid species, 
Australopithecus ramidus, generally support this scenario, Stanford argues. A. 
ramidus lived about 4.4 million years ago in a forested area it shared with 
colobus monkeys, small antelopes, and many other animals (SN: 10/1/94, p.212). 
Although A. ramidus had a body adapted for two-legged walking and undoubtedly 
climbed in trees less adeptly than Gombe chimps, it still had the capacity to 
capture the tree-dwelling ancestors of colobus monkeys, the USC researcher 
contends. For example, 8 to 10 hominids could have cornered several monkeys in 
an isolated tree, with some hunters shaking the prey off branches and others 
catching and killing them.

 A. ramidus and other early hominids had small canine teeth compared to Gombe 
chimps, but sharp canines prove far less valuable to chimp hunters than having 
the arm strength to grab monkeys and flail them to death. "Modern chimpanzees 
in the wild have little interest in dead animals as food and offer little 
support for a scavenging phase in human prehistory," Stanford says.

 Investigations have yet to turn up any solid evidence that A. ramidus hunted 
monkeys or any other creatures, says Tim D. White, an anthropologist at the 
University of California, Berkeley, and director of the A. ramidus excavations 
in Ethiopia. Future work will attempt to reconstruct the ancient environment of 
A. ramidus and compare it to the forested regions now inhabited by chimpanzees.

"Our early hominid ancestors were more like chimps than anything else," White 
asserts. "Modern chimps show us the kinds of possibilities that were open to 
hominids, but the final evidence has to come from fossils and other information 
at hominid sites."

 Still, the significance of Stanford's data on chimp hunting remains in dispute.

 Milford H. Wolpoff, an anthropologist at the University of Michigan in Ann 
Arbor, expresses doubt that living chimps offer a looking glass into the world 
of early hominids. "I don't think chimps are a good model for hominids," he 
says. "It's not clear that we even know what ancestral chimps were like from 4 
million to 6 million years ago. Stanford may end up showing us what hominids 
didn't do, which would also be important."

 Robert J. Blumenschine, an anthropologist at Rutgers University in New 
Brunswick, N.J., argues that living chimps serve up only a partial glimpse of 
how hominids procured meat. Stanford's data concern the hunting of prey 
weighing no more than 20 pounds, Blumenschine says, but ancient hominid sites 
in Africa bear evidence that hominids frequently consumed much larger animals. 
Many of these sites contain the remains of adult antelope and other prey of 
comparable size mixed with stone tools appropriate for pounding and slicing 
carcasses, he adds.

"Scavenging is the best explanation for how hominids acquired large prey," the 
Rutgers investigator holds.

 Given that Gombe chimps literally eat away all traces of their colobus prey, 
Stanford suspects that archaeological data cited by Blumenschine underestimate 
the extent to which hominids hunted small game.

 Hominids undoubtedly exerted diverse influences on their prey that are equally 
difficult to extract from ancient bones and stones, Stanford remarks. At Gombe, 
for instance, the chimps' preference for infant and juvenile monkeys skews the 
composition of the colobus population. Immature animals make up 17 percent of 
all colobus living in the chimps' hunting range, whereas they compose 40 
percent of the colobus population in adjacent areas.

 Moreover, the number of monkeys killed in hunts rises or falls substantially, 
based on the composition of the chimp population. Colobus mortality has 
increased sharply since 1990 because of growth in the number of adult and 
adolescent males in the Kasakela community, Stanford says. A single avid or 
skilled hunter can take a big bite out of a prey population. Consider Frodo, a 
120-pound adult male chimp who in the past few years has distinguished himself 
as the fiercest and most successful Gombe hunter. In 2 years, 1990 and 1992, 
Stanford estimates that Frodo single-handedly killed nearly 10 percent of the 
colobus living in the home range of the Kasakela chimps. That works out to 40 
solo kills in each of those years.

"Early hominids could have hunted in this way if they lived in woodlands with 
low, isolated trees," Stanford asserts. "Predation may have had an important 
influence on social and group behavior in all primates." .

 copyright 1996 


