Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ee_1.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 November 11, 1995

 EARTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES

 For the sake of Sue

 What will happen to the world's best T. rex ?

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 Even by a dinosaur's standards the Tyrannosaurus rex named Sue must have led 
an unusually difficult life. Its huge skeleton has scars aplenty, bearing 
witness to several life-threatening injuries sustained more than 65 million 
years ago. One leg shows a healed-over fracture, the skull has gouges along its 
side, and a tooth fragment remains embedded in a rib, the remnant of some 
distant combat with another T. rex.

 These wounds can't compare, however, to the tribulations the dinosaur has 
suffered since fossil collectors first dug it up in August 1990 on land owned 
by a South Dakota rancher named Maurice Williams. Its bones sparked a legal 
battle over ownership that raged all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. And for 
the last 3 years, it has remained incarcerated in a dinosaur dungeon--a garage 
at the South Dakota School of Mines in Rapid City.

 Reputedly the biggest and most complete T. rex skeleton known, Sue attracts 
great scientific interest. But those attributes also make this dinosaur a 
desirable commodity on the fossil market. Williams, who emerged as the winner 
of the ownership battle, has received offers of up to $60 million for the 
skeleton and is now trying to figure out what to do with it.

 Paleontologists, meanwhile, are trying to sort out what the case can teach 
them. The controversy fueled a long-standing feud between commercial fossil 
collectors and academic researchers, who see themselves as competitors for a 
limited resource. Congress may weigh in with legislation that changes the rules 
on fossil collecting.

 The case of Sue began 5 years ago, when Williams met Peter Larson, a 
commercial collector and president of the Black Hills Institute of Geological 
Research, a company dealing in fossils. At the time, Larson was looking for 
fossils on property adjoining Williams' ranch near Faith. Williams says he 
invited Larson over to look for fossils.

 While searching Williams' property on Aug. 12, 1990, a member of Larson's team 
named Susan Hendrickson spotted a piece of T. rex bone in the side of the hill. 
The fossil, which became known as Sue, was apparently that of a female T. rex.

 Larson claims that he immediately asked Williams for permission to excavate 
the fossil. Two weeks later, when his team uncovered the dinosaur's skull, 
Larson gave Williams a check for $5,000 to purchase the skeleton. The check had 
"for theropod Sue" written on the bottom, says Patrick K. Duffy, Larson's 
attorney.

 But Williams offers a different version of the story, saying that he told 
Larson the fossil couldn't be sold without government approval because it was 
found on "trust" land--real estate held in trust for Williams by the federal 
government. The trust agreement protects the interests of Indian landowners by 
giving the government oversight of the land.

 Williams denies that he reached any sort of agreement with Larson over the 
sale of the dinosaur. In fact, he says, Larson handed over the check without an 
explanation. "I asked him what the check was for and he didn't choose to 
answer," Williams told Science News. "We just considered it [was] for the right 
to search or for damage to the land."

 In any case, Williams deposited the check and kept the money. Larson, 
meanwhile, packed up and took the specimen, which he knew was probably worth 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, if not millions. After transporting the 
skeleton back to the Black Hills Institute, Larson announced that he would 
build a museum around it.

 When a local newspaper reported the discovery and word of its tremendous value 
circulated, the legal struggles began. The Cheyenne River Sioux claimed 
ownership of the fossil because it was found within the reservation boundary. 
Williams asserted his right to the T. rex because it came from his land. All 
the while, the Black Hills Institute had possession of Sue and was putting 
hundreds of hours of labor into preparing it for display--a process that 
involves carefully removing the rock matrix from the fossil.

 U.S. Attorney Kevin Schieffer stepped into the case on May 13, 1992, with a 
search warrant to seize Sue as evidence in a criminal case against Larson and 
his colleagues. The next day, National Guardsmen and FBI agents raided the 
institute, removing Sue and many other specimens and documents. Schieffer 
subsequently justified the seizure as a means of protecting public access to 
the fossil, which he feared Larson was preparing to sell.

 The institute sued the Department of Justice for the return of the T. rex, but 
the U.S. District Court ruled against Larson's group. In the court's opinion, 
the fossil represented a piece of real estate and could not be sold without 
involving the U.S. Department of the Interior, the trustee of Williams' land. 
Therefore, the fossil remained the property of Williams' trust, a decision 
upheld when the U.S. Supreme Court decided not to consider the appeal.

 Schieffer never used the skeleton as evidence in a criminal case. But in 1993, 
a grand jury indicted Larson and other institute officers on 39 felony counts. 
The indictments portrayed Larson as an unscrupulous dealer who stole fossils 
from government land and lied to private landowners in order to search their 
property for valuable bones.

 In March 1995, a Rapid City jury acquitted the defendants on most of the 
charges but convicted them on eight felony and five misdemeanor counts 
regarding less important fossils: a catfish, an extinct marine reptile, and a 
whale. The convictions include counts of stealing fossils from government land 
and making false statements to U.S. Customs officials.

 A recent Supreme Court ruling in an unrelated case invalidated five of the 
felony convictions because of a legal technicality related to the way juries 
consider false statements. The U.S. government could have retried those five 
counts, but it decided in October not to.

 Larson and his brother Neal currently await sentencing, and the institute may 
suffer fines. Peter Larson, the only person convicted of a felony, faces a 
possible 43 months in prison, although Duffy plans to appeal the convictions 
after sentencing. The defendants have spent more than $1 million in legal fees 
so far, according to Marion Zenker of the Black Hills Institute.

 Just as the Larsons' fate remains in limbo, so does Sue's. The decision falls 
to Williams and the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), charged with 
obtaining the "highest and best" use of the fossil for Williams.

 Carson Murdy, an archaeologist with the BIA in Aberdeen, S. D., says Williams 
has received offers for the T. rex from potential buyers as far away as Japan. 
"Prices have been mentioned ranging from $300,000 to $60 million, although that 
was an anonymous offer which came in secondhand," says Murdy. "The only written 
offer is for $2 million from an individual in Canada."

 Murdy has sought advice from the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (SVP), 
which convened a panel of three paleontologists to examine the fossil. "It was 
my hope that Mr. Williams could enter into an arrangement with an academic 
institution to have the fossil cleaned up and stabilized," says Murdy. Such a 
deal would benefit both parties, he says. The academic institution could study 
the fossil while doing the preparation for little or no charge.

 But funds for bringing paleontologists to Rapid City evaporated, and the BIA 
put the project on hold. Williams says that he would like to retain ownership 
of the fossil and derive some income from it. "The government tells me the 
bottom line is money when it comes to fossils. I'm not a scientist. I'm not a 
paleontologist," says the 69-year-old rancher. "I should get a value out of 
this or any other fossil. The time I've got left in my life I don't think is 
going to be devoted to the beneficial study of fossils."

 That kind of sentiment scares dinosaur researchers because it suggests that 
Sue could find a home in a private collection, out of view of scientists and 
public alike.

 Vertebrate paleontologists have long maintained their desire to avoid 
commercialization of fossils and to keep important specimens available for the 
public, says SVP president David Krause of the State University of New York in 
Stony Brook. "We do not condone the sale, the barter, or the trade of fossil 
vertebrates that would result in their being lost from the public domain."

 Commercial collectors, however, argue that they serve an important purpose and 
have a right to search for fossils. Indeed, dealers have helped build the 
collections of many museums around the country. "We have come under fire from a 
lot of what I would call academic zealots who have a purist attitude towards 
fossil collecting and feel that they are the only qualified people to collect 
fossils," says Jon Kramer, past president of the American Association of 
Paleontological Suppliers and a research associate at the Earth Museum in 
Robinsdale, Minn.

 The laws concerning fossil collection on public lands are nebulous. Amateur 
and commercial collectors face a tangled web of rules that vary widely between 
the U.S. Forest Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Park Service. 
Rep. Tim Johnson (D-S.D.) is drafting legislation to address the problem and 
has sought comments from the SVP, commercial collectors, and amateur collectors.

 One issue raised by the bill is casual, or reconnaissance, collecting. If 
included, it would allow amateurs and commercial collectors searching on public 
land to take fossils off the surface without a permit. Serious excavations, 
however, would require permission from the agency overseeing the land. 
Commercial collectors support the idea of unrestricted reconnaissance 
collecting, but the proposal has drawn criticism from the SVP. "There is a lack 
of appreciation of the significance of small fossils that can be found at the 
surface. Most of the scientifically significant fossils are found in that 
manner," says Krause.

 The rival sides will continue their battle as the bill moves through Congress. 
But both sides agree that the case of Sue has only served to inflame the 
division between the commercial and academic communities. "It's a travesty what 
happened, because ironically, now it's for sale to the highest bidder. It's an 
ugly mess that hasn't done anybody any good," concludes Kramer.

 Of all those involved, Sue may have the last laugh. When Larson found the T. 
rex skeleton, only 11 specimens of this giant carnivore were known. But in the 
intervening 5 years, Larson and others have found eight more specimens, perhaps 
reducing the value of the fossil that Williams won. "Now T. rexes are cropping 
out all over the place," says Kenneth Carpenter of the Denver Museum of Natural 
History. "They're turning out not to be quite as rare as everyone was saying."

 copyright 1996 


