Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ls_3.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 September 2, 1995

 LIFE SCIENCES

 Monkeyflowers: A Leap for Nature? By TINA ADLER 

 In this age of concern over the loss of species, scientists are still debating 
how speciation--the appearance of new species--works. Must many small genetic 
mutations occur or do a few genes undergo big changes? Darwin argued that 
change occurs gradually and that "natura non facit saltum"--nature does not 
make leaps. But a new study suggests otherwise.

 Recent research on the wildflower Mimulus, also known as the monkeyflower, 
suggests that new species arise largely through mutations in a handful of genes 
with key functions, according to Toby Bradshaw and his colleagues at the 
University of Washington in Seattle.

 The team's subjects, Mimulus lewisii and M. cardinalis, grow widely in and 
west of the Rocky Mountains. They have many different features, including the 
color and shape of their flowers, and the quantity and concentration of nectar 
they store. Although neighbors, they can't interbreed, as only hummingbirds 
pollinate M. cardinalis and only bumblebees spread the pollen of M. lewisii. 
However, scientists can crossbreed them in the laboratory.

 What genetic changes--and how many of them--caused these monkeyflowers to 
develop such unique traits? To find out, Bradshaw and his colleagues employed 
genome mapping techniques now popular among plant and animal breeders.

 The scientists mapped much of the genome of a hybrid of the two species. In 
the process, they determined which genes influenced traits related to 
pollination: such as flower color, size, and shape; nectar volume and 
concentration; and pistil and stamen length.

 In the Aug. 31 Nature, they report finding that for each trait, at least one 
gene proved responsible for more than 25 percent of the variation within a 
sampled population of hybrid flowers. For example, M. cardinalis produces 80 
times more nectar than M. lewisii, and a single gene causes at least half of 
that difference. Bradshaw suspects that other, unidentified genes control each 
trait's remaining variation.

 M. cardinalis' red color, which results from high concentrations of 
anthocyanin and carotenoid pigments, attracts hummingbirds but goes unnoticed 
by bumblebees, which, Bradshaw points out, don't detect red. M. lewisii's pale 
pink petals have a low concentration of anthocyanin and attract bumblebees. 
Bradshaw and his colleagues found that one gene causes nearly one-quarter to 
one-third of the difference in anthocyanin concentrations, while a single gene 
determines the presence of carotenoids.

"There is now increasing evidence for the importance of major genes," asserts 
Jerry A. Coyne of the University of Chicago, writing in an accompanying 
editorial. "There are still only a handful of relevant studies, of which the 
best is now [Bradshaw's] work on Mimulus."

 Before this work, no other team had looked at several traits of two species 
simultaneously and examined a large number of regions on the chromosomes to 
study how plants evolve in the wild, says Coyne.

 Although speciation in this one flower seems traceable to differences in a few 
genes, researchers will need to do many more such studies to say definitively 
whether speciation generally involves mutations in a few or in many genes, says 
Loren H. Rieseberg of Indiana University at Bloomington. Indeed, the question 
has remained unanswered for so long, the Seattle team asserts, largely because 
detailed genetic studies have been limited to only a few species, such as fruit 
flies.

 copyright 1996 


