Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ls_5.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 March 30, 1996

 LIFE SCIENCES

 Hippity hop goes the virus

 The Australian war on rabbits just got a little wild

 By TINA ADLER

 In the 1800s, British settlers in Australia imported animals from their 
homeland, such as red foxes, blackbirds, sparrows, starlings, and rabbits. 
"They couldn't quite come to grips with gum trees and koalas," explains Brian 
Cooke, an Australian zoologist.

 The rabbits lived up to their reputation and reproduced. A lot. Now, 
Australians can't come to grips with their 200 million to 300 million wild 
European rabbits, which reside primarily in the southern half of the country. 
They "are an ecological disaster," Cooke says.

 Unchecked, they create deserts wherever they go, devouring plants, shrubs, and 
seedlings. They have also forced other small animals, such as the bandicoot, or 
bilby, a native marsupial, to retreat to northern Australia. Livestock, 
including sheep and cattle, struggle to compete with rabbits for pasture.

 Keeping the bunnies in check is a Herculean task. Kill off 70 percent of their 
population, and they will recoup their losses in a year, Cooke reported in 
1991. He is the field research leader in Canberra for the Australia and New 
Zealand Rabbit Calicivirus Disease Program (ANZRCDP), a government and 
agricultural industry group. But the Australians have certainly tried to turn 
back the tide of rabbits. They've shot and poisoned them; plowed up, blasted, 
and fumigated their warrens; sicced predators on them; and fenced their fields.

 In the early 1950s, government scientists resorted to releasing myxomatosis, a 
virus that kills rabbits rather painfully. "It is not very nice from an animal 
welfare point of view," comments Sandra Bennett, a spokeswoman with the 
Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) 
in New South Wales.

 Although quite successful at first, myxomatosis gradually became less 
effective, particularly in the country's dry rangelands. Scientists are now 
trying to genetically engineer the virus to sterilize rabbits, but they have 
yet to succeed.

 In 1991, Australian researchers supported by ANZRCDP began to test a different 
virus, a calicivirus. It kills quickly and fairly painlessly by causing blood 
clots in the lungs, heart, and kidneys. After completing laboratory tests of 
the virus' safety and efficacy, the scientists injected it into rabbits 
quarantined on Wardang Island, an uninhabited spot in Spencer Gulf, South 
Australia.

 That's when things got a little out of control and some researchers really 
began to worry about the new virus and where it might hop to.

 Since the early 1900s, scientists have found a variety of caliciviruses in 
humans and other animals (SN: 2/22/86, p. 116). The rabbit version, originally 
called rabbit hemorrhagic virus, first surfaced in 1984 in China. Since then, 
it has spread throughout North Africa and Europe, as far north as Sweden, 
leaving a trail of dead rabbits.

 In their recent laboratory studies, the Australian researchers demonstrated 
that the rabbit virus fails to infect any of the 28 domestic and wild animal 
species they tested, including such natives as bush rats and fat-tailed 
dunnarts. However, to use the virus as a control agent, the researchers needed 
to know how well it kills rabbits in the field and whether it disrupts the 
breeding success of survivors, lasts a respectable time, and interacts with 
myxomatosis.

 So they quarantined 1 square kilometer of Wardang Island, built pens enclosing 
individual warrens, and in March 1995 began inoculating rabbits with the 
calicivirus. To reduce the risk of either beast or bug escaping, workers 
checked the fences daily for damage and tested the blood of wild rabbits 
outside the pens. They used insect traps and sprays "to minimize the spread of 
virus via insects," reports ANZRCDP, which hired scientists at CSIRO's 
Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Geelong to do the research.

 In late September, they discovered that, despite their efforts, the virus had 
evaded containment. Dead rabbits with signs of the calicivirus infection 
appeared outside the pens. By killing any that had survived at or near the 
site, they managed to stop the virus from spreading all over the island. But it 
had already spread to the mainland and infected rabbits hundreds of kilometers 
inland. Health officials decided that trying to contain it would be a losing 
battle.

 Since then, the virus has been found throughout South Australia, just over the 
borders of New South Wales and Queensland, and at two sites in central 
Victoria. It appears to kill between 80 and 95 percent of the adult rabbits it 
encounters.

"We don't have a formal position on how the virus escaped," says ANZRCDP 
coordinator Nicholas Newland in Adelaide. He suggests that insects may have 
carried it. Almost anyone or anything that contacts even minuscule particles of 
contaminated fecal matter or rabbit meat could pick up the virus and 
inadvertently pass it on to rabbits.

 Newland doubts that someone sneaked the potent bug off the island 
intentionally. However, "there has been some talk that people are aiding and 
abetting its spread [on the mainland]. . . . I can't say if that's just 
scuttlebutt or it's real," notes Harvey Westbury, a veterinary virologist with 
the animal health lab.

 Government officials are now deciding whether to allow an organized release of 
the virus. Under the proposed plan, scientists would infect rabbits living in 
10 ecologically different regions throughout Australia and monitor the virus' 
spread. Between November 1995 and January 1996, the government invited the 
public to comment. Ninety percent of the 470 letters submitted support the 
release, says Bennett. ANZRCDP will probably get the go-ahead, Newland believes.

 The program "clearly had failed planning," argues David O. Matson, a physician 
at Eastern Virginia Medical School's Center for Pediatric Research in Norfork, 
who studies caliciviruses in humans. The spread of the virus "could have been 
avoided. . . . We don't know what the outcome will be." He and others fear that 
the bug could infect animals other than rabbits, including people.

 But CSIRO scientists say their studies and others demonstrate that the virus 
is quite complacent and highly unlikely to infect other species.

 Many people have worked with infected rabbits, yet there have been no reports 
of anyone picking up the rabbit virus or developing antibodies to it. 
"Caliciviruses are noted for having narrow host ranges, and only a rare number 
of cases are known where a [calicivirus] has crossed species boundaries," CSIRO 
scientists report.

 The Australians "are playing with dynamite," contends veterinarian Alvin W. 
Smith of the Laboratory for Calicivirus Studies at Oregon State University in 
Corvallis. He believes that caliciviruses readily venture beyond their original 
hosts. One that infects seals can also survive in marine animals, pigs, cattle, 
monkeys, and people, he says. And for many years, scientists mistakenly 
believed that the swine calicivirus would not sicken cattle.

"The Australian scientists may have shown that the rabbit calicivirus does not 
readily infect some test species, but they have in no way proven that it cannot 
adapt to and become established in these or [a] new host," Smith wrote to an 
Australian senator in December 1995.

 Rabbits' crowded living conditions in parts of Australia are likely to allow 
the virus to reproduce extensively. That, in turn, increases the chance that 
mutants capable of infecting other species will appear on the scene, Matson 
argues.

 Moreover, a recent genetic analysis by Matson and his colleagues, including 
Smith, suggests that animal and human caliciviruses "are not as different as we 
previously thought," Matson asserts. "There has to be some sort of barrier to 
human infection--we just don't know the strength of that barrier." The symptoms 
that the rabbit virus would produce if it could live in people remain unknown 
as well.

"I respect [Matson's] views, but there is no evidence that we can find that. . 
. this rabbit virus can infect other species," Westbury contends.

 Virologists lack the know-how to determine whether a virus will move on to new 
hosts, argues Stephen Morse of Rockefeller University in New York City. "One 
thing we'd love to do in virology is to predict just this sort of thing . . . 
but it's still largely an art rather than something we can do scientifically."

"It's a risky business introducing a virus into a population with a lot of 
unknowns," says Douglas Gregg, a veterinarian with the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture's Foreign Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory on Plum Island, N.Y. 
However, this virus has remained very loyal to the rabbit and poses little 
threat to other creatures, particularly humans, he adds.

"We are a long way from a rabbit phylogenetically," he notes. "I think Al Smith 
is barking up the wrong tree."

 Gregg, in fact, thinks that the Australians are dealing with a new type of 
parvovirus--not a calicivirus at all. The rabbits' symptoms resemble those 
caused by parvoviruses, not by caliciviruses, he asserts. Also, only Nian-Xing 
Du and his colleagues at the Nanjing Agricultural University in China have 
managed to isolate and grow in cells the virus that is killing rabbits 
worldwide, he says. So only they have a pure form of the agent--which looks 
genetically like a parvovirus. Gregg's and Du's studies on the rabbit virus 
appeared in the June 1991 Scientific and Technical Review.

 Westbury disagrees. "We know we only have calicivirus," and a lot of 
international research supports that finding, he argues.

 While some Australians are rejoicing in the coming of the bunny plague, 
residents of other countries want only to shield their animals from it.

"I have a concern, and many in USDA do, that this disease could get into the 
United States easily," Gregg asserts. Rabbits are allowed to enter the United 
States only if they appear healthy, but they are not tested for disease. At 
least 324,000 pounds of rabbit meat and thousands of live rabbits enter the 
United States annually, he says.

 Among U.S. domesticated rabbits, "the potential for an epidemic is 
tremendous," he warns. For example, the virus could spread easily at rabbit 
fairs, each of which can host as many as 10,000 show animals. However, two of 
the most common wild rabbits in the United States, the eastern cottontail and 
blacktail jackrabbit, do not catch the disease, Gregg's studies have 
demonstrated.

 There isn't any widely available rabbit vaccine that has met U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration standards for safety and efficacy, Gregg says. Also, some 
countries choose not to use the available vaccine during an outbreak, thus 
ensuring that inspectors can detect sick rabbits with an antibody test. 
Vaccinated animals also produce antibodies.

 The rabbit virus has plagued other countries. It took 5 years for Mexico to 
get rid of it. The problem began when, in 1989, a supermarket worker 
unknowingly handled contaminated rabbit meat imported from China. The worker 
also had his own rabbit-breeding business and spread the virus, Gregg says.

 Australian scientists realize that if the virus works very well, rabbits' 
predators may turn to other animals. What happens, for example, if hungry foxes 
eat endangered species? "We can get rid of the foxes, I guess," Cooke says. 
"There may be a need for coordinated predator control," ANZRCDP acknowledged in 
a Dec. 4, 1995, press release.

 Questions remain about whether the Australians should use the virus and where 
it will pop up next. But do ANZRCDP's efforts have a chance of making a dent in 
the rabbit population?

 Scientists at CSIRO say yes, while acknowledging that the virus is no magic 
bullet. Australians must continue using the rest of their antirabbit arsenal, 
because young rabbits often resist the virus and then go on to develop lifetime 
immunity. Because of the immunity, Matson anticipates that within a few years 
the virus will have little effect.

 But many Australians want to give the virus a chance. They think it's their 
best shot at subduing the wild, floppy-eared gangs uprooting their native 
plants and animals.

 Easter Bunny Beware

 The Anti-Rabbit Research Foundation of Australia wants everyone to say good 
riddance to the Easter Bunny and hello to the Easter Bilby. Easter what? 
Bilby--a native Australian marsupial that looks something like a rabbit but 
lacks the rabbit's flair for reproducing and devouring vegetation.

 The foundation published in 1994 a children's book about how the sweet Easter 
Bilby beat out greedy bunnies to replace the retiring Easter Bunny. Easter 
Bilby, written by Ali Garnett and illustrated by Kaye Kessing, has sold 30,000 
copies. Sales of chocolate Easter Bilbies have done well too. Shown from the 
book are the Easter Bunny (previous page, top), a bilby (previous page, 
bottom), and a greedy bunny (right).

 copyright 1996 


