Science News Online - March 9, 1996 - March 9, 1996

 Bidding Bye-Bye to the Black Sheep?

by T. Adler

 Sheep already look so much alike that counting them helps people fall asleep. 
Now, they may become even more uniform. For the first time, researchers have 
demonstrated a technique that may lead to the mass production of livestock 
clones created from genetically altered cells.

 Although scientists can create clones of genetically engineered mice, they are 
far less successful with livestock.

 Researchers in Roslin, Scotland, report this week that they have succeeded in 
cloning sheep using a technique that they improved to produce potentially 
hundreds of animals. Moreover, the group expects to combine the method with 
genetic engineering to create animals with specific traits. Called nuclear 
transfer, the technique replaces the nucleus of an immature egg with a nucleus 
from another cell.

 In the past, scientists obtained the replacement nuclei directly from cells in 
embryos. Now, Keith H.S. Campbell and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute 
are using nuclei from cells grown in a laboratory culture, they report in the 
March 7 Nature. An embryo has no more than 30 or 40 usable cells, whereas a 
culture features an almost endless supply.

 The new approach makes genetic engineering of these donor cells more feasible 
because a lab culture can supply so many of them to manipulate, says coauthor 
Ian Wilmut. A company could first select cells for cloning from prize animals, 
then improve them further with a gene that, for example, makes the animals 
produce milk rich in a therapeutic protein.

 Many labs have tried for years to clone livestock using cell lines, "and now 
Campbell's group has done it," asserts George E. Seidel Jr. of the Animal 
Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory at Colorado State University in Fort 
Collins.

 The success "is cause for celebration," exclaims Davor Solter of the Max 
Planck Institute for Immunobiology in Freiburg, Germany, who wrote a commentary 
accompanying the report. The finding opens the door to cloning mammals from 
adult cells, he adds.

 In their study, the Scottish investigators grew embryo cells of Welsh mountain 
sheep in the laboratory. During a relatively stable stage of the cell cycle, 
they transferred 244 of the nuclei to the stripped-down eggs of Scottish 
blackface ewes.

 They didn't have to fertilize the eggs, because the new nuclei had a full set 
of chromosomes. By giving the eggs an electric shock, they also took over the 
sperm's job of initiating development.

 Thirty-four of the eggs developed sufficiently for the scientists to insert 
them into Scottish blackface ewes. After a week, they removed them from the 
ewes, discarded the failures, and returned the 19 healthy ones to their 
surrogate mothers.

 Their efforts resulted in five genetically identical Welsh mountain lambs. Two 
of the lambs died within 10 days of birth, probably from kidney trouble. What 
caused the illness remains unclear. "The more you interfere with reproduction, 
the more danger there is of things going wrong," Wilmut acknowledges.

 However, asking what failed with the procedure "is like asking what went wrong 
when [the Wright brothers] flew their plane and it went only 300 feet. . . . 
Things went remarkably well," Seidel observes. He expects the approach to be 
applicable to cattle and other livestock.

 Might this approach work for cloning humans (SN: 2/5/94, p. 92)? Both Wilmut 
and Seidel agree it's theoretically possible but far from feasible. Besides, 
"we don't think it's something you'd want to do," says Wilmut.

copyright 1997


