Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ls_8.htm January 22, 1994

 That Feminine Touch

by J. Raloff

 Are men suffering from prenatal or childhood exposures to "hormonal" toxicants?

 Sex hormones orchestrate myriad biological activities throughout our lives, 
beginning with the initial signaling for certain fetal tissues to 
differentiate into structures that are quintessentially male or female.

 But gender - both its physical expression and its characteristic behavior 
traces more to the relative concentrations of various sex hormones 
circulating in the body than to the mere existence of certain dominant ones. 
For example, women produce some androgens, or male hormones. 
Indeed, a woman's body synthesizes estrogens from androgens such as 
testosterone. Similarly, though estradiol is the animal kingdom's primary 
estrogen, or feminizing hormone, it plays important roles in both men and women.

 At no time does an imbalance of sex hormones produce more obvious results than 
during fetal development. Too much estrogen at the wrong 
moment can turn an organism with male genes into what to all outward 
appearances is a female. Similarly, an overabundance of androgens can 
produce the sex organs of a male in a fetus with the genes to be female.

 Our genetic inheritance tends to oversee the production of sex hormones so 
that these mix-ups don't occur. But increasingly, scientists are 
finding, we have been seeding our environment with chemicals that can 
inadvertently alter or mimic the activity of feminizing hormones.

 These agents are everywhere. Many such as pesticides - contaminate our 
drinking water and foods. We unsuspectingly breathe others in urban 
air. A mother may even unwittingly pass some hormone-mimicking pollutants on to 
her child - via the blood she supplies a fetus before birth 
and the breast milk with which she later feeds her newborn (SN: 4/26/86, p.264).

 A growing appreciation of the ubiquity of these "environmental hormones" has 
increased concern that large and untimely exposures to them may 
send gender-bending signals to males. In fact, some severely affected animal 
populations - principally birds, fish, and alligators - have 
already begun to exhibit the emasculating effects of these pollutants (SN: 
1/8/94, .24) Researchers also have linked coincident declines in 
fertility in these and other populations to the pollutants' disruption of 
endocrine function.

 Today, data tying similar reproductive abnormalities in humans to hormonelike 
pollutants remain scanty at best. However, signs are mounting 
that some males of our species may already have begun to suffer ill effects.

 Early in human development, genetic programming must signal if a fetus is to 
be male. If it is, observes Richard M. Sharpe, a reproductive 
physiologist at the Medical Research Council's Center for Reproductive Biology 
in Edinburgh, Scotland, then the genes will "broadcast" certain 
chemical communications that result in the secretion of male hormones. These 
signals effectively flip a series of molecular "switches" that 
turn on male development.

 If nothing happens - that is, no switches are flipped - a female will result. 
Explains Sharpe, feminine development "is what we call the 
default pathway."

 Today, researchers still seek to identify the precise mechanisms of this 
female-to-male transformation. However, Sharpe says, animal studies 
show that if a fetus receives too much estrogen - for example, if its mother 
has been administered a natural or synthetic estrogen during the 
critical period when genes attempt to express masculinity - "then you disrupt 
this switch from female to male."

 In humans, the male reproductive tract begins developing between about the 
seventh and 14th weeks of pregnancy If external hormones appear 
sporadically or in low concentrations during this time, the disruptions they 
cause will not necessarily trigger a complete reversal of an 
individual's apparent gender. Rather, they may exert subtle changes, ones that 
play out later in life.

 Nor are estrogens the only agents that can elicit gender-bending effects. Any 
chemical that blocks the activity of certain androgens can also 
foster feminization by preventing the developmental changes those androgens 
control. For instance, a male fetus depends on certain androgens 
to direct the development of its external genitalia.

 With the growing ubiquity of pesticides and other pollutants possessing the 
functional attributes of female hormones, our environment 
effectively bathes us in a sea of estrogens. This realization has led Sharpe 
and endocrinologist Niels E. Skakkebaek to propose that 
estrogenic pollutants may underlie some disturbing trends affecting the male 
reproductive tract.

 Last week, the pair chronicled these trends and their possible molecular 
underpinnings at "Estrogens in the Environment," a federally 
sponsored international conference in Washington, D.C.

 For instance, many industrialized countries have witnessed recently a sharp 
rise in testicular cancer, notes Skakkebaek, chief of the 
University Department of Growth and Reproduction at Rigshospitalet in 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Some of the first data heralding this increase 
emerged in his country, which has maintained a national cancer registry since 
1943.

 There, the incidence of testicular cancer has more than tripled over the past 
50 years, he observes. And the frightening thing, he says, is 
that the rate of increase continues to grow. Moreover, he notes, strong data 
demonstrate similar increases in Scotland, the United States, and 
other Scandinavian countries.

 Sperm counts also have fallen in the last two generations. Skakkebaek and his 
co-workers conducted a meta-analysis of previously published 
studies on semen quality. The international data, from studies involving 14,947 
men, indicate that the average density of sperm has fallen 
from 113 million per milliliter (ml) of semen in 1940 to just 66 million per ml 
in 1990.

 In the January 1992 BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL, Skakkebaek's team noted that 
because the volume of semen available in these men at any given 
time has also dropped an average of 19 percent, the 50 year drop in sperm count 
has been more precipitous than sperm density alone would 
indicate.

 Another worrisome trend is the apparent increase in the incidence of 
undescended testicles in newborn males - a condition known as 
cryptorchidism. Though formed near the kidneys, both testicles should migrate 
down, into the scrotum by birth. Few countries maintain 
registries on this condition, but Skakkebaek noted that two British studies 
have documented a near doubling of the number of boys born with at 
least one undescended testicle - from about 1.6 percent in the 1950s to 2.9 
percent in the late 1970s.

 Though undescended testicles usually complete their migration within a year or 
two after birth, some never do. Men with undescended testicles 
are unable to make sperm. Moreover, even individuals who were temporarily 
cryptorchid during infancy face an increased risk of fertility 
problems in adulthood, Sharpe notes.

 Then there are hypospadias, congenital abnormalities of the urinary tract. 
During fetal development, the penis initially possesses an open 
groove down its entire length. Before birth, that opening should fuse closed to 
form an internal channel known as the urethra. Boys born with 
only partial fusion of that groove need surgery to correct the problem.

 Birth registries in England and Wales document that hypospadias more than 
doubled between 1964 and 1983.

 At least some of these trends may be related, Skakkebaek says. His own studies 
have identified an apparent link not only between undescended 
testicles at birth and testicular cancer in adulthood, but also between semen 
quality (such as low sperm counts or abnormal sperm) and 
testicular cancer.

 Moreover, he points out, all these changes "could be the consequences of fetal 
events." Testicular cancer, undescended testicles, 
hypospadias, and poor-quality semen have been reported in the male offspring of 
women who during pregnancy received treatment with 
diethylstilbestrol (DES), a potent synthetic estrogen, he notes.

"We got more fuel for this estrogen hypothesis in late 1991," Skakkebaek 
recalls. It was then that he learned of work at the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C. This 
research showed that certain environmental contaminants can 
emulate the reproductive effects of estrogen and DES in male animals.

 The previously unexplained male reproductive trends suddenly started to make 
sense, Sharpe says. It became clear "that a surprising number of 
chemicals that we've managed to pollute our environment with are estrogenic," 
he says. Among these, he notes, are "a lot of the chemicals that 
we started making in large quantities from the 1940s and '50s onwards, and 
which are very resistant to degradation," including polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs), DDT, and the breakdown product of certain detergents.

"I'm not trying to be alarmist," Sharpe told SCIENCE NEWS, but when it comes to 
the male reproductive risks posed by hormone-like pollutants, 
"the data show there's reasonable cause for concern."

 A paper in the October ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVES (EHP) lists 45 
environmental contaminants or classes of agents that have been 
reported to cause changes in reproductive and hormone systems. They include 
eight herbicides, eight fungicides, 17 insecticides, two 
nematocides, and a miscellaneous category that includes metals, toxic 
industrial by- products, and commercial chemicals, such as styrenes.

 Though releases of many substances on this list, including the toxic 
pesticides DDT, heptachlor, and kepone, have been banned or severely 
restricted in the United States, such compounds continue to pollute the 
environment.

 Indeed, a pair of papers in the January ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
(ES&T) reports on diverse occurrences of such organochlorine 
pesticides - from residues in seals in Siberia's Lake Baikal to those in 
sediments in a bay that provides fish for Portland, Maine. These 
compounds even show up long distances from where they were used. For example, 
detectable levels of such pesticides appeared in an Antarctic 
penguin, a third ES&T paper reports.

 Others of the listed organochlorines remain in widespread use. For instance, 
2,4-D is the largest-selling broadleaf herbicide in North 
America, with some 60 million pounds of it and its chemical analogs applied 
annually in the United States alone. While this agent has not been 
shown to be directly estrogenic, work by Ana Soto, an endocrinologist at Tufts 
University School of Medicine in Boston and a coauthor of the 
EHP paper, has shown that nonylphenols are.

 These compounds can each out of some plastics (SN: 7/3/93, p.12) or form 
during the natural environmental degradation of certain 
surfactants known as nonylphenol polyethoxylates (SN: 1/8/94, p.24). Soto notes 
that an estimated 360 million pounds of these surfactants 
are sold in the United States each year for use in products ranging from 
dishwashing liquids to toiletries and pesticides.

 Most of the agents of greatest immediate concern, however, are no longer 
allowed to enter the environment in large and relatively 
uncontrolled quantities. And this may contribute to a false sense of security 
about the threat these agents pose, argues another coauthor of 
the EHP paper, zoologist Theo Colborn of the World Wildlife Fund in Washington, 
D.C.

"My big concern now is that by lowering levels [of these pollutants] in the 
environment, the substances may be present in such small amounts 
that we cannot even trace them," Colborn told SCIENCE NEWS. "They may be there, 
and we won't even know it."

 Soto shares that concern. "Most compounds with estrogenic effects are not 
present in the environment at levels that alone would produce an 
effect," she notes. However, unpublished studies by Soto now indicate that if 
humans are exposed to enough such chemicals, or if enough of 
them accumulate in the body they can combine to cause undesirable effects.

 For instance, Soto reported at the meeting last week, by taking 10 estrogenic 
chemicals and combining each of them at one-tenth of their 
effective dose, "you now have an effective dose."

 Moreover, because chemical structure offers few clues to what may prove 
estrogenic, environmental hormones can be identified only by 
methodically testing, one by one, the most widely used chemicals, she says.

 Her lab, one of the few that does such testing, has just unmasked the 
estrogenic alter ego of three widely used pesticides: dieldrin, 
toxaphene, and endosulfan. Dieldrin and toxaphene are no longer legal in the 
United States, but "endosulfan remains the nation's most widely 
used pesticide," Soto says.

 Nor are all environmental agents that affect reproduction estrogenic. For 
instance, benomyl, a systemic fungicide that's used on everything 
from rice and tomatoes to apples and grapes, "really affects the testes," Soto 
says; it causes the premature release of cells that would have 
become sperm. However, Soto notes, benomyl's not an estrogen. Other agents, 
like dioxin, may actually inhibit estrogen, she notes. Yet in 
rodents, dioxin feminizes - both physically and behaviorally - males exposed 
prenatally (SN: 5/30/92, p.359).

 Society's preoccupation with cancer has led to regulations requiring that any 
new chemical be withheld from the marketplace until it passes 
screening tests that indicate it will not foster malignancies. No rules yet 
require a similar test of a new or existing chemical's ability to 
mimic or affect reproductive hormones.

 The result of that omission, Soto charges, is that the economic cost- benefit 
analyses that today play an important role in determining which 
toxic chemicals remain on the market - and for how long - fail to capture the 
cost of exposing wildlife and its stewards to hormonemimicking 
toxic chemicals.

"We have just begun to open the door of discovery concerning the noncancer 
health effects of the synthetic chemicals that in the last 50 years 
have become an integral part of our life," says Colborn. The take home message 
from these new studies, she believes, is that "we need to take 
these effects as seriously as, if not more seriously than, cancer."

 Indeed, argues Soto: "What is the economic cost of having a generation that 
cannot reproduce?"

copyright 1997



