Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ls_7.htm January 8, 1994

 The Gender Benders Are environmental "hormones," emasculating wildlife?

 BY JANET RALOFF

 Mother Nature. The term conjures up images of a warm, nurturing, bountiful 
environment. But this sobriquet is proving increasingly apt for another 
reason--one that should offer anything but comfort.

 New studies suggest that through pollution and other environmental factors, 
Mother Nature is exerting a feminizing hormonal influence on the animal kingdom.

 Over the past 15 years, research has unmasked a number of "environmental 
hormones"--chemicals and pollutants that disrupt biological processes, often by 
mimicking the effects of naturally produced hormones such as the female hormone 
estrogen. On the ever-growing list of these agents are several restricted or 
banned pesticides--including DDT (and its even more toxic metabolite, DDE), 
kepone, heptachlor, dieldrin, mirex, and toxophene. Some polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs) exhibit these disruptive properties, as do certain combustion 
pollutants, ingredients in plastics, and breakdown products in detergents (SN: 
7/3/93, p.10).

 The hormonal activity of these chemicals usually bears little relationship to 
their intended function. Indeed, there is no way of predicting-based on 
structure or function--which compounds will exhibit a hormonal alter ego.

 That fact troubles a number of scientists because such environmental hormones 
may be contributing to an increased risk of reproductive-system cancers in 
females. Moreover, prenatal exposure to hormone-like pollutants can derail the 
developmental processes that establish gender or ensure reproductive success.

 While the health community has recently begun a host of studies to explore a 
possible link between estrogenic pollutants and cancers in women, few 
researchers have focused on the related reproductive risks such environmental 
hormones may pose for both sexes. That's unfortunate says Theo Colborn, a 
zoologist with the World Wildlife Fund in Washington, D.C., because 
reproductive effects are likely to be "much more widespread."

 Indeed, she notes, animal data are beginning to suggest that far smaller 
exposures are needed to trigger reproductive effects than to induce cancers. 
And because some of these reproductive changes may be subtle, they could evade 
detection for decades--even a lifetime--unless hunted for explicitly.

 Colborn has convened a number of symposia in the past few years for 
researchers who study reproductively impaired wildlife populations or 
laboratory animals exposed to environmental hormones. Most of these scientists, 
she says, describe the links they're finding between impaired reproduction and 
"hormonal" pollutants as sobering--if not downright scary.

 Indeed, she and many other environmental scientists worry that if hormone-like 
contaminants can feminize male animals, these ubiquitous pollutants may also 
underlie troubling reproductive-system trends being witnessed in men.

 Some of the earliest data on unexpected reproductive risks posed by commercial 
chemicals came in the early 1950s. DDT, a potent and persistent organochlorine 
pesticide, was shown to cause the eggshells of many birds to thin. In fact, 
long after the compound was banned in 1972, DDT-thinned eggshells continued to 
put many embryonic birds--including bald eagles--at risk of being crushed to 
death.

 DDT even wreaked havoc among birds resistant to eggshell thinning, such as sea 
gulls. Recognition of the extent of these problems, however, didn't emerge 
until decades after the initial reports of eggshell thinning.

 Though heavily contaminated gull embryos managed to hatch, reproduction in 
gull colonies exposed to large amounts of DDT began to decline precipitously in 
the late 1960s. Biologists observed not only that many female gulls in these 
communities were sharing nests with other females-the so-called lesbian 
gulls--but also that the young within these communities bore grossly feminized 
reproductive tracts. Female gulls, which should have developed mature 
reproductive organs only on the left side, also carried vestigial oviducts on 
the right side. Many males also bore feminine characteristics, such as 
oviducts, recalls avian toxicologist a Michael Fry of the University of 
California, Davis. Moreover, he notes, the males' left gonad "had tissues that 
were both ovarian and testicular--so it was an intersex, or hybrid, gonad."

 To connect these effects with estrogenic pollutants, Fry and his colleagues 
conducted a number of experiments during the 1980s. In one, they injected eggs 
of contaminant-free gulls with estradiol or with an estrogenic pesticide such 
as DDT. When the hatchlings emerged, they exhibited the same array of feminized 
sex organs as DDT-contaminated Western gulls on Santa Barbara Island, off the 
coast of California.

 In effect, DDT "chemically castrated" the males, Fry says. He suspects the 
males' likely lack of interest in mating explains not only why female gulls 
dominated Santa Barbara Island's breeding colony in the late 1960s and early 
1970s, but also why the females cohabited.

 More recently Fry has turned his attention to the effects of other estrogenic 
pesticides and PCBs. This summer he began studying common terns, a relative of 
the gull. Fry studied male embryos from nests along New Bedford Harbor, Mass., 
located near a toxic waste site contaminated with PCBs. Only four of the 15 
males that he analyzed appeared normal. The rest exhibited varying degrees of 
feminized sex organs.

"I never set out to do any toxicology," maintains Louis J. Guillette Jr.a 
reproductive endocrinologist at the University of Florida in Gainesville. But 
the team he heads has recently distinguished itself as one of the foremost in 
environmental-hormone toxicology. It all began six years ago, when the state of 
Florida asked him to find out what makes a good alligator egg.

 Alligator ranching has become a multimillion-dollar industry in Florida, and 
ranchers wanted to know how many eggs they could harvest from the wild without 
jeopardizing the survival of this once-endangered species. So Guillette's team 
began surveying the hatching rate of eggs on various lakes: in all, more than 
1,200 nests accounting for more than 50,000 alligator eggs.

 It didn't take long, Guillette says, "before we realized there was something 
fundamentally different about one lake." It was Apopka, Florida's fourth 
largest freshwater body.

 Whereas 70 to 80 percent of the eggs in most alligator nests hatched, between 
80 and 95 percent of those from Apopka failed to hatch. Moreover, of the 
alligators that did hatch at Apopka, roughly half died within two weeks--a 
mortality rate at least 10 times that expected for such neonates.

 As one measure of the health of these animals, Guillette's team began two 
years ago to examine the fluid that leaks out of eggs at the time of hatching 
and to analyze it for estrogen and testosterone. In females, estrogen should 
predominate, whereas males should have more testosterone. Eggs from Lake 
Woodruff-with normal hatching rates-- displayed those classic patterns.

 Apopka eggs didn't. One group showed what at first appeared to be the normal 
female pattern. Another group appeared to be "superfemales,"with ratios of 
estrogen to testosterone twice as high as normal. "We didn't have any group 
that looked like males:' Guillette recalls.

 It turns out that there were indeed males--the gators emerging from 
eggsexhibiting the standard female ratio of hormones. But the concentrations of 
the hormones contributing to that ratio were not normal. "These animals were 
making almost no testosterone and almost no estrogen," Guillette explains.

 Six months later, the researchers returned to Lakes Woodruff and Apopka to 
measure hormones in the young. "We found exactly the same condition that we had 
seen in the eggs," he says--"females with about twice the estrogen typical of a 
female and almost no testosterone in the males."

 Apopka's animals also possessed feminized internal reproductive organs. The 
males bore what looked like ovaries, for example, while follicles inthe females 
possessed not only abnormal eggs, but also far too many eggs.

 Last summer, Guillette's team collected more than 100 juvenile 
alligators--animals 2 to 8 years old--from each of five lakes. Apopka'sgators 
again distinguished themselves. The phallus on males was one- half to one-third 
the normal size, and the females' ovaries "looked burned out," Guillette says. 
Moreover, estrogen and testosterone production in all Apopka gators was 
minimal--as if, Guillette says, the ovaries and testes were indeed burned out.

 What accounts for Apopka's feminized alligators? The culprit is estrogenic 
pesticides, Guillette testified at an Oct. 21 hearing before the House 
Subcommittee on Health and the Environment. Tower Chemical Co. for years made 
the pesticide dicofol--a molecule that he says looks like DDT with an extra 
oxygen atom. Production methods at the plant, situated on the shore of Lake 
Apopka, weren't always ideal, Guillette says. Spills occurred and much of the 
dicofol was laced with up to 15 percent DDT or DDE. Tower's defunct plant is 
now a toxic waste site.

 While high concentrations of DDT have been measured in Apopka gators, 
Guillette cautions that this doesn't prove DDT is responsible for the observed 
feminization. To test that link, his team this summer painted gator eggs from 
Lake Woodruff with concentrations of DDE and dicofol to produce tissue 
contamination typical of hatchlings from Lake Apopka.

 Though not all their tests have been completed yet, Guillette told SCIENCE 
NEWS that "we're finding hormone levels in these hatchlings that are almost 
identical to those in Apopka hatchlings." He adds, "That's about the closest 
thing to proof science is ever likely to give."

 In the meantime, Apopka's gators continue to suffer. Since a catastrophic 
dicofol spill in 1980, there has been a 90-percent reduction in the number of 
juvenile alligators at the lake. And in a population of animals that can live 
to be 60 years old, that's not healthy, he says.

 Another reluctant toxicologist, Brent Palmer of Ohio University in Athens, has 
begun studying a substance in the blood of egg-laying vertebrates that he 
suspects will one day prove a sensitive biomarker of exposure to estrogenic 
pollutants, at least in males. It's vitellogenin the egg-yolk protein.

 When stimulated by estrogen, the liver produces this protein, then dumpsit 
into the blood. From there it circulates to the ovaries, where it isdeposited 
in an egg. Though males can produce vitellogenin, usually only females possess 
sufficient estrogen to do so.

 That's good, Guillette points out, because "if you have enough estrogen in a 
male to turn on vitellogenin, then you probably have enough to shut off the 
normal functioning of the testes."

 Working with the red-eared slider, America's most common turtle, Palmer has 
demonstrated that DDT can turn on vitellogenin production in males. But DDT 
doesn't elicit the same broad suite of changes that estrogen does. For 
instance, it fails to trigger the liver's production of two other proteins and 
it turns on the production of some other substances that estrogen doesn't. "So 
even though DDT is mimicking estrogen in some ways," Palmer points out, "it's 
not exactly the same."

"Certainly, if we can find vitellogenin in males in the wild, that's a sign 
they've been exposed to an environmental estrogen," he says. However, Palmer is 
not yet sure whether the converse also holds: that the lack of vitellogenin 
proves no estrogen was encountered. He says hisnew data "make me wonder if 
there might not still be an environmental estrogen present, just one that's 
having some other effect." Indeed, he says, interpreting the lack of 
vitellogenin "could prove a very sticky problem."

 It's not a problem John Sumpter has had to cope with. The rainbow trout and 
carp that he and his colleagues have studied throughout the waterways of 
England and Wales have displayed plenty of vitellogenin-- even the males.

 Sumpter and Charles R. Tyler, biologists at Brunel University in Uxbridge, 
England, collaborated with scientists from Britain's Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries, and Food to measure vitellogenin concentrations in fish that were 
caged and suspended for three weeks in the river outfalls of 30 different 
sewage treatment plants.

 In the January CHEMISTRY AND ECOLOGY, these researchers describe finding 
widely varied production of vitellogenin by the fish. However, "in all cases," 
they say, "exposure of trout to effluent resulted in a very pronounced increase 
(500- to 100,000-fold, depending on the site) in the[blood] plasma vitellogenin 
concentration." In some cases, male trout exhibited vitellogenin concentrations 
in their bloodstreams typical of mature females during egg production. Carp 
showed similar, though far smaller, increases.

 Attempts to isolate the agent responsible for these increases proved 
fruitless. However, at least one of the researchers strongly suspected that 
ethynylestradiol (EE)--the main estrogenic compound in birth- control 
pills--was responsible for much of the vitellogenin effect they observed. He 
reasoned that women on the pill excreted the EE in their urine and that some 
share of this chemical may have passed through the water-treatment plants.

 To test the theory, the researchers incubated fish in aquariums containing 
dilute concentrations of either estradiol--the animal kingdom's primary 
estrogen--or EE. Concentrations of EE as low as 0.1 nanogram per liter of water 
caused a significant spike in the animals' production of vitellogenin--proving 
EE "very much more potent" than estradiol, Sumpter's team says. Indeed, they 
conclude, EE represents one of "the most potent of biologically active 
molecules."

 If present in potable waters, however, EE must occur in concentrations below 
the limits of detection, the British team found. In fact, Sumpternotes, it was 
only after their research was completed that his team learned of another 
possible candidate: nonylphenols (SN: 7/3/93, p.12).

 These are breakdown products of alkylphenol polyethoxylates (APEs), a class of 
surfactants first marketed in the 1940s. Today, APEs are used in detergents 
(including many U.S. dishwashing liquids), pesticides, herbicides, toiletries, 
and products that need to wet surfaces. Though the parent APEs are not 
estrogenic, Sumpter describes the nonylphenols as "directly estrogenic"--which 
means that they can bind to and activate the body's estrogen receptor.

 Though nonylphenols occur in concentrations of more than 1 milligram perliter 
of water in poor-quality English rivers--especially downstream of textile 
mills--concentrations of 1 to 50 micrograms per liter (mu g/l) are more typical 
of waters in England and Europe, Sumpter says. US. concentrations, by contrast, 
tend to fall below 1 mu g/l.

"Because of their ubiquitous presence in the aquatic environment and the `high' 
concentrations," Sumpter told SCIENCE NEWS, "we consider them a good candidate 
to account for the estrogenic effects [found in the study with trout and carp]" 
Though only perhaps 1/10,000 as potent as EE, nonylphenols "are pretty 
resistant to degradation and [they] bioaccumulate, which will increase the 
likelihood of them producing physiological effects," he argues.

 But nonylphenols are not the only products formed by the breakdown of APEs. 
And because many of those others are not monitored, Sumpter says,"the total 
concentration of all the closely related degradation products remains unknown."

 Environmental estrogens are also suspected of playing a role in reproductive 
problems plaguing the Florida panther, a species whose surviving members total 
only 30 to 50 animals.

 Between 1985 and 1990, 67 percent of male Florida panthers were born with one 
or more undescended testes, a condition known as cryptorchidism. Just 10 years 
earlier, only 14 percent of males were cryptorchid, observes Charles Facemire, 
an ecological geneticist with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in Atlanta. In 
addition, he notes, atleast one noncryptorchid male is sterile, and even some 
of the apparently normal males produce abnormal or deformed sperm.

 Initially these problems were assumed to trace to a loss of genetic diversity 
in the heavily inbred species (SN: 9/25/93, p. 200), Facemire says. But a few 
months ago, he and Mike Dunbar, a veterinarian with theFlorida Game and Fresh 
Water Fish Commission in Gainesville, decided to investigate whether estrogenic 
contaminants might also be contributing to these reproductive problems.

 Their initial blood sampling program turned up males with unusual steroid 
hormone ratios. For instance, one male had nearly twice as much estrogen as 
testosterone. (This animal should have had two to three times as much 
testosterone as estrogen.) At least two other males had similarly skewed 
ratios; both of them were also cryptorchid. Equally perplexing, at least one 
female had more testosterone than estrogen.

"We don't know enough about the species to know if these hormone levels might 
be normal under certain circumstances. But we don't think they are," Facemire 
says. Though genetic problems cannot be ruled out, he acknowledges, "I suspect 
we're going to find that the problems are due more to estrogenic chemicals in 
the environment."

 Working under that assumption, Facemire's office has just issued a prohibition 
on the use of estrogenic chemicals--principally pesticides--in the 100 or so 
federally managed wildlife refuges in the southeastern United States. At the 
same time, Facemire's office has initiated four other investigations into 
possible effects of environmental hormones on wildlife-including one involving 
the prothonotary warbler in Alabama andanother involving sea turtles in Georgia.

 Nor are these the only animal studies linking reproductive changes with 
exposures to hormone-mimicking contaminants. Laboratory studies on fish at the 
University of Guelph in Ontario, for instance, have shown that white suckers 
exposed to paper mill effluent--often rich in dioxins and related 
compounds--took longer to mature, developed smaller gonads, experienced reduced 
fertility, and had lower than normal concentrations of steroid hormones in 
their blood. Moreover, Glen Van Der Kraak and his coworkers reported at an 
international meeting on the topic in September 1990, male fish exposed to 
papermill wastes developed reduced secondary sex characteristics.

 Other researchers have begun linking reproductive problems in salmon to 
relatively high concentrations of hormone-like contaminants. And at a 
conference sponsored by the U.S. and Canadian governments three years ago, PCBs 
in such fish were linked to dramatic declines in the reproduction of minks and 
otters around the Great Lakes.

 Finally, University of Wisconsin scientists demonstrated two years ago that 
low prenatal exposures to dioxin feminized the behavior of male rats during 
adulthood--and sharply reduced their production of sperm. Indeed, the 
researchers concluded, the developing male reproductive system appears to be 
more sensitive to the effects of this hormone-like toxicant that any other 
organ or organ-system studied (SN: 5/30/92, p.359).

"Because we're only just getting to the basics in this field," Palmer says, 
even simple questions about the reproductive effects of environmental hormones 
for most species must go unanswered. But he suspects that biologists are going 
to have. to move fast in finding those answers if some contaminated populations 
are to survive.

 Toxic-pollutant concentrations in the environment have dropped to where they 
can seldom kill most adult animals outright, he says. However, in some species, 
he fears, "We. may have gotten to a point where the adults look healthy but are 
so reproductively impaired that that population may already be extinct--and 
we're just waiting for the last remaining adults to die [of old age]."

copyright 1997


