Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - mc_1.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 March 25, 1995

 MATHEMATICS AND COMPUTERS

 Viral shell game

 A surprising view of how a virus shell assembles itself

 By IVARS PETERSON

 Like a microscopic, heavily armored spacecraft, a virus cruises intercellular 
space in search of a cell to invade and colonize. A tough, rigid shell protects 
its cargo of nucleic acids -- strands of DNA or RNA -- until contact. Then, 
clinging to its target, the shell opens up to inject its contents into the 
hapless cell.

 The success of a virus in infecting its host depends largely on how well its 
outer coat functions. Made up of protein building blocks, this tightly closed 
shell usually has a geometric structure.

 As the virus reproduces inside the cell it has infected, new shells must 
assemble themselves out of a broth of identical protein subunits. Researchers 
have long sought to understand how they do it. "This is an unsolved problem in 
modern biochemistry and structural biology," says Jonathan A. King of the 
biology department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 Now, biologists have a new perspective from which to tackle the question of 
virus self-assembly. Mathematical research suggests that sets of simple rules, 
which define the way an individual protein can stick to another, will 
automatically lead to the kinds of virus structures that biologists observe.

"The rules completely guarantee the final shell shape," says applied 
mathematician Bonnie A. Berger of MIT, who worked with mathematician Peter W. 
Shor of AT&T Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., and others to devise this 
new, mathematical model of virus shell construction.

 Such research may offer a novel and potentially lifesaving strategy for 
short-circuiting the infection process. Instead of looking for ways to prevent 
a fully formed shell from binding to a cell, researchers can now think about 
interfering with the growth of a virus shell to render it ineffectual.

"It's a very important piece of work," says Peter E. Prevelige Jr. of the 
Boston Biomedical Research Institute. "It allows you to think about what 
happens when things don't work correctly. You can try to poison the growing 
[virus shell] complex to make it go down a dead end."

 Of the myriad viruses that cause a variety of ailments in plants and animals, 
most have highly regular structures. Many display the 20 triangular faces of an 
icosahedron. This large group includes the adenoviruses, which can cause 
respiratory problems in humans, the herpesvirus, the poliovirus, and HIV, the 
AIDS virus.

 The shells of these viruses typically consist of a hundred or more copies of a 
single protein, though in some cases the shell contains two or three different 
kinds of proteins. Assembly occurs quickly and spontaneously -- often, in a 
matter of seconds.

 To explain how these shells assemble themselves, biologists initially focused 
on their regularity and symmetry. They postulated a two-step process. First, 
five or six protein molecules link to form pentagonal or hexagonal rings. Then 
these rings connect to make icosahedrons (see diagram). In this way, 
construction would proceed in an orderly and direct manner to the final 
structure.

 But this model didn't address the issue of how individual proteins join to 
create larger units, the rings and the shells. "How does one little protein 
know where to go to form such a highly structured shape?" Berger asks.

 Moreover, experimental studies of the growth process revealed the presence of 
single proteins and completed shells, but not the pentagonal and hexagonal 
rings of the postulated intermediate steps. These results challenged the 
existing model.

"We had strong experimental data demonstrating that almost certainly the shells 
were built from monomers [single protein units]," King says. "The high symmetry 
of the end product did not account for how [a shell] got built."

 In some instances, researchers found that certain virus shells even require a 
protein scaffolding to aid assembly. This disposable framework serves the same 
stabilizing function as the scaffolding needed to construct a cathedral's dome 
or bridge's arch, and it disappears once the structure is completed.

 Several years ago, King became interested in using computers to visualize the 
ways in which virus shells might grow. He and his colleagues had spent more 
than 15 years studying virus assembly experimentally, and they wanted a better 
understanding of how the process works in three dimensions.

 King suggested the problem to Berger, who has a background in both computer 
science and mathematics. He hoped she could find some mathematical recipes, or 
algorithms, that would make it possible to depict protein polymerization -- how 
proteins join together to form larger units -- on the computer screen.

"I did not know that a much deeper insight would necessarily come out of this," 
he says.

 Berger shared the problem with Peter Shor, and they began exploring the kinds 
of rules that might specify how one protein links to another. Instead of 
concentrating on the actual geometry of virus shells, they looked at the web of 
possible connections between individual proteins.

 Berger and Shor discovered that they could formulate a set of simple rules 
specifying how one protein links with another to directly create the desired 
final structure -- if they assumed that the protein molecules, each identical 
in its chemical composition, could fold themselves into a specific number of 
different shapes, or conformations.

"It seemed a reasonable assumption to make," Berger says. For the P22 bacterial 
virus (or bacteriophage), which had long been the target of King's 
investigations, the mathematics led to the desired structure if the protein 
could assume seven different conformations, or perhaps only four.

 When Berger checked with King, she was delighted to find that he and his 
colleagues had recently obtained experimental evidence strongly suggesting just 
such a possibility. His micrographs showed that the protein molecule that makes 
up the P22 shell apparently has seven different shapes, of which four look 
particularly distinctive.

"These structural studies had shown that the same chemical subunits are in 
different, stable conformations in different positions in the shell," King 
says. "Until very recently, that was considered a heretical notion."

 With this encouragement, Berger and Shor, assisted by graduate student Lisa 
Tucker-Kellogg of MIT's Laboratory for Computer Science, went on to develop a 
more complete mathematical theory of virus shell assembly.

"If the protein subunits assume different conformations during the assembly 
process depending on their relative positions, a protein binding to the 
structure has enough 'local' information to 'know' where to bind," the 
researchers reported in the Aug. 2, 1994, Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences.

 To keep things as simple as possible, Berger and her coworkers initially 
assumed that virus shells contain a single kind of protein. These proteins, 
however, could take on a certain number of different conformations.

 For each conformation, the rules specified which other molecular shapes it 
could bind with. They also designated the approximate angles and distances 
between the two interacting proteins.

 For one model of the P22 bacteriophage, the researchers came up with seven 
protein conformations and seven rules (see diagram). Interacting only with 
their immediate neighbors according to the given rules, the proteins could 
assemble themselves into the required structure of P22's exterior. As soon as 
one link was made, the others followed automatically to create the complete 
shell.

 Berger and Shor tried various sets of rules for different types of virus 
structures. In a number of cases, they discovered alternative strategies for 
achieving the same result, sometimes using fewer different protein 
conformations.

 They also predicted the existence of shell geometries that the old biological 
model of virus shell construction appeared to rule out. Alerted to this 
possibility, researchers began searching for and are now starting to find 
examples of these "anomalous" forms.

 Computer simulations verified that the rules worked to create closed shells. 
They also demonstrated that changing the assumed interaction angles and 
distances by small amounts didn't necessarily disrupt shell growth.

 But with larger deviations, the shells often failed to close, and deformed 
structures appeared. For example, with one false step, a polymerizing shell 
could start growing into a spiral, mimicking a malformation occasionally 
observed in nature (see color illustration).

 Berger is now interested in modeling the rates at which different types of 
shells grow. "Before in our models, when a protein came along and bonded on 
according to the rules, it stayed there," she says. "Now, we're looking at a 
protein soup and allowing things to come and go, sometimes bonding and 
sometimes not."

 The mathematical models proposed by Berger and her colleagues have already had 
some impact on biological studies.

 In one instance involving the P22 bacteriophage, Berger's rules suggested that 
scaffolding proteins would have to have a particular structure to fit with the 
shell proteins. This insight enabled Peter Prevelige to make sense of several 
puzzling experimental findings.

"We had worked for a number of years trying to discern what sorts of 
[combinations] of scaffolding proteins exist in solution," Prevelige says, but 
the combinations they had found didn't appear to fit into any known 
shell-building model.

 By suggesting what types of protein units might be present and how they might 
interact, Berger's rules provided a possible explanation. "Having a theory 
allowed us to say that our results were plausible," Prevelige says.

"The theory tells us what to pay attention to," he adds. "It's like looking for 
something that's lost. If you know what you're looking for, it's much easier to 
find."

 Understanding how virus shells assemble themselves also suggests new 
opportunities for therapeutic intervention. "In general, people in the 
pharmaceutical industry haven't seen this process as a target, partly because 
this process hadn't been sorted out," King says. Now, researchers have a 
picture of what may occur.

 Prevelige and his co-workers have already demonstrated that a dose of small 
dye molecules can block virus shell formation in vitro by binding with the 
protein subunits at critical positions. "That's quite surprising because these 
proteins have large surface areas and the dye molecules are comparatively 
small," King says.

 Apparently, the dye molecules zero in on the same molecular sites that, 
according to the mathematical model, dictate the binding of proteins to each 
other. "You can stop these reactions with small, weakly bound molecules," King 
argues.

 Prevelige is now trying to refine this strategy. The preferred course is not 
to go after individual proteins, but to rechannel the growth into misshapen 
viral forms that can no longer function properly.

"We're going to think about and use Berger's rules in our work," Prevelige says.

"There are many problems we face as biologists where we need the tools of the 
mathematician to come to our aid," King notes. "The intersection of biology and 
mathematics can be extremely productive when both sides tune in to the actual 
problem, the actual need."

 copyright 1996 


