Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ms_6.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 February 3, 1996

 MEDICAL SCIENCES

 Fake fat gets FDA's okay, 2/3/96 By K.A. FACKELMANN 

 Last week, the Food and Drug Administration approved the use of olestra, a 
synthetic fat substitute, but only in snack foods. Procter & Gamble, the 
Cincinnati-based creator of olestra, has given it the trade name Olean. A 
compound of fatty acids and sugar, olestra is neither absorbed nor digested in 
the body and therefore contributes no calories to foods (SN: 1/27/96, p. 61).

 Announcing the action, FDA Commissioner David Kessler acknowledged olestra's 
shortfalls. "Olestra may cause abdominal cramping and loose stools in some 
individuals, and [it] inhibits the body's absorption of certain fat-soluble 
vitamins and nutrients," he says. FDA states that it will require Procter & 
Gamble to label all foods containing olestra with a warning of those ill 
effects.

 Nevertheless, the agency decided that olestra is safe.

 Procter & Gamble, which introduced Crisco shortening in 1911, plans to 
test-market a line of olestra-containing foods, such as potato chips, cheese 
puffs, and club crackers, during the next few months. Eventually, the company 
will put Olean in a broad variety of snack products, says spokesperson Wendy W. 
Jacques. She says foods made with Olean have the "great taste" of real fat 
without the added calories.

 Yet critics have denounced FDA's action on olestra.

"I find it incredible that Dr. Kessler would certify this food additive as 
safe," says Michael Jacobson, executive director of the Center for Science in 
the Public Interest, a consumer group based in Washington, D.C.

 Jacobson notes that many prominent scientists have warned FDA of olestra's ill 
effects, including its ability to rob the body of key nutrients called 
carotenoids. Researchers have reported evidence that carotenoids, which are 
found in fresh fruits and vegetables, protect against certain cancers and other 
serious diseases.

 copyright 1996 


