Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ms_8.htm January 21, 1995

 Improving humans' blood with crocodiles'

by T. Adler

 Anyone who has tried swimming laps without taking a breath, or having an 
underwater tea party as a kid, should respect crocodiles. Those thick- skinned 
reptiles can remain below the water's surface for over an hour.

 Researchers had known that when crocodiles hold their breath underwater, 
carbon dioxide builds up in their blood, dissolves, and forms bicarbonate ions. 
Those ions bind to amino acids in hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying component of 
red blood cells. The bicarbonate ions cause the hemoglobin to release oxygen 
molecules, making them more readily available to tissue, N. Hennakao Komiyama 
of the Medical Research Council (MRC) in Cambridge, England, and his colleagues 
explain in the Jan. 19 NATURE.

 In contrast, bicarbonate ions do not bind to human hemoglobin, which therefore 
releases its oxygen much less readily than crocodile hemoglobin.

 Scientists had not known, however, where on the crocodile hemoglobin's amino 
acid chains the bicarbonate ions bind. To find out, Komiyama and his colleagues 
first synthesized human and crocodile hemoglobin by means of genetic 
engineering. In both kinds of hemoglobin, 50 to 60 percent of the amino acid 
chains are the same. But only 12 of the 280 sites in the crocodile's amino acid 
sequences are involved in binding bicarbonate ions.

 The researchers then introduced amino acids from crocodile hemoglobin into 
human hemoglobin "until we found out which amino acid was responsible for the 
[ion-binding] effect," says coauthor Kiyoshi Nagai, also of MRC. They 
discovered that the ions bind where two amino acid chains -- the alpha and beta 
-- meet, Nagai says.

 Knowing this, the scientists created a hemoglobin hybrid -- part crocodile, 
part human -- that binds bicarbonate ions. "Our new hemoglobin looks almost 
like human hemoglobin," Nagai says.

 The molecule may help researchers make high-quality artificial hemoglobin. "It 
opens up the possibility of engineering human hemoglobin to acquire this 
[ion-binding] property," says H. Franklin Bunn of Harvard Medical School in 
Boston. "It's not too far-fetched to think of a surgical situation where . . . 
it's difficult to oxygenate the patient and you might want to have hemoglobin 
that would unload oxygen with super efficiency," Bunn suggests.

copyright 1997


