Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ps_1.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 April 29, 1995

 PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

 Cavities of chaos

 Sorting out quantum chaos in the microwave lab

 By IVARS PETERSON

 A smooth stroke ending in a sharp tap with a billiard cue sends a ball 
scooting across the table's green felt surface. The ball bounces off one 
cushion, then another before smacking squarely into a second ball.

 On a rectangular table, an expert player can return the first ball to its 
original position, repeat the shot, and obtain the same result. However, such 
consistency proves practically impossible to achieve on a rounded, 
stadium-shaped table.

 In stadium billiards, even the slightest change in starting point can alter 
the ball's trajectory radically. The ball's path becomes unpredictable -- 
especially after several bounces. If there were no friction, the ball's 
continuing motion as it rattled around the table would appear random.

 Thus, depending on the table's shape, the motion of a billiard ball can be 
either predictable or chaotic. The same physical laws determine the outcome in 
either case, but in the chaotic situation the result is sensitively dependent 
on initial conditions.

 The rectangle and the stadium have long served as geometric playing fields for 
theorists studying differences between regular and chaotic motion. They can 
readily calculate sample trajectories to investigate the details of these 
different types of behavior.

 Researchers can also use these geometries as models for investigating the link 
between the classical mechanics of billiard balls and tables and the quantum 
mechanics of the microscopic world of atoms and electrons.

 For example, electrons confined to a tiny volume act in some respects like 
billiard balls, bouncing around within its walls. But because electrons are 
quantum particles, they exhibit wavelike behavior too. Where electron waves 
cross, they can reinforce or cancel each other, creating a quantum interference 
pattern.

 What happens when an electron wave bounces around inside a stadium-shaped 
cavity, in which a classical particle's motion would be chaotic? More 
generally, how do quantum systems behave when the corresponding classical 
systems are chaotic?

 Extensive theoretical work, often augmented by computer simulations, has 
uncovered a wealth of new physical phenomena at the blurry interface between 
the microscopic and macroscopic worlds -- where classical theory may be chaotic 
and quantum theory is very complicated.

"Although not yet available in your local video store, this new game of Quantum 
Pinball has captured the imagination of theorists in the field of quantum 
chaos," physicist Roderick V. Jensen of Wesleyan University in Middletown, 
Conn., commented in the Jan. 5 Nature.

 Now, experiment is beginning to catch up with theory. Several research groups 
are studying microwaves in thin, metallic boxes and electrons in tiny 
structures called quantum dots to verify theoretical results and to explore the 
possibility of unveiling new physics not yet evident to the theorists.

 In the realm of electrons, microdots, and nanostructures, "there's a huge 
frontier of potential applications of quantum chaos," Jensen says. 
Understanding such systems could lead to novel electronic circuitry and other 
uses in nanoelectronics.

 To explore the manifestations of chaos in quantum mechanics, Srinivas Sridhar, 
Arshad Kudrolli, and their coworkers at Northeastern University in Boston 
observe the behavior of microwaves in closed, shallow copper containers, or 
cavities. They exploit an exact equivalence between the equations of quantum 
mechanics and those governing the behavior of electromagnetic waves in two 
dimensions.

"You do it [produce the equivalence] by making the cavity very thin, like a 
pizza," Sridhar says.

 Electromagnetic waves within this microwave cavity resemble oscillations of 
the head of a drum, which vibrates at characteristic frequencies when struck 
(SN: 9/17/94, p.184). By distributing fine sand across a vibrating drumhead, 
researchers can map the drum's normal modes -- the patterns of vibration 
corresponding to the drum's characteristic frequencies. The loose sand tends to 
settle in more placid regions of the drumhead, away from the areas undergoing 
strong oscillations.

 In the quantum world, these normal modes are known as eigenfunctions, and 
Sridhar has developed a way to map the eigenfunctions of microwaves bouncing 
around inside cavities of different shapes.

 A rectangular cavity produces a set of distinctive eigenfunctions, each one 
corresponding to a particular energy. "You get exactly what you would expect 
from quantum mechanics," Sridhar says. There's no chaos in this case.

 However, the situation is somewhat different for a stadium-shaped cavity -- or 
a rectangular cavity containing a large disk, which also gives rise to chaotic 
motion. The classical description of an ordinary particle's motion in this 
geometry is chaotic, meaning that there are no normal modes. How does quantum 
mechanics change the picture?

 In 1984, Eric J. Heller, now at Harvard University, argued on theoretical 
grounds that quantum particles in such a geometry would have eigenfunctions 
that retain some of the wave patterns associated with regular, periodic motion. 
He described these eigenfunctions as having "scars" -- fuzzy tracks following 
periodic trajectories that are unstable in the classical case (SN: 11/2/91, 
p.282).

 In other words, although the classical trajectories are random, the 
corresponding quantum motion has eigenfunctions with a distinctive 
distribution. Heller could explain the existence of these structures in terms 
of quantum interference effects. Computer simulations furnished a picture of 
what they look like (see illustrations).

 In 1991, Sridhar provided the first direct observations of these scars in 
microwave experiments with a rectangular cavity con-taining a large disk. His 
subsequent work has revealed similar patterns in cavities having other 
geometries (see color illustrations).

"The Sridhar experiments are very valuable," Heller says. "At first, the 
experiments were verifying things which we knew to be true from numerical 
experiments. Most recently, Sridhar has broken new ground with challenges to 
theory."

 This recent work involves placing a random array of small obstacles inside a 
rectangular cavity in order to study the connection between chaos and disorder 
in quantum systems. It's like observing the effect of impurities on the 
movement of electrons in tiny, two-dimensional structures.

 The experiments reveal that these obstacles force the eigenfunctions to 
concentrate themselves in certain areas of the cavity. They no longer spread 
themselves throughout the entire container.

"You see enormous localization in certain regions," Sridhar says. "The waves 
are happy just to sit there." By changing the number of obstacles and the 
microwave frequency, the researchers can increase or decrease the degree of 
localization at will, thus making it possible to explore the link between chaos 
and disorder.

 Sridhar and Kudrolli described their work in March at an American Physical 
Society meeting held in San Jose, Calif. Such findings may help explain the 
results of experiments involving electron and photon activity in disordered 
solids (SN: 4/20/91, p.248).

 It's in the world of electrons and nanostructures at very low temperatures 
that quantum chaos may prove of greatest value.

 Advances in semiconductor fabrication now enable researchers to investigate 
the electric properties of solid-state devices less than 1 micrometer across 
and cooled to temperatures below 0.05 kelvin. Under these conditions, electrons 
travel freely within the cavity; electric resistance arises from the bouncing 
of electrons off the microstructure's sides. How well such a device conducts 
electricity depends strongly on its shape.

"Sridhar's experiments provide a tremendous amount of inspiration and intuition 
for experiments and theory describing what electron waves look like in small 
cavities," Jensen says. "You can also gain an enormous amount of insight into 
these systems and their quantum properties from the classical mechanics, which 
happens to be chaotic."

 For example, researchers have observed clear differences in the electric 
resistance arising from microstructures in the shape of a stadium, where the 
classical motion is chaotic, and a circle, where the motion is regular.

"These fruitful combinations of innovative experiments and theoretical games do 
not just promise to improve our understanding of the classical-quantum 
correspondence for classically chaotic systems," Jensen contends. "They may 
also be of practical use in characterizing the unusual quantum mechanical 
properties of tiny solid-state devices that may be incorporated into the 
integrated circuits of the future."

 copyright 1996 


