Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ms_7.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 March 23, 1996

 MEDICAL SCIENCES

 AIDS update

 New drugs, new tests, new optimism mark recent AIDS research

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 Imagine putting together a 50,000-piece jigsaw puzzle of an abstract 
painting--without a picture of the completed puzzle. First come the basics, 
such as identifying the four corners of the puzzle. After that, the puzzle 
solver painstakingly tries to marry piece after piece. As a rule, the jagged 
edges do not fit, and frustration mounts. On rare occasions, two pieces, maybe 
even three or four, snap into place and optimism emerges anew.

 For more than a decade, immunologists, virologists, physicians, and other 
researchers have attempted to piece together something much more important than 
a jigsaw puzzle. Their obsession is the puzzle of AIDS, the deadly syndrome 
caused by the infectious agent known as HIV.

 Investigators have recently fitted several new pieces into the AIDS puzzle. 
Two months ago, researchers at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections in Washington, D.C., made headlines worldwide with presentations on 
potent drugs called protease inhibitors and on a novel way to predict HIV's 
impact in patients.

 The protease inhibitors, in particular, stimulated a long-absent optimism 
among AIDS researchers. Attesting to this newfound hope is an editorial in the 
March Nature Medicine entitled "AIDS--a treatable disease at last."

"We're clearly at the beginning of that era," agrees Douglas D. Richman of the 
University of California, San Diego, an organizer of the D.C. conference.

 At the same time, Richman and other investigators stress that treatable 
doesn't equal preventable or curable. An international AIDS vaccine meeting 2 
weeks after the D.C. conference barely caused a stir within the research 
community, largely because there has been little discernible progress in 
developing a preventive vaccine.

 Even the much-publicized protease inhibitors, three of which have gained 
approval from the Food and Drug Administration, are not miracle drugs.

"We'd hoped to give [a patient] a drug, get rid of all the virus, and move on. 
We're not nearly at that point. . . . The best we can do is turn AIDS into more 
of a chronic disease," says Andrew Kaplan of the AIDS Institute at the 
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Medicine.

 In this roundup, Science News describes some of the recent advances--and 
setbacks--that have made the last few months the most fascinating period in 
AIDS research in quite some time.

 Surveying the enemy

 It's tough to fight a war without knowing the size of the opponent's army, but 
that's the situation AIDS researchers have faced until recently. To measure the 
severity of an HIV infection, they were forced to rely upon secondary markers 
such as certain immune system cells within an infected individual.

 These crucial CD4 cells are the target of HIV and usually decline in number as 
the virus slowly overwhelms a patient's immune system. However, CD4 cell counts 
don't necessarily provide an accurate indication of how much virus the body is 
battling. They're more accurately a measure of casualties rather than enemy 
soldiers.

 That's why scientists are excited about directly measuring viral load, the 
quantity of HIV in a milliliter of an infected person's blood. To gauge viral 
load, investigators can now count the strands of viral RNA in a blood sample. 
HIV stores its genetic information in strands of RNA rather than DNA. The 
researchers hope that monitoring changes in viral load will enable them to 
judge more quickly and accurately the effectiveness of new AIDS drugs. 
Moreover, viral load may prove much more powerful than CD4 counts at predicting 
the long-term survival of an HIV-infected person.

 In one study presented at the D.C. conference, researchers analyzed blood 
samples taken in 1984 or 1985 from HIV-infected homosexual or bisexual men. At 
the end of a decade of follow-up, only 17 of 45 men whose viral load averaged 
less than 5,300 RNA strands had died of AIDS. But of 45 men whose average viral 
load exceeded 37,000, 34 had died (see table).

"There were striking, very convincing differences in the rates of progression 
to AIDS and death. . . . It surprised even me that one or two RNA 
determinations can look 10 years into the future," says study leader John W. 
Mellors of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

 Researchers caution that the new RNA assays haven't been approved yet for 
widespread use. At least three different companies are petitioning FDA for 
approval of slightly different versions, but no one has rigorously compared 
these tests' dependability and accuracy. That's vital before physicians can use 
them to determine the proper course of treatment for patients.

"It's still not clear what a result with one assay means compared to the same 
result in another assay. That could present a really large problem in clinical 
practice," comments David Burns of the National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development's Pediatric, Adolescent, and Maternal AIDS Branch in 
Bethesda, Md. Investigators must also determine whether other factors, such as 
episodes of tuberculosis or pneumonia, might cause fluctuations in viral load, 
says Burns.

 Easing the load

 While RNA assays for HIV may not be ready for the clinic, Mellors' study 
clearly implies that a lower viral burden delays the development of AIDS. That 
implication received strong confirmation from studies showing that drug 
therapies which reduce viral load can prolong good health.

 Some of those ongoing trials test drugs, such as AZT (zidovudine), didanosine 
(ddI), and delavirdine, that target reverse transcriptase, the enzyme HIV uses 
to integrate its genetic material into host cells. In two trials of delavirdine 
taken with other inhibitors of reverse transcriptase, investigators have found 
that they can accurately figure the odds that a patient will maintain good 
health. They do this by combining the status of a patient's immune system (as 
demonstrated by CD4 counts) with measurements of viral load before therapy and 
8 weeks into therapy.

 According to data from these studies, antiviral treatments that reduce a 
patient's viral load by around 70 percent appear to halve that patient's 
likelihood of developing an AIDS-related illness or dying within a year or two, 
says William W. Feimuth of Pharmacia & Upjohn, the pharmaceutical firm in 
Kalamazoo, Mich., that makes delavirdine.

 The greatest excitement at the D.C. conference surrounded reports on newer 
drugs, the protease inhibitors. These compounds target the virus' protease, a 
small, versatile enzyme upon which HIV depends to prepare the proteins needed 
for replication.

 One study focused on ritonavir, a protease inhibitor recently approved by FDA 
for treatment of people with advanced AIDS. In a trial with 1,090 HIV-infected 
patients from around the world, investigators found that adding ritonavir to 
the normal drug regimen slowed disease progression significantly and reduced 
the number of deaths.

 The patients, all of whom had severely compromised immune systems, as measured 
by CD4 counts, received either ritonavir or a placebo in addition to 
traditional AIDS drugs. The ritonavir reduced by half the number of patients 
progressing to AIDS during the course of the 7-month study. By the end of the 
study, only about 5 percent of the ritonavir group had died, compared to 8.5 
percent of the placebo group, investigators reported.

"They showed a very convincing survival benefit," says Roy M. Gulick of New 
York University. Gulick is testing another recently approved protease 
inhibitor, indinavir. At the conference in D.C., he presented results from a 
24-week study of 97 HIV-infected people given indinavir alone, AZT and another 
reverse transcriptase, or all three compounds. Gulick monitored the safety of 
the drug regimens and their effect on viral load and CD4 counts. "There were 
very few side effects," says Gulick, noting that none of the complications 
observed was severe enough to warrant stopping a patient's treatment.

 While all three drug regimens boosted patients' CD4 counts, the most 
impressive result of the study was the reduction in viral load produced by 
combining the three drugs. On average, patients enjoyed a 99 percent drop in 
their viral load, reports Gulick. "More than 85 percent [of the patients] had 
their viral load drop beyond our ability to detect it. It was quite dramatic," 
says Gulick. Furthermore, the viral load remained undetectable for most 
patients throughout the study period, says Gulick.

 Investigators do sound a few notes of caution, however. "We're talking about 
virus in the blood. We're not talking about virus throughout the whole body," 
says Gulick. HIV probably remains at large in areas such as the lymph nodes, he 
explains. Furthermore, investigators warn, the protease inhibitors have not 
been tested long enough to establish their effectiveness and safety over many 
years.

 Since HIV mutates rapidly, the major stumbling block for AIDS drugs is the 
development of resistance. AZT, for instance, generated great optimism in early 
trials but has turned out to have little long-term benefit.

"This new class of [protease] drugs is far more effective than the drugs we've 
had up to now, but I think it's unlikely that any of these drugs will ever 
actually cure anybody," comments Kaplan. "They'll never completely clear the 
virus from an infected individual. The best we can do is suppress the virus. 
Ultimately, everyone will develop some kind of resistant virus."

 Kaplan's own research suggests that it will take no time for some people to 
develop resistance to current protease inhibitors. When he and his colleagues 
studied proteases used by the various HIV strains in 12 infected individuals, 
they discovered that many of the genes for the enzymes contained mutations that 
would provide resistance to known inhibitors.

"People who have never been treated with protease inhibitors already have 
viruses that are resistant to these inhibitors," says Kaplan. Furthermore, 
these resistant proteases are just as efficient in helping HIV replicate as the 
drug-sensitive versions, the investigators report in the March Journal of 
Virology.

 One way patients may thwart resistance is to take a costly medley of AIDS 
drugs, including drugs such as AZT in combination with more than one of the new 
protease inhibitors.

"Everyone will be on combination therapy in the future," predicts Kaplan.

 Gulick, who concurs, notes that insurance companies and the rest of society 
will have to wrestle with difficult decisions stemming from the significant 
expense of combination therapy. Adding protease inhibitors to current regimens 
may drive annual drug costs of an AIDS patient to more than $10,000. Already, 
says Gulick, some insurance companies have balked at picking up the tab for the 
new drugs, despite the data attesting to their effectiveness.

 A mother's burden

 One of the more intriguing research uses of the new assays for viral load has 
been to examine the risk of HIV transmission from pregnant women to their 
babies. Studies in recent years have suggested that only between 15 and 35 
percent of HIV-positive women will infect the babies they carry and that 
treatment with AZT can slash that risk by two-thirds.

 Viral load assays have enabled investigators to test whether the amount of 
virus in a woman's blood determines the risk of mother-to-child transmission. 
Investigators in a UCLA study saw a clear increase in transmission risk 
associated with high maternal viral loads, they reported at the D.C. conference 
and in the Feb. 28 Journal of the American Medical Association. Furthermore, 
the women with low viral loads did not infect their infants.

 Other studies haven't shown as conclusive a relationship between HIV 
transmission risk and maternal viral load, acknowledges UCLA's Ruth Dickover. 
"It's not necessarily a perfect predictor, but it's the best predictor that's 
available. . . . We've shown this is a very good research tool. It's too early 
to say if it can be used as a clinical tool," she says.

 While a high viral load in the mother implies danger to the baby, a low viral 
load is no guarantee of safety, investigators warn. "I don't think there is a 
threshold for nontransmission," notes UCLA's Yvonne Bryson.

 Bryson has also been at the center of another provocative issue surrounding 
infants and HIV infection. Last year, she and her colleagues reported evidence 
that a baby born to an HIV-infected woman was initially infected with HIV but 
later cleared the virus from its body (SN: 4/1/95, p. 196). Since researchers 
were skeptical that the developing immune system of a baby could fend off a 
virus that a mature immune system could not, the finding ignited controversy 
and suggestions of laboratory error.

 Two recent reports lend support to the validity of the observation, however. 
In the December 1995 issue of the journal AIDS, French researchers present 
evidence that 12 more infants appear to have successfully eliminated an HIV 
infection. Details of another 9 children who may have defeated HIV are reported 
in the Jan. 27 Lancet by a collaboration of investigators from Belgium, Italy, 
Sweden, and the United Kingdom.

 Though neither of the new reports provides evidence as detailed as that in the 
Bryson paper, researchers are starting to accept the idea that the event may 
occur. "If this is a real phenomenon, then what does it teach us?" wonders 
Kenneth McIntosh of Children's Hospital in Boston.

 It may be that the viruses cleared by these fortunate infants were in some way 
defective, he observes. A more provocative option, says McIntosh, is that there 
is something unusual about the immune response of certain infants. If so, 
researchers may be able to identify and exploit that protective element.

 Jerom's legacy

 A chimpanzee named Jerom holds a unique place in the annals of AIDS research. 
He was the first chimpanzee infected with HIV to develop AIDS. Researchers at 
Emory University's Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center in Atlanta 
euthanized Jerom in February after his health deteriorated seriously.

 Since isolating HIV more than a decade ago, scientists have infected a variety 
of animals with the virus in search of a nonhuman research model of AIDS. The 
mouse, the most popular animal for biomedical studies, does not develop AIDS, 
even though HIV can replicate in rodents.

 Investigators have had little success producing AIDS in species more similar 
to humans. Last year, a research team reported that a single baboon had come 
down with AIDS, but the group had infected the animal with HIV-2, not HIV-1. 
The latter, the much more common and aggressive form of the AIDS virus, does 
not infect baboons.

 Scientists have always considered chimpanzees, the primate most closely 
related to humans, to be the animal with the best chance of developing AIDS 
from HIV-1. Since the mid 1980s, they have infected around 100 chimpanzees with 
the virus and anxiously waited.

 While a number of infected chimpanzees showed declines in their CD4 cell 
counts, only Jerom came down with any of the illnesses associated with AIDS, 
says Harold McClure, head of Yerkes' AIDS research program.

 Investigators injected HIV-1 into Jerom several times between 1984 and 1987 
and first saw a drop in his immune cells in 1991, says McClure. That drop was 
temporary, but about a year ago, the chimp's CD4 cells began a steady decline. 
Eventually, says McClure, Jerom experienced anemia, pneumonia, and chronic, 
often severe diarrhea--conditions typical of AIDS.

 Last summer, when it became obvious to Yerkes researchers that Jerom had 
developed AIDS, the investigators transferred some of his blood to another 
HIV-infected chimpanzee in an attempt to speed AIDS development in another 
animal. The CD4 cells of that animal have dropped dramatically since the 
transfusion, though no AIDS symptoms have yet appeared, says McClure. 
Investigators suggest that after spending years in Jerom, the virus has evolved 
to became more virulent than the version of HIV that was originally injected 
into either chimp.

 Since chimpanzees are an endangered species and AIDS appears to take as long 
to develop in them as in humans, some researchers question whether additional 
AIDS research funds should be spent on the animals. "The chimpanzee is not 
going to be a very useful model," contends Richman.

 McClure is not ready to dismiss the primates as a research model, suggesting 
that chimpanzees used in AIDS research should come from breeding colonies and 
not from the wild. The observation that AIDS develops at the same pace in 
humans and chimpanzees indicates that their immune responses to HIV may be 
almost identical, he says. Consequently, vaccine developers should rigorously 
test preventive vaccines in chimps before beginning trials in humans, McClure 
argues.

 Despite its indecisive role in the controversy over using chimpanzees as 
animal models, Jerom's development of AIDS provides a direct lesson in another 
area. "It proves HIV causes AIDS," says McClure.

 That statement may seem obvious, but a few researchers, as well as a host of 
vocal nonscientists, continue to propound theories that HIV infection does not 
directly produce AIDS. Among their many proposals, these individuals contend 
that drug abuse or AZT therapy is the actual culprit behind the immune 
destruction in AIDS patients.

 Jerom never received AZT treatment, notes McClure. In addition, he wryly 
observes, "this animal was not a drug abuser."

 Rejecting aid from a baboon

 Another experiment concerning HIV and a primate made news recently. When 
Suzanne T. Ildstad, an investigator at the University of Pittsburgh, stepped to 
the podium at last month's American Association for the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS) meeting in Baltimore, there appeared to be more journalists than 
scientists in the audience. The media intensity stemmed from Ildstad's 
involvement in a controversial attempt to rescue the immune system of Jeff 
Getty, an HIV-infected AIDS activist.

 Because baboon immune cells are not susceptible to infection with HIV-1, the 
investigators had hoped that a cross-species transplant of baboon bone marrow 
would reconstitute Getty's ravaged immune system. Ildstad had recently 
discovered a class of cells derived from bone marrow that she expected would 
facilitate acceptance of the foreign tissue.

 In this initial trial, however, the baboon facilitator cells were apparently 
unable to prevent Getty's immune system from rejecting the bone marrow 
transplant. Eight weeks after the transplant, Ildstad and her colleagues could 
find no evidence of surviving baboon immune cells. "If there is a take, it's at 
a very low level," says Ildstad.

 Ildstad and her colleagues have yet to submit a report on the experiment to a 
peer-reviewed journal; they decided to release their results early because of 
rumors that the transplant had helped Getty. The patient has indeed seen an 
improvement in his condition, including an increased number of CD4 immune 
cells, says Ildstad. Yet the investigators don't attribute this recovery to the 
presence of baboon bone marrow. They warn that Getty's improvement may be 
temporary. The stress of the operation and preoperative procedures may have 
stimulated his immune system, they suggest.

 Illdstad claims that the procedure did not transfer any infectious agents from 
the donor baboon to Getty, a concern raised by opponents of cross-species 
transplants. "There's absolutely no evidence for baboon-derived infection," she 
says.

 If given permission by the FDA, Ildstad intends to try another baboon bone 
marrow transplant in which she'll use stronger drug regimens to prevent immune 
rejection of the graft.

 Experience counts

 As the failed baboon bone marrow transplant demonstrates, not all pieces of 
the AIDS jigsaw fall into place as neatly and quickly as investigators and 
patients would like. Though hope has risen that the new protease inhibitors 
will turn AIDS into a treatable disease, investigators note that it's important 
not to overlook basic factors that may also extend the life of HIV-infected 
people.

 At the D.C. conference, Mari M. Kitahata of the University of Washington in 
Seattle presented a simple study with this powerful message. Of 403 men 
diagnosed with AIDS between 1984 and 1994, those treated by physicians who had 
little or no experience handling AIDS patients generally survived about a year 
less than those treated by physicians with significant experience. When it 
comes to the puzzle of AIDS, the availability of advanced drugs and of veteran 
physicians who know how to use them are both crucial.

 copyright 1996 


