Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ms_3.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 May 6, 1995

 MEDICAL SCIENCES

 Variations on a theme

 Interplay of genes and environment elevates cancer risk

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 A young woman named Donna starts to fill out a life insurance form. She 
answers all sorts of health questions, including some on diet. One asks how 
often she eats red meat. Her reply: at least 7 times a week.A visiting nurse 
takes the completed form and tells her the company will need a blood sample to 
go along with her application. Donna rolls up her sleeve and watches as the 
nurse fills several tubes with the crimson liquid.

 Two weeks later, Donna gets a letter in the mail from the insurer. Her 
application has been denied. The blood sample revealed that she has inherited a 
common genetic variation, one that is harmless except to meat lovers. Donna's 
carnivorous habits have put her at high risk of developing cancer.

 Geneticists seem to capture headlines at a dizzying pace as they mine the 
human genome. Last year, they uncovered a gene that, when flawed, ratchets up 
the risk of breast and ovarian cancer. A mutant form of another gene has been 
linked to the near certainty of developing colon cancer.

 Yet scientists know that such disease-causing supergenes account for only a 
fraction of all cancer cases. The fictional example described above represents 
a far more common genetic tie to cancer. In such cases, an otherwise harmless 
genetic variation can predispose an individual to cancer, but only in 
conjunction with external factors, such as diet.

 It turns out that some genes, like ice cream, come in several varieties. At 
birth, some people get the plain chocolate form, while others get the mint 
chocolate chip version. Either way, scientists don't regard these gene 
variations -- called polymorphisms -- as flaws.

 But there's a hitch. Scientists suspect that certain polymorphisms may boost 
the chance of developing cancer. Unlike the nearly immutable risk conferred by 
the supergenes, these polymorphisms raise the specter of cancer only in the 
presence of specific environmental hazards.

 For example, one team now presents evidence that smokers with a particular 
polymorphism run a high risk of breast cancer. A second group shows that a 
common genetic variant can boost, for some people, the chances of developing a 
deadly brain cancer. The scientists aired these findings in March at the 
American Association for Cancer Research meeting held in Toronto.

"I'm thrilled that we're showing there's a clear gene-environment interaction," 
says Peter G. Shields of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. "That 
is something that hasn't really been proven until the last few years."

 Knowledge of an inherited susceptibility might spur people to avoid 
carcinogens that raise their risk, the researchers say.

 Take smoking, for example. Shields, along with Christine B. Ambrosone of the 
State University of New York at Buffalo, has evidence that a genetic variation 
in a gene called NAT may put smokers in jeopardy of breast cancer.

 The NAT gene contains the blueprint for the enzyme N-acetyltransferase. Cells 
rely on this enzyme to detoxify carcinogens, including the hazardous chemicals 
found in tobacco smoke. NAT comes in several varieties, each one responsible 
for a slightly different version of the enzyme.

 The researchers knew that previous epidemiological research had failed to find 
a consistent link between breast cancer and smoking. Those negative findings 
had always puzzled Ambrosone and others, because they knew that tobacco smoke 
contains certain chemicals, called aromatic amines, that damage the DNA in 
breast cells. Such DNA injury is the first step leading to cancer. Moreover, 
other scientists had discovered that these amines cause breast tumors in 
rodents.

 The laboratory studies suggest that "these are powerful mammary carcinogens," 
Ambrosone says. So why had previous epidemiological studies failed to forge a 
solid connection between breast cancer and smoking?

 Perhaps only a subgroup of smokers would prove at risk, the researchers 
speculated. To test that hypothesis, Ambrosone's team collected information on 
159 postmenopausal women who had breast cancer and who had participated in a 
large study conducted from 1986 to 1991. For comparison, the team looked at 203 
women who did not have cancer at the time of the study. The researchers culled 
data on smoking, diet, alcohol use, and other factors that might influence 
cancer risk.

 Researchers also had access to blood samples from the study participants. 
That's where Shields and his colleagues came in. Using polymerase chain 
reaction, a technique that amplifies segments of DNA, they looked for 
variations in the NAT gene.

 They then classified each volunteer as either a slow or a fast acetylator. 
Slow acetylators have a version of the NAT gene that leads to an enzyme that is 
less efficient at detoxifying carcinogens, including the aromatic amines in 
cigarette smoke.

 When the team analyzed breast cancer risk on the basis of genotype, they found 
the increased risk in one group: smokers who produce the slower enzyme.

 Indeed, the analysis suggests that slow acetylators who smoke more than 15 
cigarettes a day (this study's definition of heavy smoking) are eight times 
more likely to develop breast cancer than nonsmokers with the same genetic 
heritage.

 Ordinarily, the NAT enzyme can prevent DNA damage caused by aromatic amines by 
changing these carcinogens into a form that the body can excrete. But the 
slower the process of excretion, the greater the likelihood that some DNA 
foul-ups will occur.

 Once its DNA is injured, a cell may lose control over its growth and turn 
malignant.

 Ex-smokers who are slow acetylators appear to have a higher risk of breast 
cancer than women who have never smoked. What's more, the team's data show that 
women who begin smoking early in life, possibly in their teens, face the 
greatest cancer threat. "Carcinogenesis is a long, slow process," Ambrosone 
says.

 Yet slow acetylators who do not smoke face no excess threat of breast cancer, 
the research indicates.

 That finding may help explain why previous epidemiological studies revealed no 
link between smoking and breast cancer. When researchers lumped slow and fast 
acetylators together, the cancer risk never emerged. But when they zeroed in on 
a specific group of smokers, the jeopardy surfaced, Shields says.

"If we can categorize women by specific [genetic] susceptibilities, then we can 
identify new risk factors," he adds.

 What's the difference between inheriting a polymorphism and inheriting a 
mutation in a breast-cancer-causing gene, such as BRCA1?

 Geneticists believe that women born with a mutant BRCA1 face an 85 percent 
chance of developing breast cancer at some point in their lives (SN: 9/24/94, 
p.197). Environmental factors may play a role, but in most cases the defective 
gene by itself confers that elevated cancer risk.

 In contrast, the slow version of NAT does not by itself increase cancer risk, 
even though it causes changes in its enzyme. But should a polymorphism be 
considered a defect?

 Shields points out that "in some populations, slow acetylation is 20 percent; 
in other populations it's 80 percent -- so who's got the mutation?" He 
speculates that the polymorphism in the NAT gene may have evolved to serve some 
unrecognized beneficial purpose.

 Rapid acetylators may face their own cancer demons, says Shields. For example, 
they are at risk for colon cancer because they can unleash the toxicity of 
heterocyclic amines, potential carcinogens found in cooked meats (SN: 4/23/94, 
p.264).

 NAT isn't the only example of a polymorphism's link to cancer.

 Enter the GST gene, which codes for an enzyme called glutathione 
S-transferase. This gene and its enzyme help the body get rid of cancer-causing 
chemicals that are known to be active in the brain. John K. Wiencke and 
Margaret Wrensch of the University of California, San Francisco, and their 
collaborator Karl T. Kelsey of Harvard University speculated that variations in 
GST might play a role in a mysterious, deadly brain cancer called glioma. 
Glioma causes progressive mental deterioration, blindness, deafness, and 
convulsions.

 The team knew that many people -- 50 percent of whites in the United States 
and about 30 percent of African Americans -- inherit a polymorphism of GST. But 
rather than representing a simple variation in the GST gene, this polymorphism 
results in an absence of the gene altogether, Wiencke points out. Scientists 
consider it a completely normal difference in genetic heritage. People who lack 
GST don't experience problems -- unless they encounter a specific chemical that 
needs to be quenched. The researchers wondered if such individuals would then 
face a heightened threat of brain cancer.

 To find out, they collected information on 147 people from Northern California 
who had been diagnosed with glioma. For comparison, the team gathered data on 
118 controls who did not have brain cancer.

 The team's analysis revealed a risk associated with this polymorphism, but 
only for young women. About 80 percent of the women who had developed gliomas 
before age 40 had no GST gene.

 Researchers have no real clue as to the causes of such tumors. "It's a very 
difficult and puzzling disease," Kelsey says. That enigma added significance to 
the dramatic finding.

"We were thrilled at our results," Wiencke says.

 Yet the team stresses that their results are only preliminary and must be 
confirmed. "To my mind, the first thing to do is to replicate and see if this 
finding is real," Wrensch says.

 Many questions remain unanswered. For example, the group has no idea why young 
women appear at risk. Does this indicate a sex-based difference, perhaps a 
hormonal involvement in this kind of brain cancer? "We're trying to explain 
that [finding]," Kelsey says.

 And unlike the NAT-smoking link, no environmental toxin predisposing some 
people to gliomas has surfaced yet. GST genes detoxify a whole host of 
carcinogens, and the researchers have yet to focus on a particular one.

 They plan to isolate some environmental suspects soon. "We've got a gene that 
is leading us to something," Wiencke says.

 Whereas cancer-causing supergenes run in only a few families, polymorphisms 
are part of everyone's genetic heritage. You're either a slow or a rapid 
acetylator. You either have GST or you haven't. In most cases, such 
polymorphisms cause no harm. In fact, scientists argue that when high 
percentages of the population inherit such a variation, it may be a sign that 
the altered form confers some as yet unknown advantage.

 But the flip side is that polymorphisms may pose a cancer threat to certain 
people -- those exposed to a specific carcinogen. Smokers who've inherited the 
slow version of NAT run the risk of developing breast cancer. Without the 
smoke, there's no threat.

 Scientists are just beginning to unravel the complex interplay among genetic 
variations, cancer, and the environment. Studies will continue to fill in the 
details of how such polymorphisms bring on a malignancy.

 If successful, researchers may someday print out a map of an individual's 
genome, including the variations in genes that help detoxify carcinogens. "That 
would be the fantasy," Shields says. "To actually sit down with a person and 
say: Look, you have this genetic makeup. Your risk from smoking is much higher 
[than average]."

"If you could find genes that are important in carcinogenesis and understand 
what in the environment they're interacting with . . . then you'd have a handle 
on what to modify in the environment," Wrensch says.

 Some scientists believe that such knowledge would provide people with powerful 
incentives to protect themselves.

 Others believe that Donna's fictional story may become reality. Will insurance 
companies deny coverage to people who indulge a habit sure to skyrocket their 
odds of developing cancer? Will employers require workers to take a genetic 
test that assesses their body's ability to detoxify certain chemicals?

"This is a controversial and difficult area," Kelsey says. "I believe that some 
of these variant genes will in fact increase risk. Once that is well accepted 
and well shown, then we have to make social decisions on how to deal with that."

 copyright 1996 


