Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ms_4.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 November 4, 1995

 MEDICAL SCIENCES

 The Xeno-Solution

 Perils and promise of transplanting animal organs into people

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 Over the next year, 10 patients whose livers have failed will pin their hopes 
for a new life on a pig. As they wait for human donor organs to be found, 
surgeons at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., will try to fend 
off death by connecting each patient's circulation to a pig liver kept alive 
outside the animal.

 The unusual operations may foreshadow the return of permanent animal-to-human 
transplants, a procedure called xenotransplantation after xenos, the Greek word 
for strange or foreign. Such extreme efforts date back at least to the turn of 
the century. In 1905, for example, a French surgeon transplanted slices of a 
rabbit kidney into a child. Lamb was the animal of choice in 1923, when another 
kidney xenotransplant was tried.

 The most notorious case of xenotransplantation may have been Baby Fae, an 
infant born with a heart defect that would kill her within a month. In the fall 
of 1984, physicians operated on the 2-week-old baby, replacing her heart with 
one from a young baboon. Three weeks later, her immune system having 
successfully waged war on the foreign organ, Baby Fae died.

 Most of the enthusiasm for xenotransplantation died along with Baby Fae. Yet 
in the last few years, as investigators have slowly begun to understand why all 
past xenotransplant attempts failed, that enthusiasm has started to resurface. 
Researchers now believe they have a much clearer idea of why the human body 
fiercely rejects organs from other animals and how to circumvent that 
destructive process.

 Several groups, for example, have recently altered the genes of pigs in order 
to make porcine organs more like human organs and thus less likely to be 
immediately rejected. Investigators are also exploring strategies to combat 
delayed organ rejection.

 These efforts have convinced many xenotransplant researchers that their dream 
is possible. "We're flushed with excitement, but it's a long road ahead," 
cautions Fritz H. Bach of Harvard Medical School's Deaconess Hospital in Boston.

 That road was laid out at the recent Third International Congress for 
Xenotransplantation in Boston, a meeting that drew more than 700 investigators. 
Motivating that crowd of scientists and physicians is a simple reality: There 
is a desperate need for replacement organs.

 In the United States alone, 40,000 people languish on the waiting lists for 
organ transplants, according to the United Network for Organ Sharing, and the 
number is growing steadily. "There are eight people who die every day in the 
U.S. because of organ shortages," says Bach, who chaired the Boston meeting.

 Though offering a solution to those shortages, xenotransplantation presents a 
number of difficulties that human-to-human transplants avoid. The most severe 
obstacle is hyperacute rejection, an immune response that within a few minutes 
to a few hours kills the healthy animal organ by cutting off its supply of 
blood. "The transplant turns black," says David H. Sachs, who directs the 
Transplantation Biology Research Center at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) 
in Boston.

 In past xenotransplants, surgeons could avoid hyperacute rejection by using 
organs from chimpanzees, the primate genetically most like humans. Chimpanzees 
are now an endangered species, however, so researchers have turned to another 
close relative of humans, the baboon. In 1992, for example, pioneering 
transplant surgeon Thomas E. Starzl of the University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center led unsuccessful efforts to transplant baboon livers into two dying 
patients.

 Not many researchers view baboons as a good source of donor organs. The 
animals take a long time to raise, have organs that are often too small for 
human use, and perhaps most important, may harbor infectious agents that 
present a threat to humans (see sidebar).

 Many investigators believe the future of xenotransplantation may dwell in 
pigpens. Pigs are easy to raise, mature quickly, produce large litters, and 
have organs comparable in size to humans'. Since pigs are widely raised for 
food, using their organs for xenotransplantation should raise fewer ethical 
concerns than using nonhuman primates' organs.

 Despite these advantages, pig organs offer a major drawback. They provoke 
hyperacute rejection. That's because the surfaces of porcine endothelial cells, 
which line the blood vessels of the donar organs, sport molecules that their 
human counterparts don't.

 One particular molecule, a sugar that investigators call alpha-gal, poses the 
largest problem.

 Coursing through human blood, as well as that of many nonhuman primates, are 
natural antibodies that view alpha-gal molecules as evidence of a foreign 
invasion.

"The xenoreactive natural antibodies, as soon as blood flows into that organ, 
will recognize the pig endothelial cells and bind to them," says Bach.

 That binding sets off a cascade of complex interactions among a large number 
of blood proteins known collectively as complement. This complement cascade 
eventually results in the formation of a membrane attack complex, a 
multiprotein assemblage that latches onto the surface of endothelial cells, 
killing them directly or, more often, activating them.

 This activation has disastrous consequences, says Bach. The densely packed 
endothelial cells shrink away from one another, causing blood vessels to leak. 
Furthermore, the activated endothelial cells encourage proteins and platelets 
in the blood to forms dense clots, obstructing the vessels. Both actions 
quickly starve the transplanted organ of blood.

 Investigators placing pig organs in other animal species have stemmed 
endothelial cell activation and the resulting hyperacute rejection by depleting 
a prospective recipient's store of alpha-gal antibodies before the 
xenotransplant. One method involves first filtering blood through an external 
pig organ, to sop up the alpha-gal antibodies, and then returning the blood.

 Besides being cumbersome, such techniques deplete alpha-gal antibodies only 
temporarily: The host simply makes new ones. Furthermore, through what's called 
the alternate pathway, the complement cascade can sometimes proceed even 
without alpha-gal antibodies. As a result, some investigators have decided to 
focus more directly on preventing the actions of complement.

 In one study, investigators flooded the blood of monkeys with soluble 
molecules that bind to and block the action of one of the complement proteins. 
This enabled pig hearts to survive in the primates for as long as 6 days, 
reported Fred Sanfilippo of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in 
Baltimore. In contrast, untreated monkeys usually rejected pig hearts in under 
8 hours.

 Yet widely inhibiting complement may not be safe. "Complement is a terribly 
important part of our body. We probably need it to survive," says Bach.

 The most promising approach to vanquishing hyperacute rejection may be not to 
treat the recipient, but to change the donor organ. Investigators have recently 
transplanted into nonhuman primates the organs of pigs genetically engineered 
to avoid the complement cascade. Human organs aren't vulnerable to their own 
complement because proteins that inhibit the cascade stud their endothelial 
cells. The pig endothelium carries similar protectors, but they're effective 
only against pig complement.

 That realization prompted a number of academic groups and biotech firms to pop 
genes with the instructions for human complement inhibitors into the genomes of 
pigs. Talks in Boston suggested that initial experiments with these transgenic 
pigs have been more successful than investigators had expected.

 Since they wanted only to examine the survival of these engineered pig organs, 
investigators either connected an external donor heart to the primate's 
circulation or implanted the heart without removing the primate's own organ. 
Pig hearts that display human complement inhibitors called CD59 and DAF can 
survive for more than 30 hours in baboons; unmodified organs last about an 
hour, reported investigators from Duke Medical Center and Nextran, a biotech 
firm in Princeton, N.J.

 An even bigger stir was generated by data on human DAF-producing pigs created 
by scientists at the University of Cambridge and Imutran, a biotech company in 
Cambridge, England. Some hearts from these animals lasted more than 5 days in 
monkeys. Moreover, when investigators also used large doses of 
immunosuppressive drugs, some DAF-laden pig hearts survived more than 2 months.

 Starzl called those results a "landmark" in xenotransplantation.

 The long-lasting hearts still looked perfect when examined after the monkeys' 
deaths, says David J.G. White of the University of Cambridge. Animal 
regulations in the United Kingdom forced the investigators to kill many of the 
monkeys before organ rejection set in because the drugs had made the primates 
sick. "Hyperacute rejection is dead. I announce its death," White told Science 
News.

 Many xenotransplant investigators are skeptical of White's brash statement. 
What's more, they fear that overcoming hyperacute rejection isn't the end of 
their job.

 An equally destructive immune response, known as delayed xenograft rejection, 
can occur in the days after a transplant. Until recently, researchers had 
rarely seen an organ survive long enough to undergo it.

 Investigators now report that delayed xenograft rejection appears to begin 
when macrophages and natural killer cells infiltrate the organ. These two 
classes of immune cells respond to any foreign object, whether a virus or an 
organ. The immune cells then secrete chemical signals that activate endothelial 
cells, leading ultimately to organ rejection. Delayed rejection occurs without 
the complement cascade that defines hyperacute rejection.

 Since activated endothelial cells are common to both forms of rejection, Bach 
and other investigators are exploring ways to create transgenic pigs whose 
endothelial cells ignore the body's activating signals. Even if the cells do 
become activated, Bach believes, there are ways to prevent the genes that cause 
blood clotting and other rejection-related events from turning on.

 One certain way of defeating delayed xenograft rejection is to use potent 
immunosuppressants to check the cells mobilized by a host's immune system. 
These drugs can also overcome the last apparent barrier to 
xenotransplantation--a delayed rejection driven by immune cells known as T 
cells. This T cell response, which may take days or months to emerge, 
represents the primary hurdle in human-to-human transplants.

 For some time, says Hugh Auchincloss Jr. of MGH, investigators had hoped that 
T cells would prove less troublesome in xenotransplantation than in 
human-to-human operations. That optimism is fading, he explains, as growing 
amounts of data suggest that this cellular response is even stronger when 
animal organs are used.

 Though immunosuppressive drugs can often stymie the T cell response, they may 
leave patients vulnerable to equally deadly cancers and infections. 
Consequently, investigators would like to educate the host immune system into 
accepting the transplant.

"The creation of tolerance is how we must go. How to do it is the $64 question. 
A lot of people says it's impossible. I say it's not," says Starzl.

 Starzl's optimism stems from the fact that some people have received human 
organs and successfully weaned themselves off immunosuppressive drugs after a 
few years. When a solid organ is transplanted, Starzl says, immature immune 
cells from the donor inadvertently go along for the ride. These cells spread 
throughout the host body and mature, a process Starzl thinks helps induce 
tolerance. "When you transplant an organ, it's as if you're accidentally 
transplanting a bit of bone marrow," he says.

 Investigators are pursuing deliberate strategies for creating tolerance as 
well. One approach involves augmenting a recipient's immune system with cells 
from the immune system of the organ donor. Sachs, who leads a team of 
investigators from MGH and the Boston firm BioTransplant, has completed 
experiments in which researchers transferred the bone marrow of pigs into 
monkeys.

 With the help of immunosuppressive drugs administered for about a month after 
the transplants, the bone marrow survived for more than 300 days in some of the 
primates. Since bone marrow is the birthplace of immune cells, these monkeys 
had a part pig, part monkey immune system. As a result, their immune cells did 
not treat pig cells as foreign, reported Sachs. He hopes this strategy may 
someday enable scientists to transplant pig organs safely into monkeys--and 
eventually into humans.

 William E. Beschorner, president of Ximerex, a small company based in Baldwin, 
Md., presented a tolerance-inducing strategy that, if successful, might create 
less stress for the organ recipient.

 Beschorner suggests that investigators obtain white blood cells from a 
prospective organ recipient and inject them into developing pig fetuses (see 
diagram).

 During the fetal period, the pig teaches its immune cells not to recognize its 
own tissue as foreign. Beschorner hypothesizes that if transplanted human 
immune cells were educated along with the pig cells, investigators could 
harvest pig-tolerant human immune cells from newborn pigs and return them to 
the patient. These cells might suppress the normal immune response of 
uneducated human cells, he says.

 Auchincloss calls Beschorner's proposal "a bit of a long shot" but one worth 
pursuing. He notes that the idea of "suppressor" immune cells has recently come 
back into fashion after being a "dirty word" in the 1980s.

 Xenotransplant researchers are divided on how quickly they should return to 
the clinic. Since cells don't face the same risk of hyperacute rejection as 
whole organs--blood vessels from donor animals do not accompany the cells--a 
number of groups today are already trying cellular xenotransplants.

 As Science News went to press, investigators at the University of Pittsburgh 
and the University of California, San Francisco, were making final preparations 
for an attempt to rebuild the devastated immune system of an AIDS patient with 
cells derived from the bone marrow of a baboon. HIV, the virus that causes 
AIDS, does not infect baboon immune cells.

 Researchers in Sweden have transplanted, with the aid of immunosuppressive 
drugs, islet cells from the pig pancreas into human diabetics. The scientists 
want to see how well the porcine islets, which have survived for several 
months, secrete insulin and what effect this insulin will have on the patients' 
diabetes.

 Some neurodegenerative diseases, notably Huntington's and Parkinson's, may be 
treated experimentally with transplants of human fetal cells into the brain. 
But obtaining such tissue is difficult and controversial, prompting some 
investigators to try porcine fetal cells instead. Xenotransplants into 
Parkinson's patients are already under way, and several people with 
Huntington's are slated to undergo the procedure in the next few months (SN: 
10/7/95, p.230).

 A growing number of investigators expect transplant surgeons to begin using 
animal organs as bridges--interim transplants while a patient waits for a human 
organ. In addition to Duke's bridge experiments with livers from Nextran's 
pigs, other physicians are prepared to transplant baboon hearts into children 
temporarily.

 The most heated controversy among xenotransplanters centers on the question of 
when pigs or baboons may provide "destination" organs, permanent replacements 
of failing hearts, kidneys, livers, and other organs. White argues that the 
success of the transgenic pigs suggests that a trial with a few human patients 
might be feasible within a year or two.

 Auchincloss, who told Science News he was delighted by the success of 
transgenic pig organs, nevertheless challenges White's optimism. He argues that 
investigators must demonstrate at least a year's survival of an organ, with 
tolerable drug regimens, in large animals before moving ahead to humans. 
White's experiments, he says, depend on unacceptable doses of drugs.

"If you give enough immunosuppression to kill the patient, the xenograft will 
survive. I don't think these results justify clinical xenotransplants," he told 
the Boston audience after White's talk.

 Another important caveat, researchers note, is that the xenotransplants with 
transgenic pig hearts did not establish how functional the organs could be, 
because the primates' own hearts weren't removed for the experiments.

"It's easy to argue both sides, whether to move quickly or be cautious. But the 
worst thing that can happen is a negative public reaction to an approach tried 
too quickly. That could set the field back," says Sanfilippo.

 The thrilling scientific advances reported at the Boston meeting may blind 
some researchers to the clinical difficulties ahead, adds Columbia University's 
Robert E. Michler, who heads one of the most active transplant clinics in the 
nation.

"I don't share the same enthusiasm as others that we will permanently put 
animal organs into people within 1 to 3 years," he says. "You have to 
understand that there are scientists out there who are in a race right now, and 
that race may cloud their vision. All they want to do is be the first to put a 
pig organ into a human. I want to be the first to put a pig organ into a human 
and have him go home."

 Would xenotransplants produce epidemics worse than AIDS?

 The most pointed question about xenotransplantation may not be whether it can 
be done but whether it should be done. Married to the hope of alleviating the 
desperate organ shortage and curing illnesses such as diabetes is the real, but 
unquantifiable, risk of introducing deadly new viruses to the human population, 
says Jonathan S. Allan, a virologist at the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical 
Research in San Antonio.

 Investigators now believe that HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, originated as 
a monkey virus that somehow infected humans. Animals are also thought to host 
other viruses, such as Ebola, that can infect and kill humans. Allan fears that 
baboons harbor comparable viruses that researchers can't eliminate from donor 
animals.

"Baboons carry viruses that could lead to another AIDS epidemic," asserts Allan.

"[Xenotransplanters] are saying that lightning can't strike twice."

 Baboons concern Allan because they are so similar to humans. That makes them 
ideal organ donors, but it also means that viruses which infect baboons are 
likely to view humans as inviting hosts. "If you have to use a species, pigs 
will be much less of a pathological nightmare," says Allan.

 Allan's concerns have caught the attention of other researchers and federal 
officials, who openly acknowledge that xenotransplants do pose a risk of 
transmitting infectious organisms. In a June meeting, the Institute of 
Medicine, which plans to release a report on xenotransplantation next year, 
addressed the issue of infectious risks.

 The Food and Drug Administration recently convened an advisory panel to 
examine the dangers posed by an experiment designed to transplant baboon cells 
into a dying AIDS patient (see main story). With Allan abstaining, the panel 
unanimously approved the single experiment, even though a member of the 
research team tells Science News the operation will probably transfer one known 
virus from the baboon into the patient. Allan notes that the transfer of baboon 
viruses to a patient who will probably die does not present a serious threat to 
the overall population.

 Nonetheless, he points out that investigators plan to transplant baboon hearts 
temporarily into young patients awaiting human organs. These patients are 
likely to survive their xenotransplants and may spread viruses that go 
unrecognized for years, says Allan. "You're going to pull the baboon heart out, 
but you're not pulling the baboon viruses out," he warns.

 Investigators have little solid data on how easy or difficult it is to 
transfer viruses, bacteria, or parasites between species during transplants. 
"In a few years, we may have the ability to be more quantitative about the 
risk," says Louisa Chapman of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) in Atlanta.

 Placing a moratorium on xenotransplants or restricting them severely while 
researchers determine that risk "could put a stranglehold on an area of great 
medical promise," says Chapman.

 The FDA and CDC will soon publish guidelines designed to reduce the risk of 
transmitting infectious agents but will leave the approval and monitoring of 
xenotransplant experiments to local review boards, says Philip D. Noguchi, head 
of FDA's division of cellular and gene therapies.

 Allan has been sharply critical of the proposed guidelines. "There's no 
federal regulation or oversight for the future of xenotransplantation. It's 
almost irresponsible," he says.

"We're not just leaving it up to the local community. We're demanding they take 
responsibility," protests Noguchi. Yet Noguchi admits that he does worry about 
the dangers of xenotransplants. "It's a chance. It could blow up in our faces. 
Some nights I sleep better than other nights," he says.

 copyright 1996 


