Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ps_4.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 January 26, 1996

 PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

 New greenbacks

 How to make a buck--literally

 By RICHARD LIPKIN

 Suppose you wanted to found a world power. To get the new nation's economy 
rolling, you'd have to provide its citizens with currency. You'd want to design 
handsome, durable bills. They must feel substantial and look majestic enough to 
engender national pride.

 On the other hand, this currency can't be costly to produce. It must roll off 
presses easily, survive its contact with 10,000 sweaty palms, and after years 
of fingering, crumpling, laundering, and even bleaching, remain recognizable.

"Any scientist who thinks this is a trivial problem is out of his gourd," says 
Robert R. Shannon, an optics researcher at the University of Arizona, Tucson.

 Moreover, the bills must be tough to reproduce. "When it comes to 
counterfeiting," he adds, "you have to fool some very clever people."

 Such considerations represent only the tip of the iceberg for the U.S. 
Treasury Department's Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP), the federal 
agency responsible for producing the greenbacks that grace U.S. wallets. Faced 
with the rapid rise of desktop publishing--complete with top-notch ink-jet 
printers, color copiers, and scanners--BEP has had to confront a sobering 
reality: Uncle Sam's greenbacks may soon be under siege.

 With $380 billion in circulation worldwide, Washington finds itself 
hard-pressed to keep track of every note. In 1994, the Secret Service seized 
$45.7 million in counterfeit bills before they entered U.S. circulation--though 
forgers successfully sneaked $25.3 million in fakes into the economy. Overseas, 
where counterfeiting of U.S. currency occurs more frequently, agents detected 
another $137.7 million in bogus bills.

 Of the counterfeit notes, 90 percent emerged from conventional printing 
processes; however, the number of bills produced with the new reprographic 
technology is growing alarmingly. In 1992, forgers used the new techniques to 
create an estimated $6 to $8 million in notes--an amount that has doubled every 
year since 1989.

 If the number of forgeries were to continue to increase at this rate until the 
year 2000, then $1.6 billion in high-tech fraudulent currency would pollute the 
economy, a National Research Council (NRC) committee warns.

 Even a casual experimenter--not to mention dedicated professionals--can jaunt 
over to a computer store, buy an off-the-shelf system, counterfeit money, then 
throw the equipment away. Such fake notes, agreed scientists on NRC's committee 
on next-generation currency design, could quickly overwhelm anticounterfeiting 
efforts because tracing the bills to their source is "very difficult."

"The quality of the reproduction can be very high," they report, "and not 
solely dependent on the skill of the counterfeiter." Moreover, because a 
currency's value hinges on public confidence, a steady trickle of fakes could 
threaten the dollar's integrity.

 That threat has forced a rethinking of U.S. currency.

 In 1990, an interagency counterfeit deterrence committee convened to evaluate 
the integrity of U.S. notes. Since then, a wide variety of potential 
alterations has gone through testing. Based on the committee's recommendations, 
the secretary of the treasury decided in July 1994 that U.S. bills need a 
redesign.

 This year, the Federal Reserve will begin circulating a newly designed $100 
bill. The note incorporates several safety features whose efficacy federal 
agents will monitor carefully during the next few years. Ultimately, the 
treasury plans to redesign U.S. currency at the rate of one denomination per 
year, moving from the $100 note to the $1 bill.

 The potential of desktop counterfeiting has guided the design, materials, and 
production decisions of the next generation of U.S. currency--and will 
undoubtedly do so well into the next century. "We want to discourage people 
from driving to their local copy shop and printing up cash for the weekend," 
says Shannon. "Yet, at the same time, any security-enhancing feature added to 
currency must also be acceptable technologically and politically to society.

"This requires a delicate balance."

 Although it considered printing the bills on plastics, synthetics, high-tech 
cloth, and other materials, the interagency committee ultimately advised the 
treasury to stick with the traditional paper, a blend of 75 percent cotton and 
25 percent linen. While less durable than the alternatives--a $1 bill typically 
survives only about 18 months--this paper has a distinct and identifiable feel 
that proves not only difficult to copy but helpful in snagging fakes.

"Many counterfeits are still caught when people who handle money say that it 
just doesn't feel right," says Sara E. Church, a BEP materials scientist. 
Imitating the texture of money "is not a trivial production problem."

 In the intaglio process long used for Uncle Sam's greenbacks, hand-crafted 
plates that press ink onto paper give each note a distinctive embossed texture. 
Intaglio images remain crisp for a long time before fading. Moreover, since 
intaglio requires millions of dollars of machinery and great finesse, the 
process remains quite difficult to replicate.

"We're asking a lot of this product," Church says. "From a materials 
standpoint, even surviving the intaglio printing process puts the substrate 
through a rigorous test. We print 8,000 sheets per hour under enormous 
pressures, thousands of pounds per square inch. In the end, the currency 
features must remain recognizable after a lot of abuse."

 Multicolored inks, a decorative feature of much European currency, didn't pass 
muster with the NRC committee. With so many color copiers and ink-jet printers 
around, extra colors add little extra security to notes, the scientists agreed. 
In fact, a multicolor forgery can fool the human eye more easily than a 
monochromatic one.

 The NRC scientists nonetheless recommended adding visual subtleties to thwart 
high-tech printers. In the near term, they suggested introducing inks that 
change color when viewed from different angles, improving a microprinted thread 
running vertically through the paper, and employing watermarks, hard-to-copy 
dot patterns, and moirepatterns, which blur when photocopied.

 For the currency of the next century, the scientists suggested some exotic, 
high-tech features. Plastic and lamination, for example, could enhance the 
substrate on which money is printed. A note made of three leaves sandwiched 
together could contain an image visible when viewed with transmitted, but not 
reflected, light. Designers could also bury shadow images, visible only at 
certain angles, that could serve as a watermark.

 Blending microscopic particles--such as optical fibers, capsules, polymer 
beads, and radar-reflective dust--into the substrate would deter simple copying 
and printing and would help in authentication. So would so-called smart inks, 
whose colors change when viewed from different angles or under unusual light 
sources--or that appear only in ultraviolet or infrared illumination.

 Holograms and diffraction gratings, too, could offer some protection, although 
desktop graphics systems make them increasingly easy to mimic. In one security 
test, for example, Bauder reported that he counterfeited an allegedly 
hard-to-copy hologram in his garage. Kinegrams and pixelgrams, two hologram 
variants, yield a genuinely distinctive look, though the scientists fear that 
even they will soon fall prey to home computing.

 One of the most provocative means of stymieing counterfeiters involves placing 
on each bill an encrypted pattern derived mathematically from the bill's unique 
serial number. This technique would permit bank tellers and shopkeepers to 
determine a bill's authenticity merely by passing it over a bar-code scanner.

 Each banknote would have printed on it a complex pattern, says Bauder, who 
proposed the idea. Printed alongside the pattern would be a code--an encrypted 
description of that particular pattern. "To authenticate the note, a scanner 
would analyze the pattern, look at the numerical code, and compare the two to 
see if they match." The system would use a public-key encryption process. "This 
would take counterfeiting completely out of the realm of any kind of copying," 
Bauder says.

 Such bills might prove troublesome on other grounds, however. "The problem 
with this system," says Shannon, "is that it's too good." Ironically, the same 
features that could freeze counterfeiters in their tracks are likely to trigger 
howls of protest against potential federal abuses.

 Scanners at every cash register could catch the serial number of each bill as 
it moves by. In theory, this specificity could enable someone to track and 
monitor currency transactions. For this reason, the encryption plan will 
probably fail at the congressional level. "Anonymity during a cash purchase is 
a tradition people value, for legitimate reasons," Shannon adds.

 The present generation of security features, poised to enter circulation in 
$100 bills, will raise per-note production costs from roughly 3.7 cents to 
slightly over 4 cents, according to BEP.

 The Secret Service will monitor the new features to see how well they deter 
counterfeiters and increase the capture of fakes.

 Scientists engaged in counterfeit deterrence harbor no naive fantasies of a 
nonreproducible dollar bill. "With enough money, counterfeiters can do 
anything," says Shannon. "If a group wants to invest $1 million to make phony 
currency, they can buy intaglio presses and print exactly the same currency as 
the BEP."

 Thus the cat-and-mouse game of production and deception continues indefinitely.

"There's no such thing as perfectly counterfeitproof currency," says Bauder. 
"Everyone acknowledges that this is an ongoing process of staying a little 
ahead of the counterfeiters. If we devise a deterrent, the counterfeiters beat 
it. When we come up with another one, they beat that. It's a never-ending game."

 Getting less than you paid for

"To counterfeit is death," read a New Jersey banknote during the colonial era. 
A forged note carried the same warning.

 Paper money didn't appear in the British colonies until 1690, when 
Massachussetts introduced banknotes. By the 1760s, 8 of the 13 colonies were 
circulating some form of paper money--and forgers quickly followed. Since many 
colonists could not read or write, even crude forgeries might pass.

 In mid-1775, the Continental Congress, desperate to finance the Revolutionary 
War, added to the confusion by issuing notes backed only by the anticipation of 
tax revenues. By January 1776, however, a printing press aboard the British 
ship H.M.S. Phoenix had begun turning out fake Continentals, as the currency 
was called. The combination of dramatic depreciation and widespread 
counterfeiting soon gave rise to the phrase "not worth a Continental."

 Congress recalled the Continental in 1781, and for the next 80 years, the 
federal government issued no currency as we know it today. Instead, the states 
chartered private banks to issue currency.

 Eventually, some 1,600 private banks issued more than 7,000 varieties of these 
state notes. Amid the profusion of real notes, counterfeits flourished. By the 
time the Civil War began, more than one-third of the currency in circulation 
was fake.

 This led Congress in 1861 to authorize a new paper currency. Printed with 
inexpensive green ink on one side, these greenbacks could not be copied with 
the cameras of the time. Congress standardized U.S. bills in 1863, 
incorporating deterrents such as the seal of the Treasury Department, fine-line 
intaglio printing, and a distinctive paper with embedded red and blue fibers.

 In 1865, the treasury established the Secret Service to wage war against 
forgers. One of the most notorious was William E. Brockway. This New York-based 
"king of counterfeiting" passed hundreds of thousands of bogus bills between 
1850 and 1890. Aided by the recently introduced deterrents, which forced 
professional forgers to use specialized skills and equipment, the Secret 
Service suppressed the largest counterfeiting rings, including Brockway's.

 U.S. currency has undergone several changes since then. In 1869, the treasury 
introduced a watermarked paper with bands of dark jute in the substrate. In 
1879, it changed the paper to a linen stock containing parallel red and blue 
silk threads and eliminated the watermark. In 1929, the size of the dollar bill 
was reduced about 25 percent to save on paper costs, and small, dispersed red 
and blue fibers replaced the silk threads. Standardizing each denomination's 
portrait prevented counterfeiters from raising a note's value simply by 
altering the numbers.

 In 1990, two new features appeared: a metallic security thread and a line of 
microprinting around the portrait. The threat posed today by casual 
counterfeiters using color copiers has prompted the treasury to suggest several 
additional changes (see main story).

"There is no single, perfect deterrent," says Thomas A. Ferguson, assistant 
director of research and development at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing. 
In fact, "an awful lot of people don't know about the [deterrent] features 
already in the bill--most of us have never gotten a counterfeit.

"And that's our goal, to keep it that way."

 copyright 1996 


