Science News Magazine Editor's Picks - ps_3.htm

 The Best of SCIENCE NEWS

 October 14, 1995

 PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

 The Stability of Matter

 Why matter neither collapses nor explodes

 By RICHARD LIPKIN

 Contemplate, for a moment, a glass of water.

 Try to imagine the frenetic atomic activity within this seemingly tranquil 
liquid. Its trillions of molecules, each containing two hydrogen atoms and one 
oxygen atom, are continuously crashing into one another.

 Each oxygen atom sports, on average, eight electrons whirring around eight 
tightly packed protons. In each hydrogen atom, a single electron hurtles around 
a central proton, which pulls it perilously inward.

 Despite a strong electrical attraction, the negatively charged electrons do 
not fall into the positively charged protons; if they did, the resulting 
unstable mixture might explode. Confined to a relatively small area, pulled by 
gravity, and pressed by the atmosphere, the liquid teeters, in theory, on the 
brink of an atomic-bomb-sized explosion.

 Nonetheless, the glass of water remains just that--a glass of water.

"In some poetic sense, it's a miracle," says Elliott H. Lieb, a mathematical 
physicist at Princeton University. "When you consider all of the physical 
forces at work in matter, even in something as simple as a glass of water, it's 
sort of miraculous that everything doesn't just collapse and then, releasing 
huge amounts of energy, blow up."

 Most people regard this fact as too commonplace to think about, Lieb muses. 
"It seems so trivial. It's just the way things are. Except, when you think 
about the problem in detail, it really is sort of amazing."

 Putting aside the seeming absurdity of an inquiry into why atoms don't 
collapse, the question raises serious mathematical issues in quantum mechanics 
and field theory. "Classical physics can't account for the fact that matter is 
stable and occupies space," says Mary Beth Ruskai, a mathematical physicist at 
the University of Massachusetts, Lowell. There's nothing in the classical laws 
of dynamics and electromagnetism to prevent orbiting electrons from spiraling 
inward to a nuclear doom.

"People interested in this question have had to rely on some very gnarly 
mathematics to get answers."

 Among such people are Lieb and his collegues Jan Philip Solovej, also at 
Princeton, and Michael Loss of the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta. 
In the Aug. 7 Physical Review Letters, the three mathematical physicists tackle 
the question of why matter remains stable in an intense magnetic field--even 
one so powerful that it may exist only on a neutron star. To Lieb, whose 
involvement with this problem spans 28 years, the issue of matter's stability 
constitutes a "foundational problem" of modern physics.

 Speculations about matter's stability hark back to the early days of quantum 
mechanics. In 1931, Austrian physicist Paul Ehrenfest observed that someone 
holding a piece of metal or stone should be "astonished that this quantity of 
matter should occupy so large a volume."

"Admittedly," Ehrenfest remarked, "the molecules are packed tightly together 
and likewise the atoms within each molecule. But why are the atoms themselves 
so big?" For an answer, he summoned a principle first stated by Viennese 
physicist Wolfgang Pauli: No two particles of the same kind can occupy the same 
quantum state at the same time. Pauli's principle means that electrons can't 
all fall into the lowest energy, smallest orbital around an atomic nucleus but 
have to fill successively larger orbitals.

"That is why atoms are so unnecessarily big, and why metal and stone are so 
bulky," Ehrenfest concluded.

 Unfortunately, that intuitively reasonable explanation did not fully satisfy 
theoretical physicists, who wanted a more mathematically complete answer. So 
individually and together they picked and pawed at the problem, tinkered with 
the equations of quantum mechanics and field theories, and eventually, 
frustrated by a lack of clarity, put the issue to rest for about 30 years.

 In the mid-1960s, physicist Andrew Lenard, now at Indiana University in 
Bloomington, posed a question: Is it possible to prove that matter is 
inherently stable? Freeman J. Dyson, a mathematical physicist at the Institute 
for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., became enchanted with the question.

 Dyson and Lenard mulled the problem over for some time--egged on by the offer 
of a bottle of wine to anyone who could prove matter's inherent stability--then 
served up a paper in the August 1967 Journal of Mathematical Physics.

 Their report proved that with Pauli's exclusion principle, matter is stable; 
without it, matter collapses into a dense state, creating a situation in which 
"the assembly of any two macroscopic objects would release energy comparable to 
that of an atomic bomb."

 In effect, Dyson and Lenard had mathematically demonstrated the truth of 
Ehrenfest's assertion by showing that Pauli's principle of exclusion remained 
essential to keep matter stable. To build their argument, however, the two 
researchers had to simplify their model of matter. They had to put aside 
temporarily some real-world phenomena, such as magnetic and gravitational 
fields, and consider only the subtle interactions of attractive and repulsive 
forces between charged particles within an atom.

 Enter Lieb. He and physicist Walter Thirring of the University of Vienna found 
a simpler proof of matter's stability than the one put forth by Dyson and 
Lenard, using mathematical techniques that relied more heavily on physical 
intuition.

 Working in concert with many collaborators, Lieb then turned his attention to 
examining more carefully those situations in which matter does, in fact, 
collapse. For example, under the influence of gravitational forces, which only 
attract and never repel, matter will collapse despite the effects of the Pauli 
exclusion principle--a situation that presents a problem only for an object as 
massive as a star.

 In 1931, the late Nobel laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar predicted that 
stars with more than about 1.4 times the sun's mass would, on running out of 
nuclear fuel, collapse under their own gravity. More than half a century later, 
Lieb and H.-T. Yau, a mathematical physicist now at New York University's 
Courant Institute, proved that, starting from the basic principles of quantum 
mechanics, Chandrasekhar had indeed been correct.

 On earth, however, matter--not subject to star-sized gravitational 
forces--behaves tamely.

"It's crazy," says Loss. "Look around and everywhere we see matter extended, 
proportional to the number of particles. And yet atoms are incredibly tiny, 
each one being essentially a void."

 To get a deeper feeling for the problem, says Loss, bear in mind that matter 
is mostly space. Wispy electron clouds hover on the outskirts, relatively 
speaking, of an atom's tiny core, with vast distances extending between the 
nuclei of atoms in every molecule--even in a dense solid. And yet, if someone 
takes 2 quarts of water and pours them into one pitcher, that person will have 
a half gallon of drinkable beverage rather than, say, one quart of "compact" 
water that is twice as dense. The water molecules flow together, interact with 
one another, and respond to each other's electrical charges. But the volume and 
energy remain proportional to the amount of stuff, or number of atoms, present, 
says Loss.

"The amazing thing, from a scientific point of view, is that this phenomenon 
can be explained mathematically," he continues. Starting with the equations of 
quantum mechanics, physicists can now show that those mathematical expressions 
must have stable solutions--implying that matter itself must remain stable.

 The fact that someone can't simply push two stones together into one 
superdense rock falls in with commonsense notions of how solid objects behave 
on Earth. The situation changes remarkably when matter comes in contact with a 
very intense magnetic field, however. Such fields, on the order of 1 trillion 
gauss--or more than 1 million times stronger than the most extreme magnetic 
fields produced artificially in laboratories--could compress atoms into a state 
so dense that one would expect them to merge into a single explosive, subatomic 
stew.

 In their Aug. 7 report, Lieb, Loss, and Solovej look at the stability of 
matter under the influence of an intense magnetic field. Such fields are not 
the "garden variety found on Earth," says Loss, but ones trillions of times 
greater--at an intensity that might occur on a neutron star.

 A neutron star, the result of a massive star's collapse, generates crushing 
magnetic and gravitational fields. Such stars have the power, for example, to 
squeeze Earth into an object the size of a marble. But such large fields simply 
do not exist on Earth. Moreover, to create fields of such intensity requires a 
huge amount of energy.

 On Earth, when a person "bangs two stones together, for instance, the most one 
expects to see is a spark," says Lieb. "Nothing dramatic happens." But what if 
the energy contained in those two rocks were not packaged conveniently in 
trillions of separate atoms? Under extreme conditions, if those packages of 
mass and energy were to combine, matter could compress, collapse, and explode. 
Indeed, there are instances in nature--such as stellar explosions--where matter 
undergoes just such a sequence of events. Those circumstances, however, involve 
enormous gravitational forces, for greater than those present on Earth.

"There are two issues here, one weak, one strong," Lieb says.

"The weaker issue is that matter is stable because there's a limit to the 
amount of energy that each atom can have.

"The stronger issue is that the energy of matter remains strictly proportional 
to the number of particles." In other words, the amount of energy and the 
number of atomic particles increase at the same rate. This phenomenon of nature 
is rooted in certain immutable physical constants.

 In essence, what Lieb and his colleagues have shown mathematically is that 
even under extreme conditions matter remains stable. As elucidated by the 
equations of quantum mechanics, which govern atomic behavior, matter tolerates 
the onslaught of an extremely large magnetic field without colllapsing.

 Earlier research had shown that if, for some reason, a few of nature's 
critical physical constants ever grew too large, matter would subsequently 
become unstable. Now the three scientists show that because those constants are 
indeed sufficiently small, the energies of both the fields and the atomic 
particles balance out in such a way that, together, they remain stable.

"We have proved that under these conditions, the energy is not only finite but 
also proportional to the number of particles," Lieb says, "as it should be in 
order to have the strong kind of stability."

 Moreover, by clarifying mathematically the conditions under which matter does 
remain stable, Lieb and his colleagues may help to shed light on those in which 
it doesn't, such as the conditions believed to be present in stars headed for 
collapse and explosion.

"This is not a trivial result," says Ruskai. "Ironically, we need quantum 
mechanics to explain simple facts about ordinary life.

"If matter weren't stable, we wouldn't exist," she continues. "And even if we 
could somehow exist under unstable conditions, it would be virtually impossible 
to function normally in everyday life. We'd be at risk of setting off 
nuclear-sized explosions every time we put a glass of water down on a table."

"Elliott Lieb has become the central figure in this area of research," says 
Dyson. "He's done most of the important work during the last 20 years. I'm 
delighted with the results on magnetic fields. In general, this issue gets 
right to the heart of the constitution of the universe."

 The subject is not closed by any means, says Dyson. As in every area of 
science, each solution poses new questions. "There are still open questions 
regarding the interactions of large numbers of atoms," he notes.

"But in this field of research, Elliott is like the Moses who has shown us the 
way to the promised land," Dyson adds. "Though he's not quite there yet."

 copyright 1996 


