The World of Wine: Science News Online, Jan. 1, 2000

 The World of Wine

 Can chemical analysis confirm a wine's authenticity?

 Damaris Christensen

 There's a romance to wine unmatched by most agricultural products. Making 
wine, with all its complex flavors, remains as much an art as a science.

 Hints of citrus, peach, raspberry, pear, oak, grass, or flowers may show up in 
the taste or smell of wines. The catalog of factors that determine the flavor 
and bouquet is almost as long as the list of adjectives that connoisseurs use 
to describe them.

 Rain before the grape harvest, for example, bloats the fruit and makes the 
wine's flavor less intense. Long growing seasons enable rich, complex tastes to 
develop. The slope of the hill where the grapes grow, its drainage, and the 
amount and intensity of sunlight that the vines receive all affect the taste of 
the grapes.

 Even after the grapes are picked, vintners face an array of choices for 
fermenting the sugar into alcohol. Different species of yeast can change the 
flavor, as can the length of time the grapes are fermented. Finally, winemakers 
must decide whether to age their product in stainless steel vats or oak barrels.

 All these steps from vine to bottle vary the mix of organic molecules that 
give wines their distinctive flavors. Yet many wine experts, especially in 
Europe, trace the richness of a wine quite literally back to its roots. A 
vineyard's particular combination of soil, rock, and geography- its terroir-is 
the most significant aspect of a wine, they say.

 Now, science is examining terroir for both pragmatic and romantic reasons. 
It's asking whether chemical analyses can help authenticate where a wine was 
made and pin down the elusive nature of terroir.

 Championing terroir

 Europeans are the strongest champions of terroir. In France, most wines are 
distinguished by the region in which they are produced, such as Champagne. As 
the year 2000 approached, for example, many people wanted to buy sparkling wine 
for New Year's Eve celebrations. "This big market led to many attempts to 
misrepresent [other] sparkling wines as champagne," says Dominique Tusseau, a 
scientist with the Interprofessional Committee for Champagne Wines in Epernay, 
France.

 With a premium attached to wines from a specific region, "there are compelling 
legal reasons to be able to identify the terroir," says Robert M. Pool, a grape 
specialist at Cornell University. While "the [tested] elements may or may not 
be responsible for the special characters of the wines from a given region, 
creating an effective [chemical] 'fingerprint' will ensure that the production 
is from the region listed on the wine label," he says.

 Laws around the world regulate the purity of wines. "German wine law does not 
allow you to mix wines," says Wolfgang Todt of the Max Planck Institute for 
Chemistry in Mainz, Germany. "If a winery is taking cheap wine from the 
Mediterranean and diluting [its finer wine with it], then it is cheating the 
people paying a higher price, even if they cannot taste the difference."

 Chemical analysis is not new to the industry. Government inspectors test wines 
to identify unhealthy contaminants, such as lead, and to ensure that wines 
haven't been adulterated with water, sugar, or artificial colors.

 U.S. winemakers have also looked to chemistry to identify the critical 
elements in wine and learn how to use them to produce high-quality wines, Pool 
says. "For the producer of an established wine type . . . it is important to 
understand which elements are critical to achieving and maintaining the 
identity and quality of its wines," he says.

 Already, chemical testing of wine has helped identify "the common characters 
of wines, so that reliable and palatable wines-the Cokes of the wine world-can 
be made and marketed at a reasonable price," says Pool.

 Scientists have known for almost a decade that analysis of various chemical 
elements in wine can help roughly identify the geographic origin of wines, but 
the tests have been too complex and not conclusive enough to be used on a large 
scale.

 Chemical fingerprints

 Improved analytical instruments and powerful computers are now enabling 
scientists to better determine a chemical fingerprint for products of each 
wineproducing region. For the past few years, for example, a coalition of the 
French government officials and local growers has collected samples of all the 
wine produced in the small Champagne region, Tusseau says. The group can now 
analyze-for as many as 100 organic compounds and elements-potentially 
mislabeled champagnes and compare them with these standards. This has helped 
the region put a dent in the serious problem of misrepresented champagnes, 
Tusseau says.

 German researchers recently studied 165 wines from six grape-growing regions. 
The team showed that the differing proportions of 15 chemical elements, such as 
aluminum and calcium, can correctly distinguish wines from particular regions 
with 70-100 percent accuracy.

 Testing for just three elements-barium, silicon, and vanadium-and three 
organic com-pounds, the researchers correctly identified the geographic 
background of as many as 90 per-cent of the wines tested, they reported in the 
October 1999 American Laboratory. The organic compounds they tested reflect 
wine-making procedures: 2-furancarboxaldehyde, whose con-tent is determined by 
aging; 4-methyl-1-pentanol, the amount of fermentation; and 1-octanol, the 
wine's maturity.

 It would be laborious to routinely identify the geographic origins of wine in 
this way, admits chemist Gabriela Thiel of the Institute of Inorganic and 
Analytical Chemistry at the Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, Germany. 
"Temperature and the amount of rainfall fluctuate over the course of several 
years and within growing periods, so intake of trace elements from soil into 
grapes varies slightly from year to year," she says.

 In addition, techniques of wine processing tend to vary from region to region, 
she says, and these differences could also affect the proportions of trace 
elements found in wines.

 A slightly simpler approach might be to measure traces of strontium in wine to 
track its origin, says Todt. In the soil over time, atoms of another naturally 
radioactive element called rubidium decay into a form of strontium that can be 
distinguished from other isotopes of strontium that are present. Just as the 
ratio of different chemical elements varies in the soil, grapes, and wine from 
region to region, the ratio of these isotopes of strontium to rubidium and each 
other varies as well, says Todt.

 He and his colleagues have looked at about 60 different vineyards in Europe 
and Australia. They find that all grapes growing in the same soil have the same 
strontium composition and that the strontium-isotope ratio varies widely among 
soils, and therefore grapes, around the world.

"This is simpler than multielement analysis and as accurate in predicting a 
wine's origin," Todt says. One advantage of the test is that the processes of 
fermentation and aging don't alter the strontium-isotope ratios in grapes and 
wine. Another advantage is that the type of grape used to make the wine doesn't 
affect the result, he says. Some fertilizers, however, may add strontium to the 
soil and thus alter the isotope ratio found in grapes and wine.

 Todt says that for now, his team's analyses are "just too expensive to be 
routine," but he expects that the cost of the equipment used to measure 
isotopes will come down within 5 years.

 Neither elemental analysis nor isotope measurements are foolproof, Todt says. 
"For unambiguous determination of the origin of a wine, we will probably need 
several analytical methods," he says.

 The eventual development of national or even international registries of 
typical soil and wine compositions for different regions will aid 
authentication efforts and make it easier to prove that a wine was not grown 
and made in a particular region, he adds.

 Quirky regionality

"People are so interested in terroir [because] wine is one of the few things 
that haven't become so homogenized it can be ignored rather than appreciated," 
Pool says.

"The beauty of wine is its quirky regionality," agrees Leo McCloskey of 
Sonoma-based Enologix, the largest wine-consulting firm in California. "Even 
those of us in the wine business are susceptible to its mysterious allure."

 Can the effects of terroir be scientifically documented? McCloskey believes 
that for a few California regions the answer is yes. A few years ago, he and 
his colleagues showed that chardonnays from Carneros, Calif., tended to have 
more intense citrus and green-apple flavors than other chardonnays, he says. An 
earlier study suggested that pinot noir wines from the Carneros area tend to 
have notes of cherry and spice not present in other Napa Valley wines.

 From his work at the National Institute of Agronomical Research near Angers, 
France, Gerard Barbeau concludes that wines made from the same kind of grapes, 
grown in the same region using identical practices but in slightly different 
terroir, harvested at exactly the same time, and made into wine in exactly the 
same ways, still can be remarkably different. Some wines may be sweeter or more 
astringent than others; the color intensity may differ; the types and intensity 
of aromas may vary. These underlying differences, he says, must be due to 
terroir.

"The quality of the raw material is of paramount importance," Barbeau says. 
"The variability induced by the physical characteristics of the terroirs is 
much more important than everything else."

 Not everyone agrees. In a study published in the May 27, 1999 Food Quality and 
Preference, German researchers found that among 20 Rieslings rated for odor, 
flavor, and body, the groupings of similar wines depended as much on the year 
that the wine was made and the winery that produced it as on the grapes' 
growing area.

 A classification system based solely on geographic origin of a wine "would be 
rather confusing for consumers," says U. Fischer of the State Agricultural 
College and Research Center in Neustadt an der Weinstrasse, Germany.

 Accurate labeling

 The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) is examining ways to 
test whether a wine is from the region it claims on the label. "One of our 
mandates is to make sure that the products we regulate are accurately labeled," 
says Richard Gahagan of the ATF bureau in Fresno, Calif. "We take it very 
seriously. Regardless of the eventual taste of the wine, the consumer is 
entitled to get what they think they are buying."

 Unlike European wines, which are closely regulated by region, most U.S. 
wineries don't face rules that they must make wines only from grapes in a 
single field or a small vineyard, and therefore their products' taste is 
unlikely to reflect terroir.

 Moreover, merchants identify most American wines by the kind of grape, such as 
chardonnay or pinot noir, used to make the wine. Such a category can encompass 
products of more than one vineyard, and a single bottle can contain wine made 
from grapes grown in different areas.

 As American wines become more widely known, however, the wine industry is 
beginning to realize that people may prefer to buy a wine from a certain 
location, such as Sonoma or Napa Valley, says McCloskey. If wines from a region 
taste similar, and the label fully informs buyers, consumers have a better 
chance of choosing a new wine they like, he notes. Yet some geo-graphic areas 
mentioned on a bottle label may say nothing about the taste.

"Since it is so hard to describe wine and define terroir to the consumer, wine 
can be a big mystery," McCloskey says.

"Testing [of wine] might protect you from buying a fraud, but it may not help 
you pick a wine which tastes any better," cautions Andrew L. Waterhouse of the 
University of California, Davis.

 So, what's a wine lover to do? Perhaps just wait to see whether scientific, 
chemical analyses will be used to characterize and evaluate wines.

 The art of winemaking is here to stay. It's possible, however, that long 
before the next millennial celebration rolls around, wine and champagne 
drinkers may be able to toast in the new year with wine that's not only 
carefully crafted but chemically authenticated.


