A Dark View of the Universe: Science News Online, Jan. 8, 2000

 A Dark View of the Universe

 Halos of invisible matter give galaxies surprising breadth

 Ron Cowen

 Like glittering jewels on a blanket of black velvet, the starlit disks of 
galaxies are awash in a vast ocean of dark material. More than just a cosmic 
backdrop, this invisible material, called dark matter, accounts for at least 90 
percent of the mass of the universe. Astronomers believe it provides the 
gravitational glue that keeps stars from flying apart and holds clusters of 
galaxies together. They speculate that dark matter prompted gas and dust to 
coalesce into galaxies in the first place.

 Three new reports shed light on the distribution of dark matter in the 
universe. Two of the studies indicate that invisible halos of this material 
provide enormous breadth and bulk to galaxies. The halos extend 1.5 million 
light-years from each galaxy's center and contain at least as much mass as 5 
trillion suns.

 That's two to three times larger and more massive than previous estimates, 
notes Philippe Fischer of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, who led one 
of the studies. "This is a real surprise," he says.

 Dwarfing the visible portion of a galaxy, which has only about one-tenth the 
diameter and one-thousandth the mass, a halo this big has an intriguing 
implication: Our galaxy might actually brush up against its nearest large 
neighbor, the Andromeda galaxy, notes Joshua A. Frieman of Fermi National 
Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., who collaborated with Fischer.

 The third study probes dark matter on the grandest scale possible. Astronomers 
have for the first time "unambiguously detected" gravitational distortions in 
the arrangement of superclusters of galaxies stretching 10 million to 100 
million light-years across the sky, says Matthew Colless of the Australian 
National University in Canberra. By measuring the distortion, his British 
colleagues have obtained a preliminary estimate of the overall density of 
matter in the universe.

 In line with numerous other studies, the new findings suggest that the density 
is only about one-third the value required to keep the universe from expanding 
forever, notes John A. Peacock of the Royal Observatory of Edinburgh in 
Scotland. Combined with other observations, the results are consistent with the 
notion that the universe's rate of expansion may be accelerating (SN: 
12/19&26/98, p. 392: ).

 Subtle effects

 Because dark matter can't be seen, astronomers must detect it indirectly, 
through its influence on visible galaxies. Its effects can be subtle, requiring 
analysis of detailed data on thousands of galaxies. That's why the new studies 
rely on two huge surveys of the heavens.

 The Sloan Digital Sky Survey, which began taking preliminary data a year ago 
and continues through 2005, will ultimately image and map the locations of 
millions of objects across a huge stretch of the northern celestial hemisphere 
(SN: 1/23/99, p. 57). The survey, based at Apache Point, N.M., features a 
specially designed telescope and the largest electronic camera ever built. On a 
clear night, the system can image 25,000 galaxies.

 Closer to completion but smaller in scope, the 2dF (2-degree Field) Galaxy 
Redshift Survey aims to measure the distances to some 250,000 galaxies and 
50,000 quasars that astronomers have already imaged. Using the Anglo-Australian 
Telescope on Siding Spring Mountain in Australia, the survey examines objects 
in two large wedges of sky at the north and south galactic poles. Scheduled to 
finish in 2001, it has already measured the distances to 75,000 galaxies.

 Without the surveys, says theorist Nicholas Kaiser of the University of Hawaii 
at Manoa in Honolulu, none of these observations would have been possible. This 
mammoth census of the heavens offers a new way to do science, he notes.

 Cosmic mirage

 Studying galaxies imaged by the Sloan survey, Fischer and his colleagues took 
advantage of a cosmic mirage called gravitational lensing. From it, they 
deduced the extent of a typical dark-matter halo.

 Any massive body, such as a galaxy, deflects the path of light passing by, 
distorting and magnifying the images of objects behind it. If two galaxies 
happen to lie roughly on the same line of sight, the nearer one will alter the 
appearance of the farther one. Fischer's team analyzed the shapes of 1.5 
million distant galaxies and used the observed distortion to infer the pattern 
of dark matter around foreground galaxies.

 The team faced two notable problems. First, the halo of a nearby galaxy 
elongates the diameter of the distant galaxy by less than 1 percent. Second, 
the scientists don't know the galaxies' true shape. Some are spherical, but 
many are a football-shape.

 To overcome these obstacles, the astronomers relied on the power of a large 
sample. The 1.5 million galaxies they analyzed were approximately aligned with 
some 30,000 foreground galaxies. By stacking all the distorted images, they 
intensified the lensing effect. This procedure also averaged out the 
confounding effect of galaxies that were naturally misshapen. In these cases, 
the direction of the stretching is random rather than aligned by the foreground 
lens.

 The technique "is a powerful probe of mass in galactic halos," says Richard S. 
Ellis of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. Fischer and his 
colleagues recently posted their study on the Internet ().

 The team's surprisingly large estimates of halo size and mass, Fischer notes, 
are merely lower limits based on two nights of observations. They failed to 
find the halo's edge. With many more nights of data, the researchers hope to 
pin down a more accurate size. He cautions that as astronomers probe farther 
and farther out from a galaxy's visible core, it may become difficult to 
ascribe dark matter to a particular galaxy.

 Further observations may also allow the researchers to discern the composition 
of the dark matter-whether it's made of ordinary material that doesn't emit 
much light or it's truly exotic stuff, built from something other than protons, 
neutrons, and electrons.

 Another group of scientists, analyzing the Sloan data for other signposts of 
lensing, have gathered evidence that appears to confirm the vastness of the 
halos, Science News has learned.

 A team that includes B. Jain and Alexander S. Szalay of Johns Hopkins 
University in Baltimore and Andrew Connolly of the University of Pittsburgh 
examined the Sloan images for two indications of lensing: a brightening and a 
lowered density of background galaxies.

 These search criteria, says Szalay, provide a more far-ranging probe of the 
dark matter around galaxies than looking for distortions in shape does. He 
asserts that some of the dark matter his team has detected lies so far out-some 
15 million light-years from the center of the nearest galaxy-that it's more 
accurate to say that this material resides in the space between galaxies. The 
scientists plan to present some of their findings Jan. 12 at a meeting of the 
American Astronomical Society in Atlanta.

 Taken together, the results from both teams strengthen the halo findings, 
notes Kaiser. He adds, however, that the method employed by Fischer's group is 
more sensitive than that used by Szalay's team. The size of the halo may make 
it easier for galaxies to gobble up their small neighbors, suggests Kaiser.

 Superclusters of galaxies

 A British-Australian team has focused on the largest structures known in the 
universe, superclusters of galaxies that stretch across the sky in long 
filaments. Using the 2dF survey, these researchers have detected the 
large-scale influence of gravity on the mammoth pieces of cosmic architecture. 
The rate at which gravity is inducing galaxies to form superclusters-a process 
that's still going on-provides a measure of the density of matter in the 
universe today, Peacock told Science News.

 The 2dF Survey measures the velocities of a large sample of galaxies. It has 
revealed that the superclusters appear to be undergoing gravitational 
contraction, he notes.

 The mutual gravitational attraction of galaxies in a supercluster should draw 
them toward each other, Peacock explains. To an observer, it will seem that 
galaxies on the near side of the supercluster are moving away from Earth 
slightly faster than they should be, while those on the far side are a bit too 
slow.

 That's exactly what Peacock has now found, enabling him and his colleagues to 
begin estimating the cosmic density of dark matter. "Our result . . . measures 
the density of dark matter on scales of 10 million to 100 million light-years," 
he says. The report is as yet unpublished.

 The study "is really very compelling," says Kaiser, who in 1987 predicted the 
gravitational effect in a supercluster. "It's telling you how dark matter 
clumps on very large scales."

 Together, the three sets of new findings mark a milestone in understanding the 
distribution- and ultimately the nature-of dark matter throughout the universe.

"To me, the galaxies are like lights on a Christmas tree," Kaiser notes. "They 
show you the outline, but it's really the dark tree that you're trying to look 
at."

 Stay tuned, he and other astronomers urge, as they begin to reveal the 
branches.


