An Artist's Timely Riddles: Science News Online, Jan. 1, 2000

 An Artist's Timely Riddles

 Deploying scientific methods to understand a Dada artist's provocative 
creations

 Ivars Peterson

 The artwork of Marcel Duchamp presents intriguing, yet maddeningly intricate, 
puzzles.

 Born near Rouen, France, in 1887, Duchamp earned a reputation in later years 
as an "anarchistic dazzler," says science historian Gerald 
Holton of Harvard University. Duchamp made a career out of pretending not to 
work, and he professed to take nothing seriously.

 Among his more notorious escapades, Duchamp scribbled a moustache and goatee 
on a cheap, postcard reproduction of the "Mona Lisa," added a 
salacious caption and his signature, and called the result art. He submitted an 
ordinary porcelain urinal to a major art exhibition as his own 
sculpture and gave it the label "Fountain."

 Such irreverent antics strongly influenced the development of 20th-century 
art, including the work of such later artists as Andy Warhol. They 
also overshadowed another facet of Duchamp's restless, innovative mind-a 
passionate interest in mathematics and science.

 Steeped in the philosophy and popular writings of French mathematician Henri 
Poincare, Duchamp "understood the mathematics of non-Euclidean 
geometry and higher dimensionality in a far more serious and technical way than 
any other artist of his time," sculptor Rhonda Roland Shearer 
and Harvard biologist Stephen Jay Gould contend in an essay in the Nov. 5, 1999 
Science.

 Shearer directs the Art Science Research Laboratory in New York City, which is 
devoted to the scientific study of Duchamp's art. In November 
1999, she hosted a symposium at Harvard called "Methods of Understanding in Art 
and Science: The Case of Duchamp and Poincare."

 Significant advances

 The late 19th and early 20th centuries were a vibrant period of significant 
scientific and technological advances, from the discovery of X 
rays and the advent of powered flight to Albert Einstein's formulation of the 
special theory of relativity.

 It was also a time of great popular interest in visualizing a fourth spatial 
dimension-a concept that appeared to offer painters and 
sculptors, in particular, an avenue of escape from conventional representation. 
Moreover, the development of non-Euclidean geometries, which 
overturned Euclid's postulate that parallel lines never meet, provided 
alternative but perfectly consistent models of reality.

 These ideas came together in a fascinating assemblage that Duchamp completed 
in 1914 and called "3 Stoppages Etalon," or three standard 
stopping points.

 In typically meticulous fashion, Duchamp described how he cut three lengths of 
thread, each 1 meter long. Holding each thread in turn 
horizontally between outstretched hands, he dropped them from a height of 1 
meter onto canvas strips painted blue. He then used drops of 
varnish to fix the threads, no longer straight, in their new configuration.

 The creation of these contorted lines was "drawing without using your hand," 
comments philosopher Arthur C. Danto of Columbia University. It 
also exemplified Duchamp's use of chance to create art objects, he says.

 Moreover, echoing the spirit of the times, each mounted thread served as a new 
standard measure of length, Danto says. For any given 
"stoppage," there would be a universe where the "line" would look straight. In 
fact, Duchamp later fabricated three flat wooden sticks, each 
with one edge cut to follow a thread's curve, and added them to his three 
mounted threads in a display box.

 Various people, including Shearer, have tried to follow Duchamp's protocol, 
but they have consistently failed to duplicate his results, even 
roughly. "Something was very wrong," Shearer insists. Moreover, threads of 
comparable diameter and elasticity laid down on top of Duchamp's 
mounted threads wouldn't hold those shapes.

 When Shearer and her colleagues examined the artwork itself, now at the Museum 
of Modern Art in New York, they were shocked. Visible through 
the glass base were the ends of the threads, poking through from the side 
normally open to view, and they were glued to the back.

 In effect, each thread forms a stitch. Ironically, the French word stoppage 
also refers to invisible mending or sewing.

 No one before seems to have noticed or paid attention to this detail, Gould 
says.

 Rather than simply recording chance events, Duchamp apparently manipulated his 
materials to create a convincing illusion of chance. Yet by 
putting the canvasses on glass bases, he didn't hide that manipulation. The 
clues were there for anyone who looked closely.

 Indeed, Herbert Molderings of the University of the Ruhr in Bochum, Germany, 
argues that Duchamp's artwork is not the result of a physical 
experiment. "It does not propose any new standards for observing and measuring 
the material world but establishes the standards of a certain 
intellectual attitude," he says.

 Shearer describes her findings in the December 1999 issue of the laboratory's 
online journal Tout-Fait ().

 Curious readymades

 Duchamp is perhaps best known for his so-called readymades-a bicycle wheel 
mounted on a kitchen stool, a wooden hat rack, an Underwood 
typewriter cover, a snow shovel, a wood and metal coatrack, a steel comb, an 
advertisement for Sapolin enamel paints, a bottle-drying rack, 
his infamous urinal, and a number of others.

 At first glance, the underlying idea seems to be that an artist can transform 
everyday, mass-pro-duced objects into works of art simply by 
selecting them. Such items eventually move into art galleries and museums, 
completing their transformation into respectable art objects.

 Duchamp himself stated that it didn't matter who had originally manufactured 
his ready-mades. The point was that he, Duchamp, had chosen 
them. Those words echo Poincare's notion that mathematical discovery means 
selection-discerning patterns and laws hidden within apparent 
randomness.

 In his 1908 essay "Science and Method," Poincare described an instance when he 
was unable to sleep be-cause of an excess of black coffee. 
Wide-awake, he found his mind jammed with ideas. "I sensed them clashing until 
a pair would hook together . . . to form a stable combination," 
he wrote. By the next morning, Poincare had the solution to a mathematical 
problem that had plagued him for weeks.

"Discovery is discernment, selection," Poincare argued. "The real work of the 
discoverer consists in choosing between . . . combinations with 
a view to eliminating those that are useless."

 However, he went on to say that this unconscious work doesn't supply a result 
"ready-made." What it produces are merely points of departure 
for deliberate effort.

 So, there may be more to Duchamp's readymades than meets the casual eye.

 Mysteriously, none of Duchamp's earliest originals has survived. All that 
remain are various photographs of the objects in his studio and 
later reproductions of the items, including sets authorized and signed by the 
artist and miniature versions made for Duchamp's "La 
Boite-en-valise," or the box in a suitcase-a portable museum of his artworks.

 Shearer suspects that Duchamp's original readymades, rather than being 
off-the-shelf, store-bought items, were all unique creations, 
extensively manipulated by the artist's hand. The assumption that a readymade 
is an unchanged everyday object is false, she says.

 In fact, Duchamp himself had described some of the objects, such as the paint 
sign, as assisted or rectified readymades. The question is 
whether that was true for all the readymades.

 One way to check would be to find other examples of those mass-produced 
articles that he claimed to have purchased or, at least, images of 
them in catalogs. Shearer and Gould have assembled an extensive collection of 
antique hat racks, coat hooks, snow shovels, paint signs, 
perfume containers, and other items. "It was impossible to find exact replicas 
of the objects Duchamp claimed to have purchased," Shearer 
says, nor did they turn up in catalogs.

 Another approach would be to take a close look at the photographs of Duchamp's 
originals, some made by the famed photographers Man Ray and 
Alfred Steiglitz. Careful analysis of the pictures shows that some of these 
supposedly mass-produced items have implausible features, Shearer 
says.

 For example, in a photograph of a snow shovel leaning against a wall in 
Duchamp's studio, the shaft apparently has a square cross-section 
rather than the more customary rounded shape. Such an awkward, arm-numbing 
shaft may help account for Duchamp's title for the piece: "In 
Advance of the Broken Arm."

 Moreover, a careful reproduction of the snow shovel based on the photograph 
reveals that the attachment between the handle and blade is 
unconventional and the blade itself improperly reinforced. A person couldn't 
actually shovel snow with it, Shearer declares.

 Similar questions of usability arise with the racks for hats and coats. 
According to the available photographs, some hooks curve in the wrong 
direction, for example.

 Shearer's team is now using image-processing technology to pin down 
differences among the various images and reproductions of Duchamp's 
readymades.

"The readymades were not just unexpected individual art objects," Shearer 
concludes. "They were parts of an experimental game reenacting the 
larger and more general creative process."

 Perceptual ambiguity

 Duchamp had a great interest in perceptual ambiguity and conducted a variety 
of optical experiments. In the early 1920s, for example, he 
discovered that spinning disks painted with certain patterns look 
three-dimensional when viewed with just one eye. He later constructed a set 
of 12 images, including various geometric patterns and a goldfish in a bowl, to 
demonstrate the effect and to sell as a commercial product. 
Duchamp promoted his "Rotoreliefs" as a contribution to science.

 Duchamp's knowledge of optics also figured into his facility with photographic 
techniques for manipulating images. He could readily create 
composite images, for example.

 Few people today recognize how widely photographic tricks were used early in 
the 20th century, Shearer says. Even amateur photographers could 
obtain handbooks for performing manipulations such as inserting anomalous 
figures or changing the lighting.

 Intriguingly, some photographs of the readymades show signs of such 
manipulation. In one, for example, a shadow appears incorrectly placed. 
In another, a coatrack looks as if it's being viewed from several different 
perspectives at once. Nobody can be certain, however, whether the 
object or its image was distorted.

 Shearer and her coworkers have produced computer simulations that try to match 
a real coatrack to one in a photograph in order to demonstrate 
the distortions.

 In the case of the stool and bicycle wheel, the stool looks different in 
different photographs. In some, it appears to have uneven or oddly 
angled legs so that it wouldn't stand up straight. In others, different rungs 
are missing. The bicycle wheel itself looks as if it had been 
badly mounted on its axle, so it would wobble instead of spinning smoothly.

 Duchamp also created several versions of his defaced "Mona Lisa" postcard. 
Image-analysis techniques reveal that one of the representations 
differs significantly from the others. This picture may actually be a composite 
of an early photo of Duchamp layered over the cryptically 
smiling face of the "Mona Lisa."

 In another instance, in 1933, Duchamp mailed a postcard showing a Paris bistro 
scene to Katherine S. Dreier, his patron in the United States. 
Close scrutiny now suggests that Duchamp actually fabricated the image and 
printed his own postcard.

 Duchamp's casual forgery was quite elaborate, says art historian Hans de Wolf 
of the Free University of Brussels in Belgium. The "Oasis" bar 
depicted in the postcard image actually existed, but the photo appears to be a 
clever collage. It seems to incorporate a figure that looks 
suspiciously like a young Duchamp into the mix of people in the scene.

 Caution and skepticism

 Museum curators, Duchamp experts, and others have so far been cautious in 
reacting to the new information about Duchamp that Shearer's 
efforts have uncovered. Some are skeptical, and others are unsure whether it 
makes any difference.

 To Shearer, her work builds a library of information-raw data-as a fresh 
starting point for analyzing the work of an influential artist.

 There are facts that just can't be ignored, Gould says.

 Gould describes Duchamp as a "genius out of time." He was a multidimensional 
individual who could function in the context of his own era, 
scandalizing society and exerting a powerful influence on the artistic 
community. Yet he could also look far deeper and farther, exploiting 
the acceptability of artistic idiosyncrasy to orchestrate an elaborate game of 
hide-and-seek with posterity.

 Such a dynamic element was important to Duchamp. As a highly skilled chess 
player who competed in international tournaments, he appreciated 
not just the static positions of chess pieces at any given moment but also the 
patterns of the movements of those pieces throughout a game.

 In effect, Duchamp wanted his art to transcend the inevitable mummification of 
museum and gallery displays. He wanted it to live on actively.

 Duchamp created puzzles for the spectator to ponder, trace, and follow 
through, says French scholar Hector Obalk of Harvard.

 Early in his life, for example, Duchamp had noticed a sudden revival of 
interest in the work of Leonardo da Vinci with the publication in 
facsimile of Leonardo's notebooks, 400 years after they were produced. The 
prospect of that sort of immortality undoubtedly appealed to 
Duchamp. He later composed and published explanatory notes to accompany some of 
his key artworks.

 Duchamp's notes did not appear all at once but were carefully doled out over 
time. One set surfaced only after Duchamp died in 1968. It 
furnished fresh material for scholars to ponder and enabled them to appreciate 
his perplexing oeuvre anew.

 Shearer's team approach to art scholarship, taking advantage of the skills of 
computer scientists and other experts, represents another such 
reappraisal-one capable of producing additional time-release surprises.

 In his distinctively inscrutable way, Duchamp, the master chess player and 
artistic puzzler, would have loved it.



