Time's arrow may make U-turns in universe: Science News Online, Jan. 1, 2000

 Time's arrow may make U-turns in universe

 Peter Weiss

 The new millennium, or at least the new year, begins. Yet somewhere in our 
universe, the year 2000 may have just receded into the future, new research 
suggests.

 Imagine a renegade world where in Reversed-Times Square, the ball moved up the 
tower last night instead of down and where calendars flipped back to Dec. 31, 
1999, instead of ahead. Such time inconsistency from one world to another could 
occur even in our own galaxy, proposes Lawrence S. Schulman of Clarkson 
University in Potsdam, N.Y.

"The actual appearance of this [opposite-directed time] in our universe is 
something we would have to see by observation. The only thing I'm saying, 
theoretically, is it's not ruled out," Schulman explains.

"Time is an extremely important but very difficult field of research," notes 
David T. Pegg of Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia. Although Schulman 
investigates concepts that may "seem like total science fiction," Pegg says, he 
"makes some real progress."

 In his studies, Schulman assumes that the universe expands and then 
contracts-a Big Bang followed by a Big Crunch. He finds that celestial bodies 
with reversed time would have originated in our distant future and would 
already have experienced the cosmic turnaround. To us, these worlds would look 
like very old objects. Spectroscopic surveys looking for elemental composition 
typical of such old objects might reveal their presence.

 Unlikely to be luminous anymore because of their enormous age, the bodies 
would still exert gravitational attraction. Detecting them might help clear up 
a profound mystery in cosmology-the identity of the invisible, or dark, matter 
that provides most of the gravitational glue of the universe, Schulman asserts. 
His exploration of time reversal appears in the Dec. 27, 1999 Physical Review 
Letters.

 For the most part, equations describing the behavior of subatomic particles 
and the propagation of electromagnetic waves look the same if the flow of time 
is reversed. A year ago, however, scientists found experimental evidence that 
certain very rare interactions of particles called kaons imply a distinction 
between the forward and backward directions of time (SN: 10/31/98, p. 277).

 In everyday experience, time appears to flow one way. Scientists have proposed 
that the second law of thermodynamics may orient time's arrow. It holds that 
ordinary processes cause some irreversible loss of energy to randomness and 
disorder. If time reversed, improbable events would occur, such as broken eggs 
spontaneously reassembling.

 Thomas Gold of Cornell University argued in the 1960s that the universe's 
expansion dictates that time points in a particular direction. As time passes, 
the universe must grow bigger.

 In Schulman's bang-crunch universe, space expands until it reaches a maximum 
volume. Then, as it starts to contract, the arrow of time flips, à la Gold. 
Schulman contends that, by virtue of being isolated, a particular star or 
galaxy might survive through the universe's rebound from expansion to 
contraction with time arrows intact and oppositely oriented to those of the 
rest of matter.

 To explore the interactions of such a survivor, Schulman uses a computer model 
of two side-by-side boxes of gas molecules that exert a mild influence on each 
other as they compress or expand. He finds that the gases can communicate 
without destroying their direction of volume change, the time arrows.

 The new theory could self-destruct, however, if opposed time streams interact 
in such a way that leads to unresolvable paradoxes, such as putting effects 
before causes, Schulman acknowledges. Also, recent evidence of accelerating 
expansion of the universe (SN: 10/31/98, p. 277) makes a Big Crunch seem less 
likely, he notes.


