New Compounds Inhibit HIV in Lab: Science News Online, Jan. 29, 2000

 New Compounds Inhibit HIV in Lab

 Nathan Seppa

 When the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) invades a cell, it produces three 
essential enzymes that direct the takeover. Two of these-reverse transcriptase 
and protease-have proved susceptible to inhibitor drugs. Mutations in the AIDS 
virus, however, have made some strains resistant to these medications (SN: 
4/24/93, p. 261).

 Scientists at Merck Research Laboratories in West Point, Pa., now report the 
discovery of two new compounds that sabotage the third viral enzyme, called 
integrase. By blocking integrase, these compounds interfere with the 
replication cycle of HIV-1, the most common strain of the virus. Although the 
researchers so far have confined their experiments to cells in laboratory 
dishes, the compounds are the first to clearly render integrase incapable of 
splicing viral DNA onto host-cell DNA.

"I think this is very promising," says W. Edward Robinson Jr., a virologist at 
the University of California, Irvine whose research team in 1996 isolated a 
less promising compound that blocks integrase. "This, combined with our data 
and [other findings], suggests we are getting closer to having molecules that 
act against integrase-and which can be used in people."

 Tapping a corporate repository of natural and artificial chemicals, the Merck 
researchers tested roughly 250,000 substances before finding two that worked 
well. These acids, called L-731,988 and L-708,906, inhibited integrase in 
chemical tests. They also prevented for several weeks the spread of HIV grown 
in cell cultures and quelled strains of HIV that are resistant to other enzyme 
inhibitors, the scientists report in the Jan. 28 Science.

 Upon entering an immune cell, HIV makes a DNA version of its viral genome. In 
the nucleus of the cell, HIV cleaves the host's DNA chain and, guided by 
integrase, inserts its DNA into the host genome.

 Under direction from this integrated viral DNA, the cell changes its 
priorities and starts producing RNA and proteins that make copies of HIV. The 
newly created viruses then find their way out of that immune cell to infect 
others, spreading disease throughout the body. Complete takeover of a cell 
takes less than 1 day, says study coauthor Daria J. Hazuda, a Merck virologist.

 By examining the virus at various stages of its initial cell conquest, the 
researchers determined that the two new drugs halt HIV by keeping its DNA from 
attaching to the host cell's DNA.

 To prove the drugs work by inhibiting integrase, the researchers incubated 
some HIV-infected cells with L-731,988 or L-708,906. Most but not all of the 
viruses died. The researchers found that surviving viruses produced a modified 
form of integrase that is resistant to the chemical- establishing that the 
compounds had been disabling the integrase in the original HIV.

 Merck officials are cautiously optimistic. "We are a long way from having a 
clinical drug," says spokesman Laurence J. Hirsch. "We're still looking for 
better leads, better compounds."

 The study should stimulate chemists to examine the chemical family-called the 
diketo acids-to which L-731,988 and L-708,906 belong, says pharmacologist Yves 
Pommier of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. Other diketo acids or 
their derivatives might serve as more potent integrase inhibitors.

 Although integrase has no direct counterpart in mammals, its inhibitors might 
adversely affect some mammalian enzymes, Robinson says. Such drugs would need 
to avoid blocking DNA-binding proteins in people. Tests on animals could reveal 
such problems, Robinson says.

 Scientists must also determine whether chemicals that thwart integrase can 
work in concert with other enzyme inhibitors. "The days of single-drug therapy 
are long gone," says Robinson.


