Liquid Assets: Science News Online, Jan. 29, 2000

 Liquid Assets

 A new breed of bankers is helping communities save for un-rainy days

 Janet Raloff

 Before last fall's hurricane season deluged the southeastern United States 
with water, water, and more water, meteorological news had focused on the 
paucity of rain. Persistent droughts had been parching most of the eastern half 
of the country, racking up huge economic and environmental impacts.

 For instance, farmers in Maryland, which had its second-driest year in 
recorded history, suffered losses valued at $100 million. Despite an Indiana 
ban on open burning, almost 1,000 uncontrolled fires ravaged that 
drought-stricken state. In portions of Vermont, up to 90 percent of the frogs 
succumbed to the dry spell. Roots on tens of thousands of New York trees lost 
their anchoring grip, causing them to topple over during autumn storms.

 The National Drought Mitigation Center in Lincoln, Neb., issued a drought 
watch in July 1998 for parts of Maryland, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania. Over 
the ensuing year, the affected areas expanded and coalesced with other 
desiccated pockets to encompass a huge swath of land from south-central Texas 
through northern New England.

"Unfortunately," maintains Don Wilhite, the center's director, "this country- 
and most others-have not done a very good job of preparing for droughts. We 
tend to react to them in some emergency mode" during crises, then become lulled 
back into complacency as each crisis subsides.

"Drought is a normal part of climate," points out Wilhite. Droughts' impacts, 
however, have intensified.

 The problem, he suspects, is that "people still view water as an essentially 
unlimited resource-one [that's] basically free." Yet with a growing population 
and increased consumption of water, mushrooming development of arid and desert 
landscapes, and widespread pollution of the aquatic environment, such an 
attitude can be dangerous, he says.

 Increasingly, water managers are recognizing that even in times of bounty, the 
water supply must be considered precarious. Reluctant to rely solely on 
precipitation for the replenishment of their water, many are seeking ways to 
squirrel away their liquid assets during years of plenty.

 Some communities are moving surplus water to replenish underground reservoirs, 
where water naturally accumulates. Meanwhile, scientists are exploring new 
technologies to optimize such stores. Other researchers are coming up with more 
creative ways to bank water. Schemes range from making huge snow piles to 
creating commercial markets for water rights.

 Refilling aquifers

 Public utilities dispense about 40 billion gallons of water to U.S. customers 
daily. Nearly 40 percent of it is pumped from subterranean aquifers-usually 
beds of water-saturated gravel and sand. Though utilities take the larger 
portion of their water directly from lakes, rivers, and streams, a large share 
of even this resource traces back to groundwater aquifers upstream.

 Particularly in the arid western United States, many communities have been 
withdrawing groundwater faster than nature replaces it. To improve the balance 
sheet, water managers are exploring artificial ways to refill those aquifers.

 Methods for occasionally recharging groundwater systems have been around since 
before the time of Christ, observes Wayne A. Pettyjohn, a consulting 
hydrologist in Stillwater, Okla. Back then, communities would divert river 
water or snowmelt into a pond and allow its contents to seep into the ground.

 Around 35 years ago, Pettyjohn designed such a system for Minot, N.D., a town 
whose wells had all but run dry. Within 6 months, he says, the groundwater 
recharge "brought the [underground aquifer's] water level up 22 feet."

 Lately, utilities have turned to more aggressive recharge methods that inject 
water underground. While the technology for such active banking of water has 
been around for nearly half a century, "it was no more than sporadically used 
until about 10 years ago," notes Daniel J. Acquaviva, a groundwater-recharge 
consultant in Cape Coral, Fla.

 Hydrologists in Las Vegas initiated one of the first systems in 1989. That 
city gets most of its drinking water from surface sources, tapping into 
groundwater only to make up the residual demand.

 The aquifer below Las Vegas naturally collects 35,000 to 55,000 acre-feet of 
water per year. "For quite some time, we were pumping out a lot more than that, 
about 70,000 acre-feet per year," notes Erin Cole, senior hydrologist for the 
Southern Nevada Water Authority in Las Vegas. An acre-foot is 325,851 gallons, 
or the volume of one acre flooded 12 inches deep.

 Not only was the city's rate of pumping unsustainable, but it also risked 
collapsing the aquifer. Without enough water to support the earth above it, the 
aquifer might subside and compact. Water managers couldn't rely on refilling 
the aquifer with seepage from surface ponds, Cole notes, because the city's 
underground reservoir was confined beneath an impermeable layer of clay.

 So, Las Vegas has initiated an active banking program. Nevada residents have 
rights to water from the Colorado River, which touches the southern tip of the 
state. Las Vegas now runs a portion of this water through municipal treatment 
plants and injects it into the aquifer via some 60 wells spaced over a 
16-square-mile area that includes the city. Notes Cole, "We now recharge [the 
aquifer] with about 30,000 acre-feet per year."

 Slime build-up

 There's a problem with injection wells, however. "They generally screw up," 
Pettyjohn notes. "If you don't use practically distilled water, a slime can 
build up and the infiltration rate diminishes to practically zero."

 Ten years into water banking by water injection, Cole acknowledges that the 
Nevada wells are exhibiting signs of obstruction.

"We think what's happening is a biological and particulate clogging," Cole 
says. The high oxygen content of the injected water, for instance, may feed 
bacteria in the aquifer, encouraging them to congregate in a slimy biofilm at 
or near the well. Injected water may also carry particulates or stir up silts 
in the gravel bed, leading to blockages in the well or in pores of the aquifer.

 Clearly, injection-well aquifer recharge is not a mature technology, she says, 
but a continuing challenge.

 That's something John M. Stomp appreciates. Water resources manager for 
Albuquerque, he's in charge of developing an injection-well water-banking 
system there. "We face a ton of research challenges," he says, because no such 
system is available off-the-shelf.

 Though Albuquerque purchased water rights to the Colorado River from the 
federal Bureau of Reclamation 30 years ago, it has to date relied solely on 
groundwater. Last year, this city of 450,000 people pumped out almost 120,000 
acre-feet.

 Stomp's job over the next 5 years will be to guide the city in a transition to 
total reliance on river water for routine use. The city has just implemented a 
series of rate hikes to pay for a new pipeline to access that water and a new 
water-treatment plant.

 Once the pipeline is in place, the city will bank any excess water 
underground. "It's our intent to transform our groundwater into a drought 
reserve," notes Stomp, "something we desperately need here in the desert."

"A huge challenge" in the project will be matching the chemistry of the river 
water to that of the pristine groundwater, Stomp says. That step will be 
essential, he says, because it will limit well clogging and prevent chemical 
reactions that could unleash minerals now lying undisturbed in the water 
system. These minerals could make the water unappealing, a problem that has 
plagued Tucson, he notes.

 Water savings bank

 Arid regions aren't the only ones banking water. Right now, "it's being looked 
at on a very large scale in Florida," notes William M. Alley of the U.S. 
Geological Survey in Reston, Va.

 Though Florida experiences plenty of rain, it falls at the wrong time. "We get 
two-thirds of it in about one-third of the year-and that one-third includes 
summer, when demand is lowest," explains Jack McCoy of Lee County's Division of 
Natural Resources in Fort Myers. Unlike other states, Florida's peak water 
demands occur in winter, when more people populate the state.

 In response, he notes, some Florida water utilities have begun capturing 
summer rains and banking them underground. "When snowbirds and tourists arrive 
in the winter," he explains, "we just reverse the wells' pumps, chlorinate the 
water, and then send it to customers."

 Even New England states face the need to bank water. It's there, in fact, that 
researchers are exploring one of the more unusual engineering approaches.

 Hydrologists across the country have begun eyeing sites other than natural 
aquifers as potential reservoirs, including abandoned underground mines. Moshe 
Alamaro of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has a flakier idea. His 
simple scheme is to make a big mound of snow in winter and then melt it as 
needed the next summer.

 Alamaro says he started thinking about the possibility of banking water in 
Massachusetts a few years back. That's when he heard a news report about a 
coastal suburb of Boston considering a costly water-desalinization plant as a 
means to deal with summer water shortages.

"This is crazy," Alamaro recalls thinking. "Desalinization might be appropriate 
in arid regions like Egypt or Saudi Arabia but not Massachusetts." As an 
Israeli native, Alamaro had been dazzled by the Boston area's precipitation. 
Its heavy winter snowfalls set him brainstorming about how towns might bank 
their snow.

 The trick to making this affordable, Alamaro's calculations indicate, would be 
to pump water from a local river and spray it from high above the 
ground-perhaps 350 feet up-on cold, dry, windy days.

 Water would turn to snow. For every 20 grams of water sprayed during this 
snowmaking, 1 g would evaporate, he says. That small amount of lost water would 
take heat with it, forcing what's left to freeze.

"When I spray water droplets from high altitudes," Alamaro notes, "their 
extra-long flight path gives them contact with lots of air," fostering heat 
exchange. Wind helps, he adds, by continuously whisking moisture-saturated air 
from the evaporative zone.

 At 0@C, a wind speed of 1 meter per second, and 50 percent humidity, this 
technology can generate 180 kilograms of snow per square meter of land per day, 
Alamaro's calculations show.

 In Quebec City during midwinter, he crows with enthusiasm, "temperatures get 
low enough that we could freeze all its yearly water needs in just 1 day." 
Commercial snowmakers could then fold up their water-spraying scaffolds, 
relocate to some other drought-prone community, and begin 1 or more days of 
banking winter moisture there.

 To limit melting, Alamaro would jacket these snow banks with a sandwich of 
thin layers of silvery plastic separated by air. Because it should lose no more 
than a few percent of its mass to melting during each of the early months of 
storage, a well-insulated municipal mound could last more than a year. 
Communities could use the steady trickle of water throughout most of their 
normal dry season and peel off the insulating blanket to quickly thaw more snow 
during droughts.

 Alamaro has been fielding calls from municipalities in the United States and 
Canada, and even as far away as New Zealand, inquiring about his snow-banking 
technology.

 Trading water rights

 California is experimenting with market-based approaches to its water 
shortages. Deborah Braver, a Sacramento-based consultant, explains that the 
idea isn't to bank water per se. Rather, communities have begun trading water 
rights in novel ways.

 In one type of contractual arrangement, farmers who normally irrigate their 
land have begun entering agreements with communities or industries. During a 
drought, farmers will temporarily turn over their water rights for a steep 
price. Affected growers could live on this income while they temporarily fallow 
fields or grow less thirsty, but less lucrative, crops.

 In another form of water-rights banking, communities with diminishing 
groundwater buy long-term rights to surface water from communities with a 
surplus. While the purchasing community uses the procured water from canals and 
rivers, it foregoes use of its groundwater so that rains and snowmelt can 
replenish the aquifers.

 To discourage depletion of water supplies, several utilities have raised water 
prices during periods of high demand, low availability, or when consumers 
exceed an allowance.

 The most impressive example of such an approach, Braver says, is the Irvine 
Ranch Water District in Orange County, which 9 years ago issued every customer 
an individualized water budget.

 After surveying the size, landscaping, and microclimate of each customer's 
property, the utility assigned a monthly allotment of water. Explains Dale 
Lessick, the utility's water-efficiency manager, any consumption over the 
budget is billed at up to eight times the base rate-a price intended to trigger 
sticker shock and conservation.

 These budgets have proved enormously effective, Lessick notes. Almost 
overnight, the utility registered a 19 percent reduction in water use. To date, 
it has saved the community around 65,000 acre-feet of water. It's now investing 
the extra revenues from budget-busting consumers in water-reclamation and novel 
conservation efforts. The advantage, she notes, is that only those who exceed 
their budget must finance these additional measures.

 Dry spell or drought?

 Most people don't realize that drought can ravage any state, in any month, in 
any year, observes climatologist Mark Svoboda of the National Drought 
Mitigation Center.

 Though communities expect to see dry spells, they've been loath to spend money 
preparing for them. When does a dry spell become a drought? No objective 
definition exists today, observes Cody Knutson of the drought center. Nor is 
any one body coordinating emergency responses to drought, which can involve up 
to some 70 different federal agencies, notes Wilhite.

 At least as important, he says, no clearinghouse exists to collect and 
disseminate information on strategies-such as water banking-that could help 
communities prepare.

 That could change.

 Eighteen months ago, the President signed into law an act setting up the 
National Drought Policy Commission. This spring, the panel will issue a report 
to Congress addressing "what's broke and needs to be fixed" in drought policy 
and government responses to water shortages, explains George Cross, a member of 
the commission's staff in Washington, D.C.

 Wilhite and others hope the commission will not focus merely on responding to 
drought damage. If the commission and, in turn, government agencies would 
stress prevention of water shortages, he argues, fewer people will suffer from 
drought.

"In the long run," he adds, "it's also cheaper."


