All mixed up over birds and dinosaurs: Science News Online, Jan. 15, 2000

 All mixed up over birds and dinosaurs

 Richard Monastersky

 Red-faced and downhearted, paleontologists are growing convinced that they 
have been snookered by a bit of fossil fakery from China. The "feathered 
dinosaur" specimen that they recently unveiled to much fanfare apparently 
combines the tail of a dinosaur with the body of a bird, they say.

"It's the craziest thing I've ever been involved with in my career," says 
paleontologist Philip J. Currie of the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Paleontology in 
Drumheller, Alberta.

 The fossil, named Archaeoraptor liaoningensis, comes from the northeastern 
province of Liaoning, where local farmers have been unearthing many new 
dinosaur species, some showing evidence of downlike coats and feathers. Currie, 
Stephen Czerkas of the Dinosaur Museum in Blanding, Utah, and Xing Xu of the 
Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology in Beijing announced 
the discovery of Archaeoraptor at a press conference in Washington, D.C., at 
the National Geographic Society last October (SN: 11/20/99, p. 328).

 At the time, they called it a missing link between birds and dinosaurs because 
it manifested the long bony tail of dromaeosaurid dinosaurs and the specialized 
shoulders and chest of birds.

 The scientists couldn't be sure of the fossil's history because they had not 
excavated it. Spirited out of China, the specimen attracted Czerkas' attention 
when he saw it for sale in Utah. His museum arranged its purchase by a 
benefactor.

 Recently, while examining a dromaeosaurid dinosaur in a private collection in 
China, Xu decided that the Archaeoraptor fossil is a chimera. The tail of that 
dinosaur is identical to the Archaeoraptor tail, he told Science News.

 The two tails are mirror images of each other, derived from the same 
individual, says Xu. When rocks containing fossils are split, they often break 
into two fossils. Currie suspects that someone sought to enhance the value of 
Archaeoraptor by pasting one part of the dinosaur's tail to a bird fossil.

 Czerkas is reserving judgement until he can view both fossils together. "I've 
got all this other evidence suggesting the tail does belong with the [ 
Archaeoraptor] fossil," he says.

 The paleontologists already had concerns about the tail because the bones 
connecting it to the body are missing and the slab shows signs of reworking. 
They had convinced themselves, however, that the two parts belonged together.

 Other scientists criticize the team and the National Geographic Society for 
unveiling the fossil before any detailed article had appeared in a scientific 
journal. "There probably has never been a fossil with a sadder history than 
this one," says Storrs L. Olson of the Smithsonian Institution's National 
Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.

 Because National Geographic published an article about Archaeoraptor before 
any formal description, credit for the scientific name now goes to the author 
of the magazine article, rather than to the scientists, says Olson.

 Currie says that the mix-up over this one fossil does not diminish the 
evidence suggesting that birds evolved from dinosaurs. It will, however, cause 
him to be more tight-lipped in the future about fossil finds until a journal 
article appears. "Certainly, I don't recommend to any budding scientist that 
they do it this way."


