Popular Boys Show Their Tough Side: Science News Online, Jan. 22, 2000

 Popular Boys Show Their Tough Side

 Bruce Bower

 In the grueling social world of grade school, there's a flip side to a boy's 
popularity, a new study finds.

 A small but influential contingent of boys in fourth to sixth grade attains 
popularity through a flair for physical intimidation, manipulating others, and 
disrupting classroom activities, say psychologist Philip C. Rodkin of Duke 
University in Durham, N.C., and his coworkers. Although not particularly 
well-liked by a majority of their peers, these boys-dubbed "tough boys" by the 
researchers-command their own cliques and sit high on the junior social ladder.

"Model boys" take a contrasting route to popularity, Rodkin's group reports. 
These youngsters get along with others, do well in school and sports, and 
display leadership while respecting adult authority. "Tough boys can be among 
the most popular and socially connected children in elementary classrooms," 
Rodkin says. "They greatly influence the behavior of unpopular, aggressive boys 
and classroom discipline in general."

 Long-term studies of tough boys have yet to be conducted. Some of these boys 
probably encounter many job and family difficulties as adults, Rodkin suggests; 
others may channel their aggression into leadership positions in areas such as 
business and politics.

 The researchers examined 452 boys in fourth, fifth, or sixth grade. Youngsters 
came from 59 classrooms in inner-city, suburban, and rural areas. They took 
part in a larger study of the integration of students with mild learning 
disabilities into public school classrooms. Popularity represented a mix of 
factors including likability, "coolness," and influence over others.

 In surveys and interviews, the boys' teachers and classmates, as well the boys 
themselves, closely agreed on the identity of popular boys, the scientists 
report in the January Developmental Psychology. Model boys accounted for about 
two-thirds of the popular boys; tough boys made up the rest. Both types of 
popular boys exhibited a rate of learning disabilities similar to their 
classmates'.

 The popularity pattern held for African-American boys in all-black classes and 
white boys in predominantly white classes. However, popular African-American 
boys in mostly white classes usually fell into the tough category. That 
tendency may reflect social influences, such as an unwillingness of many black 
males to adopt what they see as central values of the white culture, Rodkin 
suggests.

 In a separate analysis of 496 girls from the same classrooms, the researchers 
found that model behavior characterized almost all those who were popular. The 
highly aggressive girls who attained popularity were too few to stand out as a 
statistically cohesive group, Rodkin says.

 Earlier studies found that some grade-schoolers have a circle of friends 
despite being generally disliked. Rodkin's group makes "an interesting 
argument" that such kids may become popular, remarks psychologist Kenneth Rubin 
of the University of Maryland, College Park.

 However, the new study may overestimate the popularity of tough boys outside 
their limited social circle, Rubin holds. For instance, it doesn't indicate 
whether female classmates admired or disliked tough boys.

 The findings for African-American boys in this study may not apply to all 
black youth, Rubin adds.


