Powerful explosive blasts onto scene: Science News Online, Jan. 22, 2000

 Powerful explosive blasts onto scene

 Corinna Wu

 After nearly 20 years of effort, researchers have achieved the synthesis of 
octanitrocubane, a compound that could be one of the most powerful nonnuclear 
explosives known.

 Philip E. Eaton and Mao-Xi Zhang of the University of Chicago and Richard 
Gilardi of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C., report their feat 
in the Jan. 17 Angewandte Chemie International Edition.

 Eaton synthesized the parent compound, cubane, in 1964. At the time, cubane 
had one of the highest densities of any known hydrocarbon-1.29 grams per cubic 
centimeter. Gasoline by comparison has a density of 0.8 g/cm3.

"Gasoline floats on water," he says. "Cubane sinks like a rock."

 In the early 1980s, Army researchers recognized that cubane derivatives, 
especially octanitrocubane, could pack an incredible punch. Since an explosion 
involves very fast combustion, high densities lead to big blasts, Eaton 
explains. "You go from a compact solid to a lot of gas and energy," he says.

 Octanitrocubane could be twice as powerful as trinitrotoluene (TNT), and "it's 
thought to be 20 to 25 percent more effective than HMX [octogen], which is the 
state-of-the-art military explosive right now," says Peter M. Gehring, a 
physicist at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in 
Gaithersburg, Md.

 Adding the eight nitro groups to cubane proved to be a challenge. "The first 
four could be put on by manipulating functional groups"-that is, replacing 
components of an existing cubane compound, Eaton says. "The next four were much 
more painful. We had to develop new methodologies."

 Researchers haven't yet made enough octanitrocubane to check its 
explosiveness, but tests on the small samples made by Eaton's group show that 
the compound has a density close to 2 g/cm3.

 Even though octanitrocubane may pack a powerful punch, it's safe to handle. 
"The nice thing is that it's shock insensitive, unlike TNT," says Gehring. "You 
don't blow your leg off carrying it around."

 What's more, the compound fits another one of the military's requirements for 
an explosive: Its byproducts won't hurt the environment. Eaton notes, "It can 
kill you, but it can't be toxic." Octanitrocubane should burn into carbon 
dioxide and nitrogen, he says.


