Boning Up: Science News Online, Jan. 15, 2000

 Boning Up

 Turning on cells that build bone and turning off ones that destroy it

 John Travis

 Construction and demolition crews working side by side. It sounds insane, but 
that's how the human skeleton grows and maintains itself. Each of its 206 bones 
harbors cells that continually deposit a rigid protein matrix that becomes 
mineralized. Each bone also contains cells that can break that structure down.

 The bone builders keep ahead of the bone destroyers as a child grows, but the 
balance can shift as a person gets older. Bones weaken when osteoclasts, the 
matrix-resorbing cells, outpace osteoblasts, the matrix-making cells. A wide 
variety of conditions-most notably osteoporosis, but also rheumatoid arthritis, 
leukemia, and HIV infection-shift the cellular tug of war in favor of the bone 
destroyers. The weak bones that result can suffer debilitating, even deadly, 
fractures.

 Scientific advances on two complementary fronts now offer new hope in the 
body's battle against bone loss. In one of the most exciting stories in bone 
research in many years, scientists have unearthed a fundamental mechanism by 
which oseteoblasts communicate with osteoclasts. Medical researchers are 
already testing a new drug that exploits this knowledge to stop bone 
deterioration.

 In a more surprising development, popular cholesterol-lowering drugs known as 
statins seem to stimulate growth of new bone. Statins have thickened the bones 
of mice in laboratory experiments, and test-tube studies suggest a mechanism 
for this action. However, it's not clear yet whether statin drugs will 
jump-start bone growth in people.

 Unusual skeletons

 The excitement began in 1996 when X rays of some genetically engineered mice 
revealed something unusual about their skeletons. "We found that [the animals] 
had extraordinarily dense bones," recalls Colin R. Dunstan of Amgen, a biotech 
firm in Thousand Oaks, Calif.

 He and his colleagues at the company had been puzzling over the role of a 
protein encoded by a gene that they had recently discovered. As part of their 
investigation into the protein's function, the investigators created mice with 
extra copies of the gene. The animals synthesized abnormally large amounts of 
the protein, which somehow led to the thicker-than-normal bones.

 The puzzling protein-dubbed osteoprotegerin (OPG) by Amgen because it seemed 
to protect the integrity of bones-turned out to be a key part of the molecular 
conversation between osteoblasts and osteoclasts. While the goals of these two 
cell types appear at odds, scientists have long known that the cells cooperate.

"The cells that make the bone also control its removal or resorption," says 
Dunstan. How the two types of cells communicate had been a mystery until 
studies in the past few years revealed that OPG binds to a protein called 
OPG-ligand. This attachment prevents OPG-ligand from rousing osteoclasts into 
action.

"OPG-ligand is like the accelerator of your car. If you step on OPG-ligand, you 
lose bone. OPG is the brake of the system. If you step on OPG, then you have 
more bone. The balance between the two determines how much bone we have," says 
Josef M. Penninger of the University of Toronto.

 Osteoblasts make both OPG and OPG-ligand, scientists have learned. OPG-ligand 
binds to surface proteins on osteoclasts, triggering proliferation of these 
cells and increasing their bone degradation. OPG secreted in the bone matrix 
serves as a decoy, sequestering OPG-ligand and preventing it from triggering 
bone resorption.

 Since many proteins in the body stimulate osteoclast activity, investigators 
wanted to confirm the importance of OPG-ligand by creating mice lacking its 
gene. In the Jan. 28, 1999 Nature, Amgen scientists and Penninger's team 
reported that like the mice producing excess OPG, mice without OPG-ligand 
develop unusually thick bones. The latter mice have no osteoclasts at all.

"OPG-ligand is the essential molecule for osteoclast development," says 
Penninger. By controlling the balance between OPG and OPG-ligand, he 
speculates, "you can treat hundreds of diseases that have associated bone loss."

 These molecules do seem to make up "a key and previously unrecognized system 
in the regulation of osteoclast genesis," agrees William J. Sharrock of the 
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases in 
Bethesda, Md.

 Natural body chemicals

 A variety of natural body chemicals and drugs leads to bone loss when 
administered to animals or people. Scientists are now finding that almost all 
of those substances slash production of OPG, boost creation of OPG-ligand, or 
do both.

 Consider the glucocorticoids, a class of steroids that includes prednisone. 
Prescribed for a variety of medical reasons, these drugs sometimes set off 
quick and dramatic bone loss. Treating laboratory-grown osteoblasts with such 
steroids inhibits their synthesis of OPG and heightens their OPG-ligand 
production, Dunstan and other researchers from Amgen and the Mayo Clinic in 
Rochester, Minn., reported in the October 1999 Endocrinology.

 In the September 1999 Endocrinology, some of the same scientists showed that 
applying estrogen to human osteoblasts stimulates activity of the gene for OPG. 
This may explain why an aging female's diminishing estrogen production leads to 
bone loss and may account for the bone-protecting effects of 
hormone-replacement therapy. "Now, we have the molecular explanation for 
postmenopausal osteoporosis," says Penninger.

 The interplay of OPG and OPG-ligand may resolve another medical mystery. 
Rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, lupus, hepatitis, 
lymphomas, AIDS, and many seemingly unrelated diseases can produce osteoporosis 
along with their other symptoms. "Kids with leukemia are growth retarded 
because of bone loss," adds Penninger.

 The only thing the diseases seem to have in common is that they involve a 
class of immune cells called activated T cells. How do T cells, which normally 
fight infections, interact with bone?

 The first glimpse of an explanation came in 1997 from the Seattle biotech firm 
Immunex. Scientists there described a protein made by activated T cells. That 
protein turned out to be OPG-ligand. The unanticipated connection between 
OPG-ligand and T cells grew stronger in 1998 when Penninger found that his mice 
lacking the gene for OPG-ligand had no lymph nodes, one of the tissues where T 
cells mature.

 Scientists have since found that almost anything that stirs quiescent T cells 
into action also triggers their synthesis of OPG-ligand. Although no one can 
explain why the immune cells react this way, this link suggests that chronic 
infections, autoimmune disorders, and T cell cancers can all make osteoclasts 
go wild.

"Every time you turn on T cells, they make OPG-ligand, and this leads to bone 
loss," says Penninger. "This explains hundreds of clinical studies."

 To buttress that argument, he and his colleagues recently tested whether OPG 
could slow the progression of an artificially induced rodent condition similar 
to rheumatoid arthritis. In patients with this autoimmune disorder, joint 
inflammation is followed by the destruction of surrounding bone and cartilage. 
Rheumatoid arthritis afflicts more than a million people in the United States, 
crippling many of them.

 When signs of inflammation appeared in mice treated to develop arthritis, the 
investigators started giving the animals daily injections of OPG. The 
inflammation persisted, but the shots prevented bone and cartilage destruction, 
Penninger and his colleagues report in the Nov. 18, 1999 Nature.

 They were pleasantly surprised that OPG blocked cartilage as well as bone 
damage, particularly since scientists aren't sure how rheumatoid arthritis 
destroys the cartilage in people.

"The simplest explanation is the cartilage breakdown has been a matter of the 
underlying bone deteriorating," notes Sharrock. An alternative explanation is 
that OPG-ligand may stimulate osteoclasts to degrade cartilage as well as bone, 
says Sharrock, or it may incite other cells to destroy the cartilage.

 The long trek

 Moving biological advances from the laboratory bench to the doctor's office 
can take years and frequently fails, but Amgen has already begun the long trek 
with OPG. The company's first step was to modify the protein so that it 
circulates in the blood much longer than the natural version does.

 Last September, at the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research meeting 
in St. Louis, Dunstan and his colleagues announced results of initial safety 
tests. Forty women who had just gone through menopause received a single shot, 
in varying doses, of the modified OPG. Physicians documented no side effects 
other than some minor irritation at the injection site.

 While the researchers didn't design this initial trial to test the drug's 
efficacy, they did monitor daily the rate of bone resorption in the women by 
measuring a bone-breakdown product in their urine. At the highest dose, the 
single shot of modified OPG reduced a woman's normal bone resorption rate by as 
much as 85 percent. The drug's effect lasted for up to a month, says Dunstan.

 Amgen now plans larger trials of the drug with postmenopausal women, as well 
as with people suffering localized bone destruction due to metastatic bone 
cancer. As for rheumatoid arthritis, specialists on the topic warn that the rat 
condition studied by Penninger and his colleagues doesn't perfectly model the 
human disease.

"It has a lot of shortcomings," cautions Gary S. Firestein of the University of 
California, San Diego. He adds that other T cell-based strategies have failed 
to help people with rheumatoid arthritis. Still, he believes that testing OPG 
on people with the autoimmune disorder is warranted. Indeed, Amgen may begin 
such a trial this year.

 Penninger admits that he can barely contain his enthusiasm about using OPG to 
stop bone loss in osteoporosis and T cell disorders. He compares its potential 
significance to the realization that giving insulin to diabetics prevents the 
most serious consequences of the disease.

"I think it's the insulin for the bone," says Penninger. "I've never been as 
confident in my whole scientific life."

 Growing new bone

 Stopping bone loss is one thing. Tricking the body into growing new bone is 
quite another. Physicians desperately need such a technique because they often 
don't diagnose osteoporosis until bones have already become irrevocably 
weakened.

"The Holy Grail of osteoporosis research is a drug that will restore or rebuild 
bone that is lost," notes Gregory Mundy, a researcher at the University of 
Texas Health Science Center and founder of the biotech firm OsteoScreen, both 
in San Antonio.

"We need something for the little old lady who has already lost 40 percent [of 
her bone mass]," agrees C. Conrad Johnston Jr. of Indiana University School of 
Medicine in Indianapolis, who is president of the National Osteoporosis 
Foundation.

 The widely used statins may provide the answer to Johnston's request. In the 
Dec. 3, 1999 Science, Mundy and his colleagues report that statins stimulate 
bone formation in test-tube studies and in experiments with rodents. Since 
physicians have prescribed statins for more than a decade and the drugs have a 
well-documented safety record, the unexpected results tantalize bone 
researchers.

 The initial hint that statins have bone-building properties came when the 
scientists began looking for small molecules that trigger the maturation of 
osteoblasts. The researchers used automated machines to screen more than 30,000 
natural compounds for their ability to activate a gene encoding a molecule-bone 
morphogenetic protein-2, or BMP-2-that promotes local bone formation.

 Mundy's team found just one molecule, lovastatin, that turned on the gene for 
BMP-2. Startled by this unanticipated result, the researchers quickly tested 
whether other statins, not among the compounds they originally screened, would 
also stimulate BMP-2 production. All but one did so.

 The investigators next examined whether statins can influence bone creation. 
By adding the drugs to laboratory dishes in which pieces of mouse skulls were 
growing, they showed that statins could double or triple the amount of new bone 
formation. The statins seem to stimulate activity, proliferation, and 
maturation of osteoblasts.

 Mundy and his colleagues then began testing statins on animals, initially 
injecting the drugs three times a day into tissue above the upper part of the 
skull of mice just a few weeks old. Five days of such injections produced 50 
percent more bone than normal.

 Since part of the appeal of the statins is that people can take them as pills 
rather than as injections, the scientists also administered oral doses of the 
drugs to female rats. In rodents that have had their ovaries removed, 
osteoporosis normally occurs quickly. When the researchers examined such rats 
after they had taken statins for a month, those on the highest doses had double 
the bone-formation rate of untreated rats, Mundy and his colleagues report.

 Hans Oxlund of the University of Aarhus in Denmark and his colleagues have 
confirmed the bone-building properties of statins in rodents. Compared with 
adult female rats receiving a saline solution, those getting statin had twice 
as much bone formation over 3 months, Oxlund reported at the St. Louis meeting 
of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. This extra bone has 
normal properties, Oxlund told Science News.

 Statins slash cholesterol production in the body by inhibiting an enzyme that 
creates a cholesterol precursor. Laboratory results suggest that the drugs also 
increase bone production by inhibiting that same enzyme. Pharmaceutical firms 
may ultimately need to develop statin-related drugs that increase bone 
formation while allowing the body to continue making the cholesterol that all 
animal cells need, Mundy notes.

 Yet companies probably won't go to such lengths until they're certain that 
statins build bone in people. Since human and rodent bone metabolisms differ 
significantly, the jury is still out on that question.

 In an attempt to address the issue, Mundy, along with Steven R. Cummings of 
the University of California, San Francisco, recently analyzed bone density and 
hip-fracture data from about 600 women over the age of 55 who had participated 
in trials of statins' effects on cholesterol. They were compared with similarly 
aged women taking other cholesterol-lowering agents.

 The results were not conclusive, says Mundy, who calls upon the makers of 
statins to launch clinical trials specifically designed to test the 
bone-forming abilities of their drugs.

 Even such trials may not resolve the issue. Drug developers selected the 
current statins for their ability to move quickly from the bloodstream to the 
liver, the primary site of cholesterol synthesis, rather than to the skeleton. 
Statins that target bone may be needed, but such drugs could lose the benefit 
of the current statins' enviable record. "You might have to start all over 
again on safety and toxicity," says Sharrock.

 While physicians don't yet have mastery over the skeleton's cellular 
construction and demolition crews, bone researchers are finally providing them 
with the commands they need to instruct their skilled workers.


