Nerve cells of ALS patients harbor virus: Science News Online, Jan. 15, 2000

 Nerve cells of ALS patients harbor virus

 Nathan Seppa

 Fragments of viral genetic material show up with unusual frequency in patients 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, but rarely in other people, a new 
study shows. The report, in the January Neurology, provides the strongest 
evidence yet that a virus may have a hand in killing nerve cells in this lethal 
disease.

 Although a small percentage of cases is attributable to an inherited mutation, 
the cause of most ALS is unknown. The illness first attacks the nerve cells in 
the spinal cord that carry messages to muscles in the legs and arms. It shuts 
down the signals in these motor neurons, causing the muscles to wither. ALS, 
also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, typically results in respiratory failure. 
Death usually occurs 2 to 5 years after symptoms begin.

 A group led by researchers at Claude Bernard University in Lyon, France, has 
found RNA strands of a so-called echovirus in 15 of 17 spinal cord tissue 
samples from people who died from nonhereditary ALS. The viral particles showed 
up in spinal tissue from only 1 of 29 people who died of other neurological 
diseases.

 Echoviruses belong to the enterovirus family. This group includes the polio 
virus, which also kills motor neurons. Researchers have linked echoviruses to 
meningitis, another central nervous system affliction, but no previous study 
concluded that these viruses are highly prevalent in patients with ALS.

 The disease damages neurons so badly that they are hard to identify in 
postmortem tissue. Judging from their size and shape, the cells containing 
fragments of echovirus RNA in the new study were clearly neurons, says study 
coauthor Martina M. Berger, a microbiologist currently at the University of 
California, Irvine. She adds, however, that it's impossible to be certain the 
cells were motor neurons.

 Berger and her colleagues detected the viral particles in the tissue by using 
a chain reaction that copies small portions of viral RNA millions of times.

 Still unresolved is the question of whether echoviruses contribute to the 
disease or whether ALS simply makes motor neurons susceptible to invasion by 
the viruses, says study coauthor Bruno Lina, a virologist at Claude Bernard 
University. Berger suspects that the echoviruses are part of the ALS puzzle and 
combine with some other factor-perhaps another virus or a genetic defect-to 
become lethal.

"The study is interesting and provocative . . . but leaves many, many questions 
unanswered," says Marinos C. Dalakas, a neurologist at the National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke in Bethesda, Md. For example, ALS-damaged 
nerve tissue shows little inflammation, he says, unlike tissue infected with 
enteroviruses such as polio.

"Any leads into ALS are always very interesting and exciting because so little 
is known about it," says Teepu Siddique, a neurologist at Northwestern 
University Medical School in Chicago. He looks forward to seeing whether other 
researchers can reproduce the new finding.


