X-ray Data Reveal Black Holes Galore: Science News Online, Jan. 15, 2000

 X-ray Data Reveal Black Holes Galore

 Ron Cowen

 Viewed in visible light, the sky appears as a dark expanse, adorned with the 
twinkling lights of faraway stars. But with an X-ray telescope, the sky seems 
uniformly bright, bathed in a diffuse glow. For 37 years, astronomers have 
struggled to find the multitude of pointlike sources that combine to produce 
this impressionistic glow, known as the X-ray background. Although they have 
made progress, the limited ability of telescopes to detect X rays in fine 
detail has hampered their efforts.

 Using the orbiting Chandra X-Ray Observatory, a sensitive telescope launched 
last July (SN: 9/4/99, p. 148), researchers now report that they've pinned down 
the origin of the background at energies where it had remained most 
elusive-above 2,000 electronvolts. The results suggest that supermassive black 
holes lurking at the cores of galaxies are far more common than visible-light 
observations have revealed.

 An intriguing, but much less certain, possibility is that some of the 
X-ray-bright objects are the signposts of the earliest galaxies to assemble in 
the universe.

 The source of X-ray background is "just the sort of thing one hoped Chandra 
would discover," comments astronomer Roger D. Blandford of the California 
Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

 The researchers presented their findings this week in Atlanta at a meeting of 
the American Astronomical Society.

 To search for the origins of the X-ray glow, Richard Mushotzky of NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., and Keith A. Arnaud of the 
University of Maryland, College Park focused on a small patch of sky. Chandra 
stared at it for 27.7 hours early last December.

"We found enough point sources of the right [intensity] and distribution to 
account for 80 to 100 percent of the X-ray background," Mushotzky says. By 
chance, other researchers had extensively studied the same patch of sky in 
visible light, using one of the twin Keck telescopes-the world's largest 
optical detectors-atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea.

 Comparing the two sets of observations, Lennox L. Cowie and Amy Barger of the 
University of Hawaii in Honolulu found that about one-third of the X-ray 
sources reside at the centers of galaxies with brightly shining cores known as 
active galactic nuclei. Such galaxies are thought to harbor massive black 
holes, which cause surrounding gas to produce X rays and visible light as the 
gas gets sucked in.

 Another one-third of the X ray-emitting objects lie at the centers of galaxies 
that radiate very little visible light from their cores. The team suggests that 
these X rays also come from massive black holes, but ones that are shrouded in 
dust or unusually quiescent at visible wavelengths.

"The Chandra data show there are at least twice as many" black holes as had 
been counted in visible light, says Mushotzky.

 Another team, led by Gordon Garmire of Pennsylvania State University in State 
College, has also traced the sources of the high-energy X-ray background and 
found a multitude of black hole candidates. The group used Chandra to examine a 
patch of sky that includes the Hubble Deep Field, a region scrutinized in 
visible light by the Hubble Space Telescope.

 Though the number of newly detected massive black holes is not a surprise, 
these findings highlight their prevalence, Blandford says. Theorists suggest 
that black holes play a crucial role in galaxy formation.

 The remaining X-ray sources found by Mushotzky's team may pose a bigger 
puzzle. The galaxies they lie within are barely, if at all, detectable in 
visible light. One explanation, Mushotzky says, is that these galaxies are so 
young and distant that the vast volume of gas that lies between them and Earth 
absorbs their light. These X rays could thus represent the "beacons that light 
the first galaxies," he suggests.

 This interpretation is consistent with earlier predictions. Martin J. Rees of 
the University of Cambridge in England contends, however, "Most astronomers 
would think it more likely that the sources are [nearer to us] and obscured by 
dust." The puzzle won't be solved until astronomers manage to measure the 
distances to the X ray-emitting objects.


