Black hole recipe: Slow light, swirl atoms: Science News Online, Feb. 5, 2000

 Black hole recipe: Slow light, swirl atoms

 Peter Weiss

 Physicists may soon create artificial black holes in the laboratory, analogous 
to the ones expected to lurk in distant space. A new study by a pair of 
theorists in Sweden describes how swirling clouds of atoms could slug down all 
nearby light, making them as black as their astronomical cousins.

 Called optical black holes, these eddies could provide an extraordinary 
test-bench for the theory of general relativity, which gave rise to the concept 
of gravitational black holes, the researchers say. Ulf Leonhardt and Paul 
Piwnicki of the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm find that the same 
mathematics describes both the terrible tug of an astronomical black hole on 
light and the gentle corralling of rays by an atom vortex.

"We were quite surprised that it worked that well," Piwnicki says. "We're still 
working on it to understand it more deeply," he adds. The researchers report 
their findings in the Jan. 31 Physical Review Letters and the December 1999 
Physical Review A.

 The laboratory analogy goes only so far, however. Black holes out in space are 
massive remnants of collapsed stars that pull in not just light but everything 
else in their vicinity. By contrast, the proposed atomic whirlpools would have 
too little gravity to swallow any matter. Tiny tornadoes within wispy clouds of 
gas, they would snag photons through their remarkable ability to slow light 
pulses.

 The proposed mechanism by which such a vortex would capture light rests on 
principles discovered in the 1800s. Many substances, such as water or glass, 
retard light as it passes through them. Consequently, a fluid flow can drag 
light along with it.

 Leonhardt and Piwnicki show that, theoretically, an eddy can trap a beam if it 
circulates faster than the speed of light in the liquid, just as fish can be 
trapped in a whirlpool that's rotating faster than they can swim. So far, 
however, no material slows down light enough for a vortex's velocity to exceed 
the radiation's reduced pace.

 That may change soon. Last year, Lene V. Hau, now of Harvard University, and 
her colleagues used a stationary, laser-manipulated atom cloud to limit light 
to an astoundingly sluggish 17 meters per second-roughly bicycle speed (SN: 
3/27/99, p. 207).

 To make an optical black hole work, Leonhardt and Piwnicki estimate that light 
would need to crawl along still more slowly, at a mere 1 centimeter per second.

"We're actually aiming for that, and I think it will be possible," Hau says. 
Her experiments have already achieved a slowdown to 50 cm/s, she told Science 
News. She calls the Stockholm proposal "a very exciting idea" but cautions that 
aspects of the proposed vortex might prevent the black-hole effect. "There are 
things one must look into," she says.

 The Stockholm researchers discovered that German physicist Walter Gordon, back 
in the 1920s, found the same mathematical equivalence between light in a moving 
fluid and in a gravitational field but didn't investigate specific patterns of 
flow, Piwnicki says.

 Modeling swirling flows in their new study, he and Leonhardt found that 
photons passing near the fast-spinning optical black hole, but outside a 
critical radius, follow a bent course. Those straying close spiral inexorably 
into the center.

 Pursuing similar studies, theorist James Anglin of the Harvard-Smithsonian 
Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., and his coworkers are exploring 
links between sound waves in a moving fluid and light waves in a gravitational 
field. Atom clouds may also trap acoustic vibrations, creating sonic or 
so-called dumb, black holes, Anglin says.


