Sleepyheads' brains veer from restful path: Science News Online, Feb. 12, 2000

 Sleepyheads' brains veer from restful path

 Bruce Bower

 A good night's sleep seems to clear the brain and help the well-snoozed 
individual negotiate the flow of daily affairs.

 In contrast, a lack of sleep makes it difficult to carry out even mundane 
acts, such as conversing intelligibly or calculating a waiter's tip. Initial 
investigations of brain activity in sleepy volunteers as they try to perform 
verbal and mathematical tasks have yielded intriguing clues about the nature of 
sleep deprivation.

 The new evidence adds to scientific concern over the potentially harmful 
effects of widespread sleep deficits (SN: 9/25/99, p. 205: ).

 Brain functions tapped during certain types of thought change considerably 
after a sleepless night, reports a team of neuroscientists led by Sean P.A. 
Drummond of the University of California, San Diego.

 As they try to memorize words, sleep-deprived adults exhibit a pattern of 
brain activity not previously recorded, Drummond and his colleagues say. This 
response may reflect the recruitment of a brain system to compensate, at least 
in part, for neural losses sparked by sleepiness, they suggest.

 In contrast, sleep-deprived people display generally lower brain activity 
while grappling with math problems than they do when rested, says the team. In 
this case, no new areas of heightened neural activity compensate for the 
effects of sleepiness.

"The effects of sleep deprivation on cognitive performance and related patterns 
of cerebral activation may depend in part on task-specific demands," the 
researchers conclude.

 During both tasks, functional magnetic resonance imaging scans measured 
blood-flow changes in specific brain regions. These data provided an indirect 
index of rises and falls in brain-cell activity.

 In one study, published in the Feb. 10 Nature, the researchers evaluated 13 
healthy adults, ages 21 to 35, in a sleep laboratory. Each participant tried to 
memorize short lists of words on the afternoon following a full night's sleep 
and then after about 35 hours without sleep. Word recall and recognition 
dropped sharply in the sleep-deprived.

 Parts of the prefrontal cortex and temporal cortex showed the most activity in 
rested individuals, the scientists say. The prefrontal cortex helps coordinate 
attention and memory for information used in various tasks. The temporal cortex 
contributes to language comprehension.

 The scientists had presumed that a lack of sleep would obstruct prefrontal 
activity, which increases sharply during wakefulness. Contrary to expectations, 
however, the prefrontal cortex after sleep deprivation exhibited even more 
activity across a larger area as volunteers studied the lists.

 Sleepy participants also displayed blood-flow surges in another brain area, 
the parietal lobe, but not in the temporal cortex.

 The buildup of sleep-promoting substances, such as adenosine, in the 
prefrontal cortex of sleepy individuals may cause that area to work harder when 
confronted with a verbal task, Drummond and his coworkers theorize.

 In another study, published in the Dec. 16, 1999 NeuroReport, participants 
performed a series of arithmetic tasks that required subtraction. Parietal 
regions that were activated in rested participants exhibited blood-flow 
declines after 35 hours without sleep.

 Activity in other brain regions remained stable or declined slightly while 
sleep-needy volunteers worked on the math problems. Participants made more 
mistakes and omitted more responses when drowsy.

"This is exciting work," remarks sleep researcher David Dinges of the 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia. "But brain 
processes involved in sleep deprivation are probably more complex than any 
current scientific explanations."

 Alterations of brain activity in sleepy people may reflect the use of new 
cortical areas to compensate for neural losses elsewhere, Dinges says. However, 
the observed brain changes may instead result, in part, from impairment of the 
ability to sustain attention for more than a few seconds, he adds.


