When Ants Squeak: Science News Online, Feb. 5, 2000

 When Ants Squeak

 Eavesdropping on lesser-known bulletins from the hill

 Susan Milius

 If you haven't stuck an ant in your ear recently, don't write the insect off 
as the strong, silent type.

 Many species make tiny squeaks that people can hear if they hold an ant close 
enough. The rich chemical communication of ants has claimed more attention from 
scientists in recent decades, but a small band of researchers has been sorting 
out ant sounds.

 Biologists have long realized that ants can hear with their knees, picking up 
vibrations humming through leaves or nests or even the ground. In the past 20 
years, researchers interpreting the messages that thrum in substrates have 
revealed a sort of ant-ernet, zinging with communiques about lost relatives, 
great food, free rides for hitchhikers, caterpillars in search of ant partners, 
and impending doom. Improvements in recording equipment are expanding the range 
of ant chirps and buzzes available to human eavesdroppers. Some scientists are 
even challenging decades of textbook truths and suggesting that ants might also 
be able to detect certain kinds of airborne sounds.

 Drummings and scrapings

 For almost a century, naturalists have considered ants practically deaf to 
sounds traveling through the air but exquisitely responsive to vibrations. The 
noises that ants seem to make intentionally, drummings and fast stridulatory 
scrapings of roughened body parts, can buzz through substrates easily.

 Drumming, also called body rapping, turns up most often in species with wood 
or dried-pulp nests. For example, when a carpenter ant nest gets disturbed, 
workers rock furiously back and forth so their mandibles in front and their 
hindmost body part wham against the nest. An ant pounds the nest in a burst, up 
to seven thumps at 50-millisecond intervals.

 The other obvious ant sound, the squeak that people can sometimes detect, 
comes from stridulation. This high-pitched rasping of one surface against 
another occurs frequently in animals, most famously among cicadas, katydids, 
and crickets but also catfish and, some scientists argue, sea horses.

 Ants stridulate with the hindmost body section, the gaster, explains 
systematist Philip Ward at the University of California, Davis. The gaster is 
made up of segments, one of which bears a ridged patch. Its nearest neighbor 
sports a file-like rasping widget. The segments remind Ward of the nested tubes 
of a telescope. "Imagine the meeting edges scratching a bit as they move in and 
out," he says.

 Residents of the southwestern United States can hear stridulatory concerts by 
picking up red desert ants, suggests Ward. In the Northeast, the less common 
but hefty Myrmica species also squeak audibly when plucked up by a human hand.

 Ants in four subfamilies stridulate, but others seem silent and don't have 
recognizable scraping surfaces, Ward notes. Entomologists argue about whether 
this pattern means stridulation evolved several times in ants or whether the 
Adam and Eve of ant ancestors rasped to each other but some descendants lost 
the ability.

 In the 1970s, pioneering studies of these ant scratchings showed that they 
boosted the listening ants' response to the pheromone signals indicating that 
dinner or a nest site is available.

 Stridulation also seems to summon rescuers after a nest cave-in. Hubert Markl 
of the University of Konstanz in Germany reported that leaf-cutter workers 
converged at a spot where nestmates were trapped 5 centimeters down in 
well-packed soil. If the workers were buried only 3 cm below ground, nestmates 
not only milled around the spot but dug toward the pinned ants.

 Stridulation can also signal "stop already" from a female Pogonomyrmex whose 
sperm-storage organ can't hold any more. Ants don't make this stridulation 
during the earlier courtship, Markl reports, and the distinctive sound benefits 
both sexes by reducing time- and energy-wasting activity.

 Snipping leaves

 One of the more unusual notions about stridulation arose in 1995 when Flavio 
Roces and Bert Holldobler of the University of Wurzburg in Germany reported 
that leaf-cutting ants tend to stridulate as they slice off snippets of tender 
leaves. The vibrations make their jaws buzz as they rip through plant tissue 
(SN: 11/26/94, p. 358). Could ants have evolved the electric knife?

 However, offering ants both prime leaves and chemically tainted ones revealed 
that workers stridulate more on desirable than less-favored leaves, regardless 
of any differences in the toughness of the cutting task.

 Buzzing jaws do make smoother cuts, the researchers found, but don't improve 
speed or efficiency. The scientists now look to communication instead of 
cutting enhancement as the driving force behind the evolution of ant humming. 
"The electric knife is a wonderful epiphenomenon," as Holldobler puts it, 
sounding a little wistful.

 The same line of research on leaf-cutter stridulation revealed a related 
function: an invitation to hitchhikers. When the ants forage, the smallest 
workers, or minims, swarm along even though they're too little to do any 
cutting. They scurry around the cutting site or stand nearby with mandibles 
open and antennae outstretched. Many don't walk back to the nest on their own 
but literally hitchhike on the loads carried by the bigger ants.

 Despite the appearance of frivolous gawking, the little hitchhikers provide a 
useful service. Somehow, they discourage attacks from phorid flies. These 
parasites swoop onto leaf-cutters and inject an egg, which hatches and chews 
through the ant's innards, finishing with the brain and leaving a headless 
corpse.

 Roces and Holldobler noted that cutters stridulate extrafast when they come to 
the end of their task and heave the leaf fragment into carrying position. When 
the researchers artificially vibrated a leaf, it attracted more hitchhikers 
than a leaf without an experimental buzz. The scientists suggest that the tiny 
bodyguards find their rides by listening for the stridulation.

 Ants listen for more than the buzz of their own kind, as Phil DeVries of the 
University of Oregon in Eugene shows with his singing caterpillars. The larvae 
of many species of two butterfly groups, lycaenids and riodinids, sport glands 
that ooze a sweet liquid of interest to ants. As the ants collect the bounty, 
they discourage attacks from the caterpillars' predators.

 DeVries found that caterpillars advertise their delicious presence with 
vibrations that ants can detect along quivering plant stems and leaves. He's 
recorded a considerable variety of these caterpillar calls, ranging from a 
sound, he says, like "bub . . . bub . . ." to fancier noises such as "beep ah 
ah ah beep" and "biddup . . . biddup . . . biddup."

 DeVries has also investigated whether caterpillars can fake ant sounds. The 
Maculinea butterflies would have good reason to do so, he reasons. Very young 
caterpillars topple off food plants. They lie there wiggling and making noises 
until picked up by roving ants. Perhaps a little dim about taxonomy, the ants 
bring a fallen caterpillar back to their nest and tuck it into the brood 
chamber. They don't seem to object as the newcomer eats some of the young ants 
that are its nurserymates.

 When the caterpillar finally matures, two ant species recognize their mistake 
and kill the freeloader, but a third ant leaves it unharmed. For the 
caterpillar, "there's strong selection to attract the right ant."

 When DeVries compared the sounds made by the caterpillars and ants, he found 
that despite their overall differences, "some components of the caterpillar 
calls were dead on."

 Shouting at an ant

 People don't do anywhere as well as caterpillars in communicating with ants. 
Shouting at an ant is a bit like shouting at a computer or a cat. You may not 
see any sign that you've been heard.

"Ants don't respond to sound on a human scale," says Robert Hickling of the 
National Center for Physical Acoustics at the University of Mississippi in 
Oxford. That quirk, he argues, has hobbled the study of ant acoustics for a 
century.

 Ants may not pick sounds of stridulations out of the air as people do, but-in 
theory at least-ants may respond to airborne vibrations if scientists make the 
right noise.

"It all started with the sensor," remembers Peng Lee, an acoustical and 
electrical engineer who works with Hickling. In the mid-1990s Lee was 
struggling to make a device sensitive enough to detect the dreaded pink 
bollworm just by listening for the sounds of larvae munching.

 His early version succeeded miserably well. In a field test on an Israeli 
kibbutz, the device picked up so many faraway tractors and planes that the 
technological din drowned out any bollworms.

 As Lee tinkered with the oversensitive gizmo back in Mississippi, lab 
conversation drifted to speculation on whether fire ants make noises and what 
they'd sound like if they did.

 Two decades earlier, researchers in the laboratory of Walter R. Tschinkel of 
Florida State University in Tallahassee had used less elaborate equipment to 
try to capture sounds from the imported black fire ant and others in the genus 
Solenopsis. The experiment yielded scratchy sounds from one of the black fire 
ant's larger relatives, but the invader itself revealed nothing that the 
scientists could record.

 Lee and Hickling took their new sensor out to the nearest mound of black fire 
ants and poked in the probe. "There was a big uproar," Hickling says. "You 
could hear individual ants as they passed by the microphone."

 In other experiments, the team collected the noise of some important episodes 
in ant life. For instance, the scientists provided a caterpillar and 
eavesdropped on its demise. With such a sensitive acoustic view, they recorded 
more than the ants' sounds. "You could hear the caterpillar struggling," 
Hickling says. "I felt sorry for it."

 They also recorded two colonies clashing. The thumps and thuds of activity, 
however, drowned out any stridulations from the contending armies. "The sound 
of the struggle tended to be quite loud," Hickling notes. Lee adds another 
tribulation: "I got stung a lot."

 The researchers also brought a fire ant indoors, but the recording session did 
not turn out to be easy. They didn't know how to cue the ant to make noises. 
After hours of experimentation, one of Lee's colleagues discovered that 
attaching a weight to the ant's antenna provoked a recordable sound.

 A debut selection of black fire ant recordings are available at a special 
ant-sound Web site, . The site has already attracted a query from a Hollywood 
screenwriter, Lee notes.

 Picking a relatively tranquil moment for the fire ant mound, the researchers 
played back recordings of the pandemonium in the colony. "I was expecting them 
to get all upset," Hickling recounts. However, the colony showed no sign of a 
response. "I had to backtrack somewhat," Lee understates.

 Other scientists have interpreted ants' apparent lack of response to sounds 
that interest humans as an inability to hear vibrations in the air. Hickling 
and Lee have come up with another possibility. Ants might hear only what 
acousticians call "near-field sound."

 A tiny source like an ant that makes long sound waves creates a special effect 
in the first few centimeters of the emission, Hickling explains. Such 
near-field sound decays not as the inverse of distance from the source but as 
the inverse of distance squared. An ant might respond only to this kind of 
sound, he suggests.

"It's not easy to test," Hickling points out. To create that special-effects 
zone, the sound source has to be minute compared with the wavelength. 
Broadcasting sounds from standard speakers, even ones a few inches tall, won't 
work to study this kind of hearing.

 Hickling and Lee are trying to make an ant-size sound source. They've started 
with a source that stands a few inches high and is shielded so that sound 
blares only from the front. They added a long funnel that compresses the sound 
waves and guides them to a pinhole opening. They described the project at the 
annual meeting of the Entomological Society of America in Atlanta in December 
1999.

 Holldobler notes that, so far, there's no behavioral evidence of airborne 
sound reception by the ants. He says, "There is a possibility that ants 
perceive near-field sound, or wind velocity produced by the sound wave, as has 
been shown for honey bees, but the work is preliminary as far as I can judge 
it."

 The idea of ants perceiving near-field sound strikes Tschinkel as "plausible." 
In the tight spaces inside a nest, such close-range communication might prove 
useful because chemical communication can be difficult to modulate at close 
range. The possibility of near-field-sound communication interests Tschinkel 
because, he says, "it could fill a gap."

 Acoustic studies might eventually also fill a gap in fire ant control, 
Hickling daydreams. "You can't just put a rock band over their mound and they'd 
go away-bioacoustics doesn't work like that," he acknowledges, adding, "I'm not 
sure whether I'd rather have a rock band in my yard than fire ants."

 In either case, shouting won't help.


