Researchers Probe Cell-Phone Effects: Science News Online, Feb. 12, 2000

 Researchers Probe Cell-Phone Effects

 Janet Raloff

 Cell phones are hot. Some 85 million U.S. residents-30 percent of the 
population-have joined the mobile-phone revolution. Still, Americans have been 
relatively slow to go wireless.

 Even a decade ago, when U.S. cell-phone use was a rarity, 10 percent of Swedes 
had taken the wireless plunge, says Maria Feychting of the Karolinska Institute 
in Stockholm. Today, Nordic countries remain Western leaders, with 40 percent 
of Danes, half of Norwegians and Swedes, and almost 60 percent of Finns using 
cell phones.

 Many of these people are also reporting side effects, observes Monica 
Sandstrom of the Swedish National Institute for Working Life in Umea. Last week 
at a Bioelectromagnetics Society symposium in Washington, D.C., she unveiled 
data from her agency's new survey of cell-phone users-5,000 in Norway and 
another 12,000 in Sweden.

 One-quarter of the Norwegian users, she noted, feel warmth on or behind the 
ear when they use their phones. More troubling, she said, 20 percent also 
linked frequent headaches and recurring fatigue to cell-phone use. Her agency 
saw the same trends in Sweden, though the overall rates were somewhat lower, 
Sandstrom notes. At least one of the symptoms noted, which include dizziness, 
concentration difficulties, memory loss, and a burning sensation, showed up in 
47 percent of people who reported using these wireless devices an hour or more 
daily.

 Cellular phones, which send and receive radiofrequency (RF) signals via their 
attached antennas, come in digital and analog varieties. The newer, digital 
phones broadcast their communications in discrete bursts of energy, whereas 
analog devices employ continuous signals. Being energy hogs, analog phones also 
beam eight times as much energy into the user's head as digital phones do.

 Overall, "people using analog phones reported more symptoms and more 
sensations of all kinds," Sandstrom says. However, she's quick to add, "we 
didn't measure RF emissions." Any headaches or other complaints might therefore 
trace to factors such as occupational stress, ergonomic issues, and even the 
warmth given off by a phone's battery.

 Yet cell phones' RF emissions clearly can affect the brain, says Alan W. 
Preece of the University of Bristol in England. Last April, he published a 
study in which devices simulated a phone's RF emissions, in either digital or 
analog form, while volunteers sat at a computer. The researchers could switch 
the RF energy on or off without a user knowing.

"I was looking for memory effects but didn't find any," Preece notes. Instead, 
to his surprise, RF emissions from both digital and analog signals correlated 
with a cut in the time it took users to answer simple questions. The 
improvement was small, just 15 milliseconds.

 Since then, he notes, a Finnish group recorded a similar drop in reaction time 
among people during RF exposures. And a few weeks ago, a statistical expert 
"acting on behalf of the Department of Health here [in Britain] reanalyzed my 
data," Preece told Science News. "He came up with the same results."

 While hardly a hazard, the quickened reaction times demonstrate that 
cell-phone emissions are biologically active, Preece says. He's now probing 
what's going on, scouting for changes in blood flow within the brain. He's 
especially interested in the angular gyrus, a structure important to decision 
making.

 Other scientists last week reported biological effects in animals triggered by 
bombardment with energy at power levels and frequencies typical of cell phones.

 W. Ross Adey of the University of California, Riverside, for instance, showed 
that a pregnant rat's exposure to phonelike radiation at any of three power 
levels alters the activity of an enzyme-ornithine decarboxylase-in the fetuses' 
brains. This enzyme helps create polyamines, which are chemical markers of 
stress. Surprisingly, Adey noted, the lowest input of RF energy, 0.16 watts per 
kilogram of tissue, triggered the biggest changes in polyamine concentration.

 He speculates that increased enzyme activity, which can foster certain 
cancers, "may offer an explanation" of tumors that he and his colleagues have 
observed in rats exposed to RF energy for long periods.

 While concern over possible cancer risks has dominated public debate of 
cell-phone safety, until now there have been too few long-term users of the 
technology to make epidemiological studies practical, notes Feychting. She adds 
that by pooling data from many countries, however, detecting risks for several 
types of cancers should now be possible. This summer, a 13-country study of 
brain and other head-and-neck cancers in cell-phone users will begin under the 
aegis of the International Agency for Research on Cancer in Lyon, France.

 Allen H. Frey, a Washington, D.C.-area consultant who has conducted cell-phone 
studies, hopes neurological effects won't be ignored in a rush to study cancer. 
Headaches, nausea, and reports of warming "could be merely the most obvious 
symptoms that something else is going on," he says. "There are some real 
indications of a hazard here."


