Novel diabetes strain has rapid onset: Science News Online, Feb. 5, 2000

 Novel diabetes strain has rapid onset

 Nathan Seppa

 Every year, thousands of people, young and old, experience the malaise and 
nagging thirst that are characteristic of untreated type I diabetes. Also 
called juvenile-onset diabetes, this disease stems from the death of beta cells 
in the pancreas. These cells make insulin, the hormone that regulates sugar 
metabolism. In most patients, their own immune cells do the killing.

 Japanese scientists have now confirmed that some patients have a peculiar kind 
of diabetes that doesn't fit this pattern. Instead of immune cells, an unknown 
agent-possibly a virus or a chemical in the environment-seems to destroy the 
beta cells. Moreover, these patients fall ill rapidly, the researchers report 
in the Feb. 3 New England Journal Of Medicine.

"We all have patients where we sometimes wonder what happened," says physician 
David C.W. Lau of the University of Calgary in Alberta. This study establishes 
"an important subtype of type I diabetes that is different from the 
conventional diabetes that we associate with children. . . . Diabetes is more 
complex than we previously thought."

 In most cases, physicians can ascertain that a patient has type I diabetes by 
gauging symptoms and testing for diabetes-related antibodies in the blood, a 
sure sign of an immune attack on the pancreas. However, of 56 randomly selected 
Japanese patients newly diagnosed with the disease, 11 had no trace of such 
autoimmune antibodies but still showed high sugar concentrations in the blood 
and other pancreatic abnormalities.

 Researchers took pancreas tissue samples from three of these patients. 
Examination showed no immune-cell invasion of the cell clusters that harbor 
beta cells. Tests on tissue from three of the patients with conventional type I 
diabetes revealed the expected immune attack.

 Furthermore, the 11 patients, aged 25 to 57, had had symptoms for an average 
of only 4 days before their condition drove them to see a physician, who 
diagnosed full-blown diabetes, says coauthor Akihisa Imagawa, an 
endocrinologist at Osaka University. In the other patients, the onset took 
about 50 days.

 The cause of this subtype of diabetes is unclear. "Some unknown pathogen . . . 
attacked the pancreatic beta cells," Imagawa says.

 Patients with the novel subtype of diabetes showed signs that the pancreas as 
a whole was affected, not simply the beta cells. That may be evidence of a 
viral infection, Imagawa says. Past studies have hinted at a link between 
viruses and diabetes but haven't provided solid proof.

 The pancreas damage could also arise from an environmental factor, says Ake 
Lernmark, an endocrinologist at the University of Washington in Seattle. 
Chemicals called nitrosamines, which can derive from nitrates such as those in 
smoked meats and other cured foods, have been weakly associated with increased 
diabetes incidence, he says.

 The new study "will boost research to find environmental factors that might 
actually be causing diabetes," Lernmark says.


