Hunting for Higher Dimensions: Science News Online, Feb. 19, 2000

 Hunting for Higher Dimensions Experimenters scurry to test new theories 
suggesting that extra dimensions are detectable

 By P. Weiss

 Only 2 years ago, the idea of extra dimensions inhabited a nebulous region 
somewhere between physics and science fiction.

 Many physicists had already begun to see the up-and-coming string theory as 
the next major step for theoretical physics. In that theory, everything in the 
universe is composed of tiny loops, or strings, of energy vibrating in a 
space-time that has six or seven extra dimensions beyond the seemingly endless 
three standard dimensions of space and one of time. Conveniently, however, 
those extra dimensions are compactified, as physicists say, crumpled up in a 
space so small as to be unobservable.

 The idea that extra dimensions might be larger-perhaps detectable-was 
something that scientists mostly talked about "late at night, after a lot of 
wine," says Gordon L. Kane, a theorist from the University of Michigan in Ann 
Arbor. Kane therefore felt he was walking on the wild side when he penned a 
fictional news story about experimenters discovering extra dimensions.

 Kane's story, which appeared in the May 1998 Physics Today, was one of three 
winners of an essay contest sponsored by that magazine. Basing his tale on some 
innovative theorizing published in 1990 by Ignatius Antoniadis of the Ecole 
Polytechnique in Palaiseau, France, Kane wrote of peculiar sprays of particles 
yielding "startling data." He set his experiments in 2011 at a European 
accelerator, known as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which is currently under 
construction.

 The results could imply the existence of one or two extra spatial dimensions, 
the story stated, "a surprise to everyone."

 Even by the time his article came out, however, the possibility no longer 
seemed quite as surprising as it had when he wrote it a few months earlier. 
Between the submission of Kane's story and its publication, two theoretical 
studies had come out that suddenly pushed the idea of relatively large extra 
dimensions into the spotlight.

 One study came from a team at CERN, the European Laboratory for Particle 
Physics in Geneva where LHC is being built. It examined the consequences of 
extra dimensions being 10,000 trillion times larger than the extra dimensions 
of string theory are typically imagined to be. At the larger size, still only 
about one-ten-thousandth the size of a proton, the extra dimensions might 
produce effects detectable by the current generation of particle accelerators 
or their immediate successors, such as LHC, the researchers found.

 The other study argued that certain types of extra dimensions could be even 
larger, as grand as a millimeter. They might then be accessible not only in 
colliders but in small-scale, table-top experiments as well, say researchers at 
Stanford University and the International Center for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) 
in Trieste, Italy.

 Today, teams of experimentalists in both the United States and Europe are 
searching for the signatures of extra dimensions. The hunt for such indicators 
"is certainly one of the best chances of making a very spectacular discovery in 
the next couple of years," says Joseph Lykken of the Fermi National Accelerator 
Laboratory in Batavia, Ill.

 Meanwhile, the wave of novel, extradimension theory continues to roll on. In 
the latest splash, researchers have proposed extra dimensions of infinite size.

 Imagining any of these extra dimensions isn't easy. Depending on how many 
extra dimensions there are, physicists say, they might curl into a simple loop 
or sphere or bend into a tortuous 6-dimensional pretzel popular in string 
theory. Every point in the traditional, apparently 4-dimensional universe is 
then a tiny, multidimensional volume. Theorists suggest that an extra dimension 
might be on the order of 10-35 meter.

 Physicists also measure the extra dimensions in terms of the energy needed to 
probe them. A particle accelerated to 1 trillion electron volts (TeV) has, 
according to standard arguments from quantum mechanics, a wave aspect with a 
wavelength of about 2 x 10-19 m. It can therefore explore facets of the 
subatomic world on that scale. Doubling the energy means seeing features half 
that size, and so on. So far, the smallest length scale observable with 
accelerators is a little greater than 10-19 m.

 The idea of extra dimensions dates back to at least the 1920s. At that time, 
physicist Oskar Klein, building upon work by mathematician Theodor Kaluza, 
added a curled-up fifth dimension to the familiar universe in an ingenious but 
unsuccessful attempt to unite the forces of electromagnetism and gravity.

 Physicists believe that the four forces-electromagnetic, weak, strong, and 
gravitational-were joined as a single superforce at the time of the Big Bang. 
In theory, they could merge only if the forces were about the same strength 
under conditions of high energy. However, gravity is much weaker than the 
others.

 As some researchers today explore extra dimensions, they are on the lookout 
for implications regarding unification of the four forces. Other scientists 
striving for models that unify the forces have found extra dimensions a useful 
tool.

 Testing unification theories directly appears to be impossible, however, since 
the phenomenon would only occur at energies in the range of 1013 to 1016 TeV. 
The highest-energy collisions achieved in accelerators today approach only 1 
TeV.

 CERN theorists Keith R. Dienes, Emilian Dudas, and Tony Gherghetta wondered 
what would happen if they uncurled one or more of the extra dimensions in 
string theory to 10-19 m, the largest size that would not already have been 
detected. To their surprise, they discovered that the three nongravitational 
forces could unify in the energy range of 1 TeV. This unification could then be 
observed directly in LHC and indirectly in less-powerful colliders.

 They posted their study on the physics archive () maintained by Los Alamos 
(N.M.) National Laboratory in March 1998.

 For physicists, an energy of 1 TeV was already a landmark. Both theory and 
experiment had established that a mixing of the electromagnetic and weak forces 
begins to take place a little below that energy level. Physicists have been 
troubled because unification of even three forces requires much higher 
energies. They refer to this puzzle as the hierarchy problem.

 Scientists at Stanford University and ICTP used extra dimensions in their 
attempt to solve the hierarchy problem. They focused first on gravity and 
looked for a way to make it comparable in strength to the other forces at an 
energy of about 1 TeV.

 They accomplished that feat by hypothesizing extra dimensions that affect only 
gravity and are as large as 1 mm. Only a yawning gap in the scientific record 
makes such extra dimensions feasible. While physicists have probed the other 
forces of nature down to nearly 10-19 m, they've made extensive measurements of 
gravity only down to about 1 centimeter.

 To describe extra dimensions that would affect gravity alone, the 
Stanford-Trieste researchers made use of entities known as branes. Those 
complex, membranous objects, which can have many spatial dimensions themselves, 
have become a central part of string theory. In some versions of the theory, 
the universe itself is a brane with three spatial dimensions-a 3-brane-moving 
through a higher-dimensional space-time.

 String theory dictates that any extra dimensions outside a brane affect only 
gravity. In other words, just the force-carrying particles of gravity, called 
gravitons, could travel in the space-time beyond the brane, leaving the other 
forces confined to the brane. By contrast, extra dimensions associated with the 
brane influence all the forces.

 Therefore, even if gravity boasts an intrinsic strength similar to that of the 
other three forces, because it diffuses throughout the external space-time, 
also called the bulk, its apparent strength in the 3-brane universe is much 
reduced.

 Any extra dimensions affecting gravity would alter Isaac Newton's 
inverse-square law, which holds that objects attract each other with a force 
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The 
theorists calculated that one extra dimension in the bulk would have a scale of 
100 million kilometers-about the distance from Earth to the sun. That option 
isn't feasible because Earth's orbit obeys the inverse-square law.

 If there were two extra dimensions, however, each would have a scale of 0.1 to 
1.0 mm-large enough to be detectable but small enough not to be ruled out by 
tests of the inverse-square law to date. With more extra dimensions, the length 
scale shrinks far below the millimeter range.

 Combining both approaches, "you wind up with a very compelling picture," says 
Dienes, a CERN team member, now at the University of Arizona in Tucson. "These 
two scenarios together lower all the fundamental high-energy scales of physics."

 Inspired by these proposals, experimenters are looking for signs of extra 
dimensions both at accelerators and in gravitational laboratories.

 Most of the accelerator searches have begun in the past year, says Kingman 
Cheung of the University of California, Davis. Before that, researchers had 
been translating the theorists' proposals into concrete predictions. Cheung 
presented a summary of ongoing and proposed searches last December at the 
Seventh International Symposium on Particles, Strings, and Cosmology '99 
(PASCOS '99) conference at Tahoe City, Calif.

 To find extra dimensions of the type studied by the CERN group, experimenters 
are on the alert for what they call Kaluza-Klein towers, which are associated 
with carriers of the nongravitational forces, such as the photon of 
electromagnetism and the Z boson of the weak force. Excitations of energy 
within the extra dimensions would turn each of these carriers into a family of 
increasingly massive clones of the original particle-analogous to the harmonics 
of a musical note.

"I like to think of these Kaluza-Klein states as echoes off the fifth 
dimension," Dienes says.

 Because these towers tend to magnify the strengths of the forces, their 
influence might even be detected at energies below those at which the towers 
themselves become apparent, researchers say.

 Going back through the data from an earlier run of CERN's Large 
Electron-Positron Collider (LEP), researchers have found no evidence of such 
extradimensional influences at up to an energy of 4 TeV, Cheung told Science 
News. The CERN team's extra dimensions must therefore be smaller than 0.5 x 
10-19 m. The towers might become detectable in 6 or 7 years, when the completed 
LHC will be able to probe energies of up to 14 TeV, he says.

 Gravity doesn't lend itself to measurement in accelerators because the other 
forces overwhelm its tiny influence on particle interactions. "The graviton is 
so weakly interacting, it doesn't enter the picture," Cheung says.

 Instead, physicists typically make precision measurements of gravity by using 
extremely delicate experiments, named after the 18th-century scientist Henry 
Cavendish, that determine the force between two suspended masses. At very small 
separations, however, electrostatic influences and molecular interactions known 
as van der Waals forces again swamp the gravitational effects.

 By conducting Cavendish experiments with extremely sensitive equipment, at 
least two teams of scientists are testing for millimeter-scale extra 
dimensions. If those dimensions exist, gravity in the submillimeter range would 
increase not according to Newton's inverse-square law but in inverse proportion 
to the fourth power of the separation.

 Researchers at Stanford University led by Aharon Kapitulnik have developed a 
micromachined cantilever that reacts to the gravitational tug of an arm 
swinging back and forth 80 micrometers beneath it. A laser detects motion in 
the cantilever, which is chilled to 4 kelvins to reduce random thermal motion.

 The experimenters intend to measure not only gravity but also van der Waals 
and other short-distance forces. However, because of the hubbub over extra 
dimensions right now, "we are neglecting all other experiments," Kapitulnik 
says.

 Similarly in Boulder, Colo., a tungsten strip resembling a diving board 
weighing a few grams sits in a vacuum over another strip of tungsten. As a 
motor rapidly wiggles the diving board up and down, scientists look for motion 
in the strip below. A next-generation instrument operating at 4 K will 
eventually replace the current room-temperature version, says John C. Price of 
the University of Colorado, who leads the effort.

 Given the dearth of knowledge about gravity in the subcentimeter range, the 
group is looking for any kind of deviation from expectations, not just 
extradimensional effects, he says. Nonetheless, the excitement about extra 
dimensions helps spur the group on, Price says.

 If the strength of gravity takes a sharp turn upward at around 1 TeV, as the 
Stanford-Trieste scenario implies, an opportunity opens for testing this theory 
also in accelerators. Collisions at such energies could produce gravitons in 
large numbers, and some of these particles would immediately vanish into the 
extra dimensions, carrying energy with them. Experimenters would look for an 
unusual pattern of so-called missing energy events.

 This and more subtle effects of extra dimensions could show up at existing 
accelerators, such as LEP and the Tevatron at Fermilab, only if the dimensions 
have scales nearly as big as a millimeter. The powerful LHC will greatly 
improve the chances for detecting missing energy events and other prominent 
extradimension effects.

 Despite his award-winning literary fling 2 years ago, Kane has soured on large 
extra dimensions. He remains a firm believer in six or seven extra dimensions, 
he says, but only at about 10-35 m. The theory is cleaner that way, he argues, 
with just the three familiar, very large spatial dimensions, and the rest 
reduced to the scale of strings themselves.

"If I was trying to win a contest today, I'd write on something else," he says.

 By contrast to Kane's insistence on small extra dimensions, one pair of 
researchers recently came up with an argument for extra dimensions of unlimited 
extent, similar in size to the familiar dimensions. These scientists noted that 
the 3-brane, like any other object with energy or mass, would warp space-time 
and thereby confine gravitons to a region just slightly larger than the brane.

 The warping would also localize extra dimensions' effects on Newton's 
inverse-square law of gravity to subcentimeter distances not yet explored. Such 
localization allows the dimensions themselves to stretch indefinitely, argue 
Lisa Randall of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Princeton 
University and Raman Sundrum of Boston University. This novel idea, described 
in the Dec. 6, 1999 Physical Review Letters, has many implications and may 
suggest new indicators of extra dimensions. The work has already sparked dozens 
of journal and online articles.

 Whether or not large extra dimensions actually show up in the laboratory, 
researchers are sparing no effort to push the limits of one hidden dimension on 
which everyone agrees: imagination.


