Survey raises issue of isolated Web users: Science News Online, Feb. 26, 2000

> Survey raises issue of isolated Web users

 Bruce Bower

 Boot up, log on, and tune out. That's the mantra of a small but rapidly 
growing number of Internet users, according to a controversial national survey 
released last week.

 People who spend 10 or more hours per week on the Internet substantially cut 
down the amount of time they devote to talking with friends and family, both in 
person and by telephone, say two Stanford University political scientists.

"The more hours people use the Internet, the less time they spend with real 
human beings," contends Norman H. Nie, who directed the survey with his 
colleague Lutz Erbring. "The Internet could be the ultimate isolating 
technology that reduces our participation in communities even more than 
television did."

 Only 15 percent of people surveyed qualified as heavy Internet users, roaming 
the Web at least 10 hours per week. However, the proportion of heavy users is 
steadily growing, Nie asserts.

 About 55 percent of the population now has access to the Internet, the survey 
finds. Regular Internet users, who log on for at least 5 hours per week, 
accounted for 36 percent of people surveyed.

 Other findings include:

 One-quarter of regular Internet users say that Web activities had reduced 
their time talking with friends and family, as well as time spent attending 
events outside the home. One-quarter of the regular Internet users who are 
employed say that the Web had increased the amount of time they worked at home, 
without diminishing their office work. Sixty percent of regular Internet users 
say that they had reduced their television viewing, and one-third allot less 
time to reading newspapers. The lowest rates of Internet use occur among the 
least educated and oldest people, although those with Internet access use the 
Web much as others do. The most common Internet activities are sending and 
receiving electronic mail and searching for information. About one-quarter of 
Internet users say that they have made an online purchase. Only 10 percent 
participate in online stock trading, banking, or auctions.

 The survey consisted of a representative national sample of 4,113 adults in 
2,689 households. It was conducted by the Stanford Institute for the 
Quantitative Study of Society and InterSurvey, a company cofounded by Nie and 
partly funded by Stanford. Survey data are available at .

 The researchers provided free Web TVs to people who agreed to answer the 
surveys, which they received and returned through the devices supplied.

 Nie's emphasis on social isolation recalls an earlier study in which 
depression and loneliness rose among new Internet users (SN: 9/12/98, p. 168). 
Other data, however, suggest that membership in online groups benefits some 
people (SN: 10/17/98, p. 245: ).

 Social isolation may have escalated in the small proportion of heavy Internet 
users surveyed, but that doesn't mean that future heavy users will respond in 
the same way, comments sociologist Lee Sproull of New York University.

 Those currently employing the Internet for more than 10 hours per week are-as 
the new survey finds-highly educated and relatively affluent, and they often 
use the Web at home to do projects for their work, Sproull holds.

 Nie and Erbring didn't examine whether employers have exploited the Web to 
extract more labor from their employees, she says. Hours spent working at home 
may promote isolation more than inherent qualities of Internet use, she asserts.

 Changes in computer technology over the next decade will affect social 
interaction in ways that no one can foretell, Sproull says.


