Great Computations: Science News Online, Mar. 4, 2000

 Great Computations Owners of home computers join researchers in cracking 
problems and crunching data

 By I. Peterson

 Computers at home or in the office often sit idle for minutes, hours, or days 
at a time. The Internet now allows researchers to take advantage of this 
enormous reservoir of unused computer power.

 More than 1.6 million people have downloaded software to sift through signals 
collected by the Arecibo radio telescope in Puerto Rico as part of a search for 
signs of intelligent extraterrestrial life. Investigators at the University of 
California, Berkeley manage the year-old project, known as SETI@home, and 
consolidate the results (SN: 9/18/99, p. 187).

 A recent call for people interested in running large models of the world's 
climate brought 15,000 replies within 2 weeks. "The response was pretty 
impressive," says Myles R. Allen of the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in 
Chilton, England. "It looks like we're going ahead."

 Founded in 1996, a worldwide effort to identify record-breaking primes-numbers 
evenly divisible only by themselves and 1-has attracted more than 13,000 
participants to the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) (SN: 2/21/98, 
p. 127). A smaller effort focuses on factoring large numbers to test encryption 
methods that safeguard information transmitted on the Internet.

 Beyond the satisfaction of contributing to ongoing scientific and mathematical 
research, such participation can sometimes lead to a modicum of fame and even 
fortune.

 Last summer, using GIMPS software on his home computer, technology consultant 
Nayan Hajratwala of Plymouth, Mich., discovered the first prime number with at 
least 1 million decimal digits. As a result, he qualified for a prize of 
$50,000 offered by the Electronic Frontier Foundation in San Francisco, to spur 
development of cooperative computing technology. The foundation has since 
announced that it will award $100,000 to the discoverer of the first prime with 
at least 10 million digits.

"I still participate in the [GIMPS] program, and I am always looking for more 
computers to add to the search," Hajratwala says.

 Anyone can join in the hunt. All it takes is a desktop computer with idle time 
on its chips and a connection to the Internet. Indeed, the number of 
opportunities for taking part in group computational efforts continues to grow, 
and several Internet companies now focus on organizing and coordinating such 
projects.

"The combination of the Internet and the proliferation of home computers has 
resulted in one of the most significant new scientific and mathematical tools," 
says retired engineer Harvey Dubner of Ridgewood, N.J., who keeps his own 
computers occupied with several prime pursuits. "Using normally wasted computer 
power to attack problems that cannot be solved in any other way is truly 
wonderful and important."

 A fascination with gargantuan numbers, especially those that are primes, has 
played a central role in the rise of collective computing.

 A decade ago, powerful supercomputers dominated the hunt for trophy-class 
prime numbers. Computer programmer George Woltman of Orlando, Fla., organized 
GIMPS to challenge that dominance.

 The search for Mersenne primes, named for the French monk and mathematician 
Marin Mersenne, concerns numbers of the form 2n - 1, where the exponent n is 
itself a prime. Written in binary notation, a Mersenne number consists of an 
unbroken string of 1s. Nearly all of the largest known primes are numbers of 
this form.

 To facilitate searches for Mersenne primes, Woltman wrote a small, efficient 
computer program to test whether a number is a prime and made the software 
available on a Web site. His program relied on an ingenious computational 
algorithm invented by Richard E. Crandall of Reed College in Portland, Ore., to 
speed up certain computer operations. Anyone with even a modest personal 
computer could download and use the software to check lists of candidate 
numbers for primes. Because the computer is not connected to the Internet 
during the hours while the program runs, it is not vulnerable to unauthorized 
use by outsiders.

 The project quickly attracted hundreds of participants. To manage the 
calculations, Scott Kurowski of Entropia.com () in Campbell, Calif., developed 
the PrimeNet server, which now automatically doles out chunks of work and 
gathers results from thousands of copies of Woltman's program residing on more 
than 22,000 computers throughout the world.

 Handling massive amounts of data processing over the Internet, the system 
represents a "new kind of computing service," Kurowski says.

 To date, GIMPS participants have found the four largest known primes.

 Mersenne primes are not the only targets of large group efforts. Last fall, 
Crandall, Ernst W. Mayer of Cupertino, Calif., and Jason S. Papadopoulos of the 
University of Maryland at College Park performed a massive calculation to prove 
that the 24th Fermat number, which is more than 5 million digits long, is not a 
prime.

 That was the biggest computation ever done to obtain a simple "yes-or-no" 
answer, Crandall contends. It required 100 quadrillion (1017) computer 
operations, comparable to the number needed to create the animated movie A 
Bug's Life.

 A Fermat number has the form 22n + 1. The first Fermat number is 22 + 1, or 5; 
the second is 24 + 1, or 17; and the third is 28 + 1, or 257. Written in binary 
form, a Fermat number consists of 2n - 1 zeroes sandwiched between an initial 
and a final 1.

 In the early 1600s, French mathematician Pierre de Fermat conjectured that all 
such numbers are primes. That turns out not to be true. The first four Fermat 
numbers are prime, but the fifth is divisible by 641. Among the rest of the 
known Fermat numbers, up to and now including the 24th, none are prime.

 Proving that a number is not a prime is much easier than actually determining 
its prime factors. No one has yet found even one prime factor of the 24th 
Fermat number, for example.

 Crandall is now working with Kurowski to set up a system that would allow 
individuals and teams to join forces to factor large Fermat numbers. Crandall 
himself has offered modest cash prizes to anyone who finds new factors.

 Esoteric pursuits of big numbers have value, Crandall notes. They have, for 
example, spurred the development of computational techniques useful for solving 
other problems.

"Who knows where an idea will lead?" Crandall argues. Obscure notions can 
translate into tremendous benefits years later, he says.

 Factoring has long intrigued and perplexed number theorists. Multiplication is 
easy, but the inverse process of finding the prime factors of a nonprime, or 
composite, number is horribly time-consuming when the numbers get large.

 The assumed difficulty of factoring large numbers plays a crucial role in the 
so-called RSA encryption system, which is widely used to safeguard credit card 
numbers and other information transmitted across the Internet. To unscramble 
intercepted data, a snoop's computer must factor a large number into its two 
prime-number components.

 How big should the numbers be to ensure an adequate level of security? Since 
1988, researchers have organized themselves into teams to test the security of 
these schemes (SN: 10/22/88, p. 263). Last year, one worldwide effort required 
5 months on 300 personal computers and a Cray supercomputer to crack a 
155-digit number into two 78-digit primes (SN: 10/2/99, p. 221).

 Nowadays, information-security companies and other organizations occasionally 
offer cash prizes for either factoring numbers of a certain size or testing the 
security of alternative mathematical schemes for encrypting information.

 The resulting competition has helped drive the development of increasingly 
efficient and refined methods for factoring, pitting one scheme against 
another. It has also produced strong rivalries. Last fall, for example, a 
global effort involving 195 volunteers and 740 computers demonstrated how a 
cryptographic system based on functions called elliptic-curve discrete 
logarithms could outperform an RSA scheme based on factoring.

 The nonprofit Internet company known as distributed.net () has coordinated 
several group attacks on cryptographic schemes, earning several cash awards. In 
January, its 62-day effort involving 38,000 contributors won a contest 
sponsored by a French security firm.

 Most projects don't offer prizes, however. The problems themselves are 
intriguing or have research value. The GIMPS Web site at  maintains a list of 
mathematical research efforts soliciting support from individuals or teams.

 Computational number theory isn't the only field where individuals can 
contribute computing resources. "There are plenty of deep questions that could 
profit from extensive distributed computing," says Joe P. Buhler of the 
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, Calif., who has 
participated in several such efforts.

 The SETI@home project takes advantage of idle computers to perform large-scale 
data processing. A colorful screensaver pops up whenever a computer is running 
the program, available at .

 Other opportunities span fields such as chemistry, molecular biology, 
epidemiology, population dynamics, and climate modeling.

 In the Oct. 14, 1999 Nature, Allen proposed recruiting people for the 
demanding task of forecasting climate. "For a 50-year forecast, we would first 
need to perform large numbers of simulations of the past 50 years, both with 
and without external influences such as increasing greenhouse gases," he notes. 
"We could then discard all those perturbed models that were either inconsistent 
with the observed record or inconsistent with our (much less certain) estimate 
of what the 20th century would have been like in the absence of external 
influences."

 Allen calls the proposed effort Casino-21. "This experiment would introduce an 
entirely new form of climate prediction: a fuzzy prediction, reflecting the 
range of risks and probabilities, rather than a single &lsquobest-guess&rsquo 
forecast," he says. "We don't have the computing resources to do this [fuzzy 
prediction] any other way."

 There's even the possibility of worldwide fame for the participant running the 
model that makes the most accurate forecast, Allen adds, "and a nice 
screensaver, of course."

 Participants can get into trouble, however, if they don't own the computer 
that they're using to run a climate model, check Mersenne numbers, or crunch 
radio-telescope data.

 In September 1998, computer consultant Aaron Blosser of Lakewood, Colo., found 
himself under arrest, accused of interfering with the operation of computers at 
the Denver-based US West phone company. With the permission of a supervisor, 
Blosser had installed GIMPS software on the company's computers to search for 
Mersenne primes.

 Soon after, computers at US West's facility in Phoenix, Ariz., started to take 
as long as 5 minutes, rather than just 3 to 5 seconds, to retrieve telephone 
numbers. Company investigators discovered Blosser's GIMPS program, blamed it 
for the slowdown, and called in the FBI, which searched Blosser's home and 
confiscated his computers.

 Blosser now faces the possibility of a misdemeanor charge of computer fraud 
and perhaps a fine and an indeterminate amount of restitution to US West for 
the cost of removing the software from any machine he had installed it on.

 The lesson is clear. "Do not install your own software onto a work PC, or you 
could end up just like me," Blosser warns. "If you do not own the machine 
you're running the program on, you are in fact breaking the law if you don't 
receive permission, in writing, from the owner of the machine."

 At the same time, Blosser adds, "I still believe in the validity of many of 
the ongoing research efforts, [especially] GIMPS. I can only hope that . . . 
companies and universities would be willing to explore the possibility of 
allowing their vast resources to be used in these projects."


