Melting nuclei re-create Big Bang broth: Science News Online, Feb. 19, 2000

 Melting nuclei re-create Big Bang broth

 Peter Weiss

 A powerful particle accelerator in Switzerland may have briefly reproduced an 
ancient state of matter that pervaded the universe in the first microseconds 
after its birth, researchers have announced.

 If confirmed, the findings from the European Laboratory for Particle Physics 
(CERN) in Geneva indicate that scientists have glimpsed a substance governed by 
titanic effects called color forces. Researchers are eager to study properties 
of the bizarre material, which may also exist inside collapsed stars known as 
neutron stars.

 CERN investigators smashed lead nuclei flying at nearly light's speed into 
other nuclei in fixed targets. The collisions produced fireballs 100,000 times 
hotter than the sun's core and 20 times the density of an atom's nucleus. In 
such microfurnaces, theorists propose, protons and neutrons may dissolve and 
momentarily set free a furious swarm, or plasma, of quarks and gluons. Quarks 
possess a characteristic that physicists call color, which is loosely analogous 
to electric charge. Under normal conditions the potent color force keeps quarks 
and gluons tightly confined within the nuclear particles.

 Researchers have sought the quark-gluon plasma since at least the mid-1980s 
(SN: 10/8/88, p. 229). In their Feb. 10 announcement, the CERN teams reported 
finding traces perhaps not of the plasma itself-which has a very narrow 
scientific definition-but of something closely akin to it.

"All that we know is that we have evidence for a state in which quarks and 
gluons are deconfined," says Federico Antinori of the Instituto Nazionale di 
Fisica Nucleare in Padova, Italy.

 Since 1994, seven separate CERN teams have studied lead-lead and lead-gold 
collisions at the laboratory's Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) accelerator. Some 
of those groups have previously reported findings that also hinted, although 
less strongly, at the quark-gluon plasma (SN: 9/21/96, p. 190: ). For the 
latest announcement, all the teams put their most up-to-date findings together 
like pieces of a puzzle, Antinori says.

"Some individual signals may be controversial, but when you fit the picture 
together, the evidence is compelling," he argues.

"All this agrees with what would be expected," concurs Johann Rafelski at the 
University of Arizona in Tucson. "CERN has done great, significant work."

 Some physicists, however, remain unconvinced. "The important thing is the 
evidence for deconfined matter. I don't feel that it is compelling," comments 
James Nagle of Columbia University. Although he says the SPS research is of 
high quality, Nagle contends that many other physicists share his skepticism.

 The timing of the announcement has also raised eyebrows. Next month, the new 
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory in 
Upton, N.Y., begins its much-heralded search for the quark-gluon plasma.

 CERN reports measurements indicating that SPS packed sufficient wallop to make 
a quark-gluon plasma. Other signs, also indirect, include anomalous abundances 
of certain quark types within particles formed when fireballs cooled. When CERN 
scientists combed their data for direct evidence, however, such as the gamma 
rays that physicists expect such plasma to emit, the signals they identified 
were unconvincing.

 Stronger signs could show up soon at the new collider, where nuclei will smash 
together with 10 times greater energy than at SPS, scientists say. Although 
disappointed that CERN may have beaten the Brookhaven facility to the punch, 
RHIC director Satoshi Ozaki welcomed the findings as "good news." Assuming they 
are correct, "we are now sure we can study [the new state of matter] in detail 
and establish what it is," he says.


