Marrow Can Hide Breast Cancer Cells: Science News Online, Feb. 26, 2000

> Marrow Can Hide Breast Cancer Cells

 Nathan Seppa

 Breast cancer's ability to silently spread to various parts of the body via 
the bloodstream has frustrated physicians for decades. Several studies in the 
past few years, however, have detected stray tumor cells in the bone marrow of 
breast cancer patients after surgery. This suggests that these cells, which 
were carried there by the blood, might herald a relapse elsewhere.

 Scientists in Germany now have evidence that patients carrying such aberrant 
cells are indeed more likely to die from cancer or have cancer appear in 
nonbreast tissue than are patients without the cells.

 The discovery may eventually open a new avenue that physicians can follow to 
determine a patient's risk of cancer recurrence, says study coauthor Wolfgang 
Janni, a gynecological oncologist at Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich. 
Such information could also help clarify what kind of treatment a person needs 
when first diagnosed with the disease, he says.

 Janni and his team analyzed bone-marrow samples from 552 breast cancer 
patients attending clinics in Augsburg and Munich between 1994 and 1997. The 
patients underwent breast surgery and received drug or radiation treatments, or 
both, according to standard protocols.

 The researchers found that 199 of these patients had tumor cells in their bone 
marrow at the time of diagnosis. At the end of 4 years, 49 of these women had 
died of cancer-related causes. Of the 353 patients without the aberrant cells, 
only 22 had died.

 Therefore, patients harboring the tumor cells were four times as likely to 
succumb to cancer as the others were, the researchers report in the Feb. 24 New 
England Journal of Medicine.

 Among the 552 patients, the scientists also identified 301 in whom the initial 
breast cancer hadn't spread to lymph nodes. Of these, 14 of the 100 who 
harbored cancer cells in bone marrow died of cancer-related disease during the 
study, while only 2 of the 201 who didn't have evidence of cancer in the marrow 
died.

 The study "is certainly an important report in this field," says John W. Park, 
an oncologist at the University of California, San Francisco.

 In all, 135 of the 552 patients had a cancer relapse of some sort. The 28 
women in whom cancer recurred in breast tissue were no more likely to have 
harbored cancerous cells in their bone marrow than women who stayed free of 
breast cancer were, the scientists found.

 However, the 107 patients in whom cancer cropped up elsewhere were 
significantly more likely to have these cells. For example, of 19 patients in 
whom cancer had spread only to bone, 18 had the aberrant cells in their bone 
marrow. Cancer recurrence in other tissues was less closely correlated with the 
stray tumor cells' presence.

 The scientists also analyzed marrow from 191 patients with nonmalignant breast 
problems, such as benign cysts. Of these, only two had tumor cells in the 
marrow, possibly signs of an undetected cancer elsewhere in their bodies, the 
researchers suggest.

"We are learning from this study and others that cancer cells get out [of the 
breast] very early in the disease," escaping via the lymph system or the blood, 
says David N. Krag, a surgical oncologist at the University of Vermont in 
Burlington. While the findings won't immediately change the way physicians 
treat patients, eventually-after more research-a consensus will emerge as to 
whether this test should be done routinely on breast cancer patients, Park says.

"We think that in the future, [aberrant-cell] detection might help us to 
identify those people who should get adjuvant [supplemental] therapy," Janni 
says.

 Currently, finding cancer cells in a breast cancer patient's lymph nodes 
doubles the risk of recurrence to about 60 percent. These patients receive 
aggressive treatment.

 If further research can verify that cancer-free lymph nodes and bone marrow 
identify a sub group of patients at very low risk for relapse, physicians may 
be able to spare these patients from arduous therapy after surgery, says 
Barbara L. Smith of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, writing in the 
same journal issue.


