Two Meningitis Bacteria Yield Genomes: Science News Online, Feb. 19, 2000

 Two Meningitis Bacteria Yield Genomes

 John Travis

 In many people, Neisseria meningitidis resides quietly in the nose or throat, 
doing no harm. In others, the bacterium invades and inflames the tissue that 
surrounds the brain and spinal cord, causing meningitis, a disease fatal in 
about 10 percent of cases.

 This week at the Fourth Annual Conference on Microbial Genomes in Chantilly, 
Va., researchers announced that they have sequenced all the genes of two common 
strains of the microbe. Those genome data have already helped the scientists 
identify bacterial proteins that may lead to a much-needed vaccine for one of 
those strains.

 Completing the bacterial genomes "is a major advance in our understanding of 
this important pathogen," says microbiologist David S. Stephens of Emory 
University School of Medicine in Atlanta. "It's not going to fully solve the 
question of how this organism causes disease, but it's a step in the right 
direction."

 Although N. meningitidis comes in more than a dozen strains, three of them, A, 
B, and C, account for most of the bacterial meningitis worldwide. The B and C 
strains cause sporadic meningitis outbreaks in Europe and the Americas, while 
the A strain periodically unleashes devastating epidemics in Africa. In 1996 
and 1997, for example, more than 200,000 Africans developed meningitis-A and 
around 20,000 died.

 At the Chantilly meeting, scientists from the Sanger Centre in Cambridge, 
England, reported their recently completed sequence of the A strain. 
Investigators from the Institute for Genomic Research in Rockville, Md., the 
University of Oxford in England, and Chiron Corp. in Siena, Italy, described 
their sequencing of the B strain.

 While it's often difficult to identify every gene just by scanning a DNA 
sequence, the researchers estimate that each of the strains has more than 2,100 
genes. For the B strain, only about 60 percent of those genes have an obvious 
function, says Richard Moxon of the University of Oxford.

 Nearly 200 genes in the B strain do not appear in the A strain. Most of those 
genes remain a mystery, says Moxon, but a few encode toxins and other proteins 
that may explain why the strains affect people differently.

 There's great hope, he adds, that the genomes will lead to novel antibiotics 
and vaccines against N. meningitidis. Current vaccines consist of the complex 
carbohydrate, known as a polysaccharide, that makes up the protective capsule 
around the bacterium. Researchers have had to develop several vaccines because 
each strain has a unique polysaccharide.

 For the B strain, however, there's no capsule-based vaccine because part of 
its polysaccharide is identical to a human molecule. Scientists fear that 
immunizing people with the bacterial molecule would generate an autoimmune 
disorder.

 Chiron has already used the B-strain genome to identify other vaccine 
candidates. The researchers scanned the bacterium's genome for signs of genes 
that encode surface proteins or exported proteins. From about 600 leads, they 
confirmed a set of novel surface proteins.

 When the investigators immunized mice with each of them, more than two dozen 
of the proteins triggered antibodies that killed N. meningitidis. The company 
will now evaluate whether any of those proteins can provide protection against 
the B strain in people.

 Scientists also hope that they can develop better vaccines for other strains 
of the bacterium. The current ones can't be given to infants and don't generate 
enduring immunity-their protective effect lasts about 5 years at most. Public 
health officials therefore wait for meningitis outbreaks before they advocate 
mass immunizations.

 The Sanger Centre now plans to sequence strain C. The genomes should 
ultimately elucidate the bacterium's biology. Moxon and his coworkers, for 
example, found a novel way that the B strain acquires iron from a host and 
unearthed several genes that may help N. meningitidis survive inside cells. 
"These genomes have a lot to offer," says Moxon.


