Good Readers May Get Perceptual Lift: Science News Online, March 18, 2000

> Good Readers May Get Perceptual Lift

 Bruce Bower

 Few educational topics incite as much disagreement as how best to teach 
grade-schoolers to read, especially considering the many children who fail to 
attain literacy. A new study adds to this debate by exploring two perceptual 
abilities that may give kids a leg up on learning to read.

 The results imply that training children in these perceptual areas would 
provide a boost to both traditional phonics and meaning-based approaches to 
reading instruction, contend experimental psychologist Joel B. Talcott of 
University Laboratory of Physiology in Oxford, England, and his colleagues.

 Among literate 10-year-olds, those best able to detect modulations, or shifts 
in pitch, of low-frequency sounds proved most adept at reading words and 
manipulating speech sounds, Talcott's group reports. Moreover, those with the 
keenest eyes for spotting changes in the motion of dots across a computer 
screen exhibited the best spelling skills.

 This combination of results indicates that primary aspects of hearing and 
vision separately influence children's ability to read, the researchers contend 
in the March 14 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 Other research suggests that brain disturbances affecting sound and visual 
perception may contribute to the severe reading deficits known as dyslexia (SN: 
6/5/99, p. 362). If those findings and the new data hold up, they will support 
the theory that dyslexia falls at the disadvantageous end of a normal 
distribution of brain processes that underlie reading, Talcott and his 
coworkers say. A contrasting theory portrays dyslexia as a distinct 
neurological disorder.

 The scientists studied 32 children, all 10 years old, who attended the same 
elementary-school class. None had any recognized learning disabilities.

 On an acoustic task, each child indicated which tone in pairs of low-frequency 
and high-frequency tones contained modulations. Spoken language occurs at a low 
frequency. The youngsters also performed a visual task by indicating as quickly 
as possible when dots moving in clusters across a computer screen reversed 
direction.

 On tests probing for understanding of speech sounds, the building blocks of 
reading, participants tried to pronounce nonphonetically spelled words (such as 
"colonel") and nonsense words (such as "tegwop"). They also attempted to follow 
instructions to manipulate speech sounds in words, such as swapping the first 
sounds of "little" and "pup" to make "pittle, lup."

 On a spelling task, children viewed pairs of words, each containing a real 
word and a nonsense word that sounded the same but were spelled differently. 
They tried to identify real words, such as "rain" instead of "rane."

 Low-frequency, but not high-frequency, tone sensitivity tended to coincide 
with higher scores on speech-sound tests, and visual-motion sensitivity 
accompanied better spelling performance, even when the researchers accounted 
for the kids' intelligence and overall reading ability.

 Such findings suggest that if teachers train youngsters to detect rapidly 
presented acoustic and visual stimuli, reading instruction will benefit, 
asserts neuroscientist Paula Tallal of Rutgers University in Newark, N.J., in a 
comment published with the new study. Tallal is cofounder of a company that 
produces computer programs designed to improve acoustic perception in beginning 
readers.

 Basic visual and auditory processes undoubtedly contribute to reading skill, 
remarks psychologist Marilyn J. Adams of Bolt, Beranek & Newman in Cambridge, 
Mass., a private research and consulting firm. "But at this point, it's a leap 
of faith to say that [such findings] have implications for teaching kids to 
read better," Adams says.

 Joel B. Talcott University Laboratory of Physiology Parks Road Oxford OX1 EPT 
United Kingdom

 Paula Tallal Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Rutgers 
University Newark, NJ 07102


