Chocolate Hearts: Science News Online, March 18, 2000

> Chocolate Hearts

 Yummy and good medicine?

 Janet Raloff

 More than 35 million heart-shaped boxes of chocolate changed hands in the 
United States on Valentine's Day this year. The holiday's total chocolate sales 
approached $1 billion. Yet this confection's link to hearts is extending even 
beyond the lucrative candy business.

 Chocolate and cocoa powder are derived from beans that contain hefty 
quantities of natural antioxidants called flavonoids. In recent years, research 
has correlated consumption of tea, red wine, and other foods rich in these 
compounds with a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease.

 Realizing that this observation might transform chocolate's reputation from 
junk food into health-promoting snack, candy companies and the American Cocoa 
Research Institute (ACRI) in McLean, Va., have begun pumping money into studies 
of chocolate's antioxidants.

 Those investments now hint at big payoffs. New findings-many reported for the 
first time last month in Washington, D.C., at the annual meeting of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)-suggest that 
chocolate's chemistry confers cardiovascular benefits.

 Though preliminary, the research indicates that cocoa and chocolates not only 
contain natural compounds that can protect the heart and blood vessels but also 
that the quantities present in commercial products may be sufficient to exert 
measurable effects.

 These studies are prompting manufacturers to reevaluate how they make 
chocolate, since some techniques unintentionally eliminate flavonoids. Mars, 
Inc., recently developed a proprietary process to preserve flavonoids. By next 
month, the company plans to be labeling U.S. products made with the process, 
which they call Cocoapro. Then, observes Harold H. Schmitz, Mars' director of 
nutrition and analytical services in Hackettstown, N.J., consumers can identify 
chocolates retaining much of a cocoa bean's initial flavonoid riches.

 High potency

 A 40-gram serving of milk chocolate typically contains around 400 milligrams 
of antioxidants, about the same quantity as a glass of red wine, according to 
research published last year by Joe A. Vinson of the University of Scranton 
(Pa.). Dark-chocolate aficionados will be happy to learn that a serving of 
their favorite contains more than twice that quantity-roughly the same amount 
as a cup of black tea. Unsweetened powdered cocoa starts out with almost twice 
as much of these antioxidants as dark chocolate. But to make a cup of hot 
chocolate, the cocoa is diluted with water or milk and sugar, so the flavonoid 
total per serving plummets to about half of that present in milk chocolate.

 At least as important as the total amount of flavonoids, however, is the 
potency of these antioxidants, Vinson notes. And the potency of those in 
chocolate is impressive, his team reported in the December 1999 Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry.

 Vinson and his colleagues found that, matched molecule for molecule, 
chocolate's flavonoids are more powerful than vitamins such as ascorbic acid in 
limiting the oxidation of cholesterol circulating in low-density lipoproteins 
(LDLs) and very-low-density lipoproteins. Atherosclerosis studies have 
suggested that oxidation of these lipoproteins is an essential step in the 
creation of artery-clogging plaque.

 Vinson, whose work was supported by ACRI, doesn't know which chocolate 
products the institute gave him to test or the complex mix of flavonoids within 
them

 Yet individual flavonoids-some 4,000 have been identified in plant products so 
far-vary not only in potency but also in mode of action. The primary family of 
flavonoids contributing to the antioxidant prowess of chocolates is the 
procyanidins, notes Schmitz. Their basic unit is a three-ring molecular 
structure. The mature cocoa bean contains pairs known as dimers, triads known 
as trimers, quartets known as tetramers, and larger ensembles of these units.

 Test-tube studies by German scientists recently showed that chocolate's 
tetramers were the top performers among this group in curbing the type of 
oxidation that free radicals can wreak in blood vessel walls. That's 
potentially important, Schmitz notes, because such naturally occurring radicals 
can inflame vessels, a process that fosters a dangerous rupturing of 
atherosclerotic plaque (SN: 2/6/99, p. 86).

 Chocolate's tetramers and larger procyanidins also help relax the inner 
surface of blood vessels, according to studies in isolated tissues headed by C. 
Tissa Kappagoda of the University of California, Davis School of Medicine.

 This relaxation "is a major player in vascular health," he explains. People in 
whom it's absent or grossly impaired often have high blood pressure, 
atherosclerosis, or other symptoms of cardiovascular disease.

 In healthy blood vessels, Kappagoda noted at the AAAS meeting, much of this 
relaxation is controlled by the production of nitric oxide (SN: 3/23/96, p. 
180). His research, funded by Mars, indicates that chocolate's compounds exert 
their relaxing effect by increasing nitric oxide concentrations.

 Test-tube studies by Schmitz's team at Mars dovetail with the findings by both 
groups. Chocolate procyanidins can dampen the activity of enzymes that trigger 
inflammation and ratchet up production of nitric oxide, Schmitz reported at the 
meeting. Moreover, he notes, both of these actions may be independent of the 
flavonoids' antioxidant role.

 Protecting lipids

 Yet Cesar G. Fraga of the University of Buenos Aires hails the procyanidins' 
antioxidant activity. In work funded by Mars, he has demonstrated a rise of 
chocolate-derived procyanidins in the blood of men and women who had just eaten 
semisweet-chocolate candies. His team found that blood sampled 2 hours after 
candy consumption protected its circulating lipids from oxidation. The more 
chocolate eaten, the better the protection.

 Earlier test-tube studies, he says, indicate that the procyanidins may 
function as a first line of defense against damaging oxidants-sparing vitamin C 
and other antioxidant vitamins that would otherwise be destroyed in the battle. 
In these experiments, while all of the tested procyanidins appeared active, the 
pentamer offered the best protection.

 Nutritionist Carl L. Keen, Fraga's collaborator at UC Davis, has conducted 
additional Mars-funded work. At the AAAS meeting, he unveiled data from new 
studies indicating that flavonoid-rich foods may benefit the heart yet another 
way, by damping the reactivity of blood platelets.

 When stimulated by any of several chemical triggers, these cells turn sticky, 
helping blood to clot. Doctors often recommend that people at risk of heart 
attacks take aspirins to reduce clotting. Keen's data now show that chocolate's 
procyanidins work like especially mild aspirins

 His group gave water, procyanidin-rich cocoa, or alcohol-free red wine to 
groups of 10 men and women. The researchers sampled and tested the volunteers' 
blood 2 and 6 hours later.

 Though both the wine and cocoa significantly delayed the blood's clotting 
time, only the cocoa protected blood platelets from fragmentation. Platelets 
tend to fragment when they become overly stickey, Keen says.

 At the Experimental Biology meeting in San Diego next month, Penny 
Kris-Etherton and her colleagues at Pennsylvania State University in State 
College, who are funded by ACRI, plan to report yet another cardiovascular 
benefit. In the 24 volunteers whom they studied, diets enriched with dark 
chocolate or cocoa powder raised the individuals' high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol, the so-called good cholesterol.

"This is important," Kris-Etherton says, "because a higher ratio of HDLs to 
LDLs is associated with a decreased risk of heart disease."

 A valid question

 Why should consumers trust the tantalizing data on chocolate if they're all 
coming from industry-funded research? "That's a valid question," acknowledges 
nutritionist John W. Erdman of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
who cochaired the AAAS symposium on chocolate. Though he believes people should 
be skeptical, he also points out that these studies would never get off the 
ground without candy-industry financing.

 Erdman likens the situation to Quaker Oats' funding of research that laid the 
foundation for studies that proved oats' ability to lower serum cholesterol. 
Similarly, soy producers funded most of the initial work showing that proteins 
and antioxidants in their crops could fight heart disease. When it comes to 
potential neutraceuticals-foods offering health benefits-publication of a 
critical mass of promising, peer-reviewed, industry-financed studies appears 
necessary before the government will step in with financial support, Erdman 
says.

 While U.S. chocolate makers would love to be able to adorn their labels with 
health claims, Schmitz says that "a lot of research needs to be done before we 
get to that point."

 If that ever happens, chocolate will have come full circle, says Louis E. 
Grivetti, a nutritional historian at UC Davis. His research team is documenting 
extensive medicinal use of chocolate and cocoa that dates back at least 500 
years throughout Europe and the Americas. Healers used them to treat dozens of 
conditions, including tuberculosis, anemia, gastrointestinal upset, and kidney 
stones.

 Concludes Norman K. Hollenberg of Harvard Medical School in Boston, who 
cochaired the AAAS symposium, "The issue [today] isn't should we or should we 
not be recommending chocolate. The fact is, we are eating chocolate"-more than 
12 pounds per person in the United States each year. The new data suggest that 
unless we overindulge, says Hollenberg, "people should not feel guilty about 
eating it."


