Pregnant—and Still Macho: Science News Online, March 11, 2000

> Pregnant-and Still Macho

 Male seahorses allow scientists to test extreme notions of sex-role reversal

 Susan Milius

 One-half of the human race may find the idea more interesting than the other 
half does, but regardless, there's been plenty of speculation on what the world 
would be like if males were the ones who got pregnant.

 The more elaborate hypotheses-about warp-speed progress in obstetrics or Tiger 
Woods endorsing maternity clothes-have yet to receive rigorous testing. 
However, some of the basic theories of sexual behavior and sexual selection are 
getting attention thanks to a burst of new studies in the topsy-turvy social 
world of the seahorse.

 In these unusual fish, the female still produces the eggs, but she deposits 
them into a pouch in her mate's body. Then she swims away, returning only for 5 
to 10 minutes once a day during his several weeks of pregnancy. Finally, his 
distended body contracts and labors as he expels tiny seahorses one by one. 
Males of some species give birth to a few dozen, but others bear more than 100, 
and one Caribbean male astonished researchers as his half-tablespoon pouch held 
more than 1,500 babies.

 They're real

"I spend a lot time saying, 'Yes, they're real,'" notes Heather Hall, a fish 
geneticist at the London Zoo and cofounder of Project Seahorse, an 
international project to study and conserve seahorses. Many of her visitors 
come to the zoo believing that seahorses are myths, and until the last decade, 
the paucity of scientific literature on the topic might have justified their 
beliefs.

"I find it incredible, still, that an animal that's so popular has been so 
little studied," says Hall. "I expected to be looking at research gaps and 
filling them in, not starting with a blank sheet of paper."

 Seahorse study had been so neglected that until last year, taxonomy "was a 
complete mess, to put it politely," remarks Hall. About 150 Latin names 
appeared in print to describe roughly 35 species. One of the names mentioned 
most often in seahorse-trade records has been applied to a range of animals 
that Hall considers to include at least 10 distinct species. Finally, in 1999, 
creative fundraising from such sources as Guylian Chocolates of Belgium, which 
makes seahorseshaped candy, allowed Project Seahorse to publish the first 
identification guide to the fish.

 It lists 52 species in one genus, Hippocampus, within the oddball syngnathid 
fish family. The syngnathids generally share a hunting style, snorting up small 
crustaceans and other prey through strawlike snouts. Body styles of the 35 
syngnathid genera diverge from the few-frills swimming cylinders of pipefish to 
the abundantly adorned frames of sea dragons, which resemble a cross between a 
seahorse and a wilting begonia.

 Hall often has to convince zoo visitors that seahorses are really fish. They 
breathe with gills, and they swim with fins. The biggest, the Pacific seahorse, 
reaches about 11 inches in height, whereas an Australian species stays under an 
inch.

 Seahorses stick to narrow zones along tropical and temperate coasts, bobbing 
in sea grass meadows, mangrove stands, and coral reefs. All seahorses are 
marvels of camouflage, cloaked in murky brown-and-gray patterns that vanish 
into sea grass backgrounds.

 Yet the animals assume startling colors during social moments or in unusual 
surroundings. Mates can blush a creamy yellow when meeting each other in the 
morning, reports Project Seahorse cofounder Amanda C.J. Vincent of McGill 
University in Montreal. She encountered one Australian male that took on the 
orange of the high-visibility tape that she used to mark a grid in the study 
area.

 Vincent's studies of seahorse family life, starting in the mid-1980s, led the 
new wave of research. Lurking for hours underwater in sea grass beds in 
Australia, she detailed the doings of a typical species, Hippocampus whitei.

 Males stick to about a square meter of their habitat though females range over 
perhaps a hundred times that area, she found. When two parties discover a 
mutual interest at the beginning of the breeding season, they court for several 
days. In lab tests, interlopers of either sex tried to interfere.

 The courting pair might change color, sidle by each other, swim side-by-side 
holding tails, or grip the same strand of sea grass with their tails and wheel 
around it in unison. A male pumps water through the egg pouch on his trunk, 
which balloons and gapes open to display an alluring emptiness.

 When a female's eggs reach maturity, she and her mate abandon grips on any 
anchors and, snout-to-snout, drift upward out of the sea grass, often spiraling 
as they rise. The female squirts perhaps 200 eggs from a chamber in her trunk 
into his pouch. Her body slims as his bulges. Both seahorses sink back to the 
bottom, and she swims off.

 A male seahorse's body courses with prolactin, the same hormone that governs 
milk production in pregnant women. He doesn't supply milk, but his pouch 
provides oxygen as well as a controlled-environment incubator for about 21 days.

 Throughout the male's pregnancy, his mate visits him daily for what Vincent 
calls morning greetings. The female seahorse swims over for about 6 minutes of 
interaction reminiscent of courtship. They change color, wheel around sea grass 
fronds, and finally promenade, holding each other's tails. Then, the female 
swims away until the next morning, and the male goes back to vacuuming up food 
through his snout.

 While monitoring the Australian seahorses, Vincent saw females refuse to mate 
with other males during her mate's pregnancy.

 The pregnant male typically gives birth during the night, and a female 
returning for the morning greeting finds her mate ready for the next batch of 
eggs. That day or the next, she obliges as the greeting turns into courtship.

 Mirror-image world

 Such a lifestyle fulfills an ecologist's fantasy of finding a mirror-image 
world in which to test theories about reproduction. For example, Vincent 
wondered, would males that spend most of their adult lives pregnant still swat 
at each other competing for females? Or would they become the choosy sex, 
leaving females to battle it out to win male favors?

 The latter sex-role reversal "had been tacitly and explicitly assumed" by 
researchers, she notes. Yet her lab tests in the late 1980s dashed that 
expectation.

 When she watched various combinations of males and females sharing an aquarium 
tank, she found that only the males tail-wrestled. She has seen males snap 
their heads toward each other but hesitates to call this competition. Putting 
underwater microphones into tanks revealed that the fish make a noise like 
fingers snapping.

 In competitive behaviors that males and females shared, Vincent rated the 
males as more intense. The male rival that triumphed in a contest for a mate 
typically turned out to be the heavier one. Contrary to old expectations, it 
looked to Vincent as if males were putting more effort into getting pregnant 
than females were exerting to impregnate them.

 The intense male competition has raised questions about where to fit seahorses 
into the spectrum of animal mating systems. One way to look at the problem is 
to calculate which sex could produce more young if unlimited partners were 
ready and willing. In theory, the sex that competes the most forcefully ought 
to be the one that has the potential to have more offspring.

 Vincent and Tim H. Clutton-Brock of the University of Cambridge in England 
have tested this prediction by comparing 29 fish, frog, or bird species in 
which dad tends the kids. In 27 species, the idea holds, they reported in 1991. 
For example, male three-spined sticklebacks and coqui frogs squabble over 
mates. In these species, males could produce more offspring than females could, 
and as predicted, the males get more competitive.

 The reverse situation appears among 14 species, including two pipefish and 
such birds as phalaropes and jacanas. Males are the ones limiting the number of 
offspring, and femalefemale competition in romantic matters gets intense.

 Recent work adds seahorses to the first group of species, says Heather D. 
Masonjones now at Amherst (Mass.) College. She explored the question for dwarf 
seahorses, Hippocampus zosterae, from the Florida Keys. Males of this species 
compete fiercely.

 When mates meet for the first time, the male can be ready for action in about 
4 hours. Although the female takes only a few hours to prepare a batch of eggs 
by pumping water into them, she demands several days of courtship. Because of 
this difference in readiness, males have the potential to produce 17 percent 
more offspring than females could during a breeding season, Masonjones reports 
in the January Animal Behaviour.

 Also, females have time-outs from the reproductive cycle that are 1.2 times 
longer than those of males. Hence, dwarf seahorses fit the model that 
competition goes with greater reproductive potential.

 The female's longer courtship period doesn't seem to be based on physiology, 
Masonjones says. Once the female's eggs are ready, she has to lay them within a 
few hours. If the male flits off, she just ejects them onto the sea floor.

 Masonjones speculates that some behavioral mechanism keeps females from 
hydrating eggs in the first hours of courtship to reduce the chances of wasting 
an egg clutch if the courtship goes awry. Losing a clutch represents a big 
loss; eggs represent about a third of the female's body weight.

 Competition and choosiness

 Masonjones has been exploring another aspect of competition and choosiness, 
the eternal question of who's investing more energy in the kids. For seahorses, 
the answer may look ridiculously obvious, but it's not, says Masonjones.

 To estimate the female's direct contribution, Masonjones performed a chemical 
analysis of the energy stored in the eggs. "I did with fish eggs what any good 
nutritionist would do to find out how many calories are in French fries," she 
says.

 To measure the toll that pregnancy takes on a male, Masonjones ventured into 
the frontier of seahorse obstetrics. She built a seahorse-size respirometer 
that records the oxygen concentrations in water flowing into and out of a 
chamber.

 Before a male became pregnant, she checked his baseline need for oxygen. Then, 
she monitored the increase as pregnancy progressed. The male's body has to work 
hard by the end of pregnancy, consuming almost a third again as much oxygen as 
he did before mating, she concludes.

 To correct for oxygen used by his growing brood, Masonjones managed to keep 
1/4-inch high preemie seahorses alive outside the pouch so she could measure 
their oxygen needs.

 Despite the weeks of pregnancy, males directly contribute only half as much 
energy for offspring as females do, Masonjones found. Male seahorses then might 
fit the widespread pattern of the less-invested sex being the less-choosy, she 
told the 1998 meeting of the International Society for Behavioral Ecology in 
Asilomar, Calif.

 Still, direct costs don't tell the whole story, she cautions. Now, she's 
working on ways to calculate indirect costs, such as increased predator risk.

 Seahorse monogamy in the wild intrigues Vincent, so she brought some of the 
fish into her laboratory to test the speculation that the daily greeting helps 
cement the bond between the pair. She kept each female in a tank with two 
males. When the female filled one male's pouch with eggs, Vincent exiled him 
and left the female alone with the other male.

 During the 2 weeks of her mate's pregnancy, the female seahorse and her 
tankmate greeted each other daily, clinging to the same bit of grass and 
changing color, but Vincent saw no serious courtship. When the original mate 
had given birth, Vincent returned him to the tank. The female then had a choice 
between him and the other tankmate.

 Both males expressed eagerness for her attention, changing color and flaunting 
their pouches. They also tail-wrestled and whacked at each other with their 
snouts. In all six tests that Vincent performed, the female rejected her 
original mate and presented the next clutch of eggs to the tankmate that she 
had greeted each day. In seahorses, a daily greeting counts for a lot, Vincent 
concludes.

 Clicking sounds

 Not all the new seahorse science focuses on family life. Dwarf seahorses and a 
related species make clicking sounds when they feed, but just how they click 
has not been clear.

 One theory held that rapid pressure changes create little cavities in the 
hollow behind the intake snout. However, that's not the case, argue D.J. Colson 
and a team based in Sara Lewis' lab at Tufts University in Medford, Mass. 
Probing the structure of the head, they found evidence that a bony file on one 
part scrapes against another segment.

 Seahorse clicks could come from a stridulation, an underwater version of a 
cricket's sound, the researchers suggest. High-speed video with simultaneous 
sound revealed that the clicks start within 1 to 2 milliseconds of feeding.

 The most important ability of a seahorse, however, may turn out to be its 
power to charm people, says Hall. With Vincent, she has been publicizing the 
threats to seahorse populations, and people are noticing. As coastal 
populations of people boom around the world, seahorse habitats are shrinking or 
choking with pollution.

 An international trade that supplies wild-caught seahorses for sellers of 
traditional medicines, aquarium keepers, and curio collectors claims perhaps 20 
million animals each year, Vincent concluded in a 1996 report distributed by 
TRAFFIC, a nonprofit watchdog for the international trade in wildlife. 
Commercial seahorse collectors in five countries have told Vincent that catches 
have declined by up to 50 percent since the early 1990s.

 Drumming up support for aquatic conservation has never been easy, Hall 
laments. Many people cherish coral reefs, but the equally vital sea grass 
meadows seem to the untrained eye to be "just squidgy mud and grass," she says. 
Some of the rarest, most exciting marine species in these areas look like 
"boring little gray-brown fish," she admits.

 Seahorses, thank heavens, are a very different matter. Hall hopes they'll 
become flagship species to inspire conservation of ecologically vital habitats.

"They're just one of those quirks of nature that people can't quite come to 
grips with," she says. "People are fascinated."


