Olfactory cells aid spine healing in rats: Science News Online, March 18, 2000

> Olfactory cells aid spine healing in rats

 Nathan Seppa

 Olfactory neurons, the cells that carry information about scents to the brain, 
are surrounded by caretaker cells that nourish and insulate them. Unlike other 
cells in the brain or spinal cord, olfactory neurons can regenerate, thanks in 
large part to their able assistants.

 A new study shows that these service-oriented cells, called olfactory 
ensheathing glia, can also build bridges in damaged spinal cords. Scientists in 
Spain disabled the hind limbs of nine rats by severing their spinal cords, then 
promptly injected olfactory glial cells at each severed end. Within 7 months, 
all the rats recovered partial movement in their hind legs, the researchers 
report in the February Neuron. They theorize that the glial cells provided 
growth-promoting chemicals to the severed cells.

"This the most impressive level of [nerve] regeneration after complete spinal 
transection that I've ever seen. It's certainly very exciting," says Eric 
Frank, a neurobiologist at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. "At 
the same time, this field is historically filled with amazing reports that turn 
out to be difficult to replicate. We have to be cautious."

 Severing the spinal cord cuts the axons, the long tendrils of neurons that 
extend up and down the spinal cord. Axons carry messages to and from the brain.

 In the recent test, the ends of the spinal cord retracted immediately after 
the injury to leave a gap of up to 3 centimeters. The rats were unable to 
support their weight on their back legs or use them to climb. Three to 7 months 
later, severed axonal ends gradually reconnected in the spines of the rats 
treated with the glial cells.

 The animals regained some ability to use their back legs and climb a mesh grid 
pitched at a 45@ angle. The rats also appeared to recoup some sensation in 
their hindquarters, says study coauthor Almudena Ramon-Cueto, a neuroscientist 
at the Spanish Council for Scientific Research in Valencia. Twelve other rats 
that received the same injury but no glial cells remained unable to use their 
hind legs throughout the study.

 William D. Snider, a neuroscientist at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill who has seen a videotape of the rats, says several of those getting 
the glial-cell treatment "could really navigate the grid," climbing slopes of 
up to 90@.

 The improvement is remarkable, Snider says, considering that the injury to 
these rats "is more extreme than humans would usually suffer." Most 
spinal-damage patients have crush injuries, which can leave some axons intact.

 The new technique is promising because, theoretically, ensheathing glial cells 
could be taken from an individual's own brain and transplanted into the injury 
site, says Wise Young, a neuroscientist at a Rutgers University laboratory in 
Piscataway, N.J. Such patients wouldn't need to take immune-suppression drugs 
to forestall tissue rejection. The procedure would also avoid the ethical 
controversies associated with research and treatments using fetal cells, he 
says.

 Olfactory ensheathing glial cells seem capable of this healing because they 
can migrate from the injection sites, unlike other glial cells, Ramon-Cueto 
says.

 The precise molecular mechanisms underlying the process remain to be 
determined, Ramon-Cueto says. "We know that olfactory ensheathing glia produce 
a variety of adhesion molecules and growth factors that might change the 
inhibitory central nervous system environment." The Spanish team next plans to 
test the technique on nonhuman primates.

 Eric Frank Department of Neurobiology University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine Pittsburgh, PA 15261

 Almudena Ramon-Cueto Neural Regeneration Group Institute of Biomedicine 
Spanish Council for Scientific Research Jaime Roig 1146010 Valencia Spain

 William Snider University of North Carolina Campus Box 7250 Neuroscience 
Center School of Medicine Chapel Hill, NC 27599

 Wise Young Rutgers State University of New Jersey Center for Collaborative 
Neuroscience W.M. Keck Center Nelson Biological Laboratories605 Allison Road 
Piscataway, NJ 08854


