Meteoric wallop may have diversified life: Science News Online, March 11, 2000

> Meteoric wallop may have diversified life

 Ron Cowen

 Some 540 million years ago, life on Earth exploded in diversity. On the 
seafloor, some creatures acquired hard shells, and the direct ancestors of 
modern animals suddenly appeared. A new study suggests that this evolutionary 
Big Bang blossomed about the time that cosmic debris began pummeling our planet 
at an increasing rate.

 The timing may not be mere coincidence, argue the geologists who found 
evidence for the revved-up impact rate. The researchers speculate that a spate 
of meteoroids battering Earth might have ferried in large amounts of the 
organic compounds vital to life, or the pummeling could have sparked diversity 
by forcing organisms to adapt to a new environment.

 Timothy S. Culler of the University of California, Berkeley and the Lawrence 
Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory (LBNL) and his colleagues derived this 
scenario from their analysis of lunar samples brought back in 1971 by the 
Apollo 14 spacecraft. Unlike Earth's surface, which receives frequent facelifts 
from erosion and plate-tectonic activity, the pockmarked lunar surface provides 
a nearly pristine record of the inner solar system's greatest hits.

 The researchers relied on radioactive dating to determine the ages of tiny 
glass beads in the soil samples. Such beads arise when bits of debris crash 
into the moon and heat rocks to their melting point. As the molten droplets 
fall back to the surface, they cool to form a glass. The geologists estimate 
that the 155 beads they analyzed came from 146 distinct impacts.

 As previous studies have indicated, the ages of the beads suggest that the 
rate at which debris battered the moon and Earth began to dwindle about 3.5 
billion years ago. At that time, the solar system was maturing and many stray 
objects-asteroids and comets-were swept up by the gravity of Jupiter and the 
sun.

 To the team's surprise, the study also revealed that after settling down to an 
all-time low some 500 to 600 million years ago, the impact rate rose nearly 
fourfold over the past 400 million years. The rate remains high today.

"It's not surprising that the impacts tapered off about 3 billion years ago," 
notes study collaborator Richard A. Muller of UC Berkeley and LBNL. "What is 
surprising is the reversion from a benign to a violent solar system about 500 
million years ago." Culler, Muller, and their colleagues, including Paul R. 
Renne of UC Berkeley and the Berkeley Geochronology Center, describe the work 
in the March 10 Science.

 In 1997, a team including Alfred S. McEwen, now at the University of Arizona 
in Tucson, analyzed craters on the moon's far side and suggested that the 
impact rate had doubled over the past 300 million years. The team has since 
questioned its own findings, but the new report "is entirely consistent with 
our 1997 results," McEwen says.

 He cautions that the California researchers have analyzed just 1 gram of lunar 
soil. "The assumption that this is representative of the cratering-history rate 
for the entire moon may be a giant leap," McEwen says.

 Renne subscribes to the notion that the increased impact rate seeded Earth 
with water and other compounds essential to life during the past 500 million 
years. This could have sparked the Cambrian, the brief era in which a profusion 
of animal life emerged. "Life already here would suddenly have a new stimulus, 
a greater need to evolve quickly, and more raw material to do it," says Renne.

 Muller maintains that the study supports his theory that the sun has an 
undetected stellar companion that periodically flings comets into the inner 
solar system.

"I think it is a bit premature to draw any strong conclusions about the 
cratering record of the Earth-moon system and therefore about any implication 
for life," says Alan P. Boss of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.). 
Nonetheless, the team has demonstrated "an extremely powerful technique" for 
addressing such questions, he says.


