Ancient Asian Tools Crossed the Line: Science News Online, March 4, 2000

 Ancient Asian Tools Crossed the Line

 Bruce Bower

 Large stone-cutting tools dubbed hand axes regularly appear at prehistoric 
archaeological sites from India westward across southern Asia into Europe and 
Africa. In 1944, Harvard anthropologist Hallam L. Movius Jr. proposed that 
those prehistoric populations, living 1.6 million to 200,000 years ago, existed 
on one side of a geographical line that separated them from groups in central 
and eastern Asia, where early humans fashioned much simpler stone implements.

 Now, the discovery of ancient hand axes in southern China's Bose basin 
supports the growing suspicion that hand ax production sometimes crossed what 
archaeologists call the Movius line. The 800,000-year-old Asian tools look much 
like Stone Age hand axes from anywhere else, concludes a team led by Hou Yamei 
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing and Richard Potts of the 
Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.

 Other new evidence gathered by the scientists suggests that an ancient 
meteorite destroyed forests in southern China and temporarily exposed rocky 
outcrops in the Bose basin. Human ancestors, either longtime residents or 
recent arrivals to the region, then had access to large clumps of rock that 
they could hammer and chip into hand-held axes, the researchers hold.

"Our work suggests that evidence for cultural differences doesn't occur in 
early human behavior," Potts asserts. "Given a particular kind of open 
environment, human ancestors everywhere produced the same kinds of stone tools 
for hundreds of thousands of years."

 Yamei, Potts, and their colleagues analyzed 991 stone artifacts found at 24 
sites in the Bose basin. This collection includes 35 pear-shaped hand axes 
featuring two sharpened edges running up opposite sides above a rounded base.

 The researchers describe their discoveries in the March 3 Science.

 They also report that sediment at the three excavation sites that yielded the 
tools contains rocks that had undergone intense heating. Laboratory analysis of 
argon isotopes in the rocks from Bose dated the heating to about 803,000 years 
ago.

 The scientists suspect that the heated rocks resulted from a meteorite's 
impact or its explosion in Earth's atmosphere in the vicinity of Indonesia at 
around the same time. Independent examinations of ocean cores have documented 
such an occurrence.

 Increasing evidence from the Bose basin and sediment beneath the South China 
Sea suggests that the region fluctuated from drier to wetter conditions for 
much of the Stone Age, Potts asserts. In his view, this suggests that periodic 
access to rock sources in drier times, when there was less vegetation, 
encouraged hand ax production among the region's longtime residents.

 The discovery of the Bose hand axes "implies similar technical, cultural, and 
cognitive capabilities on both sides of the Movius line," Potts says.

 The Bose axes resemble those from elsewhere without slavishly duplicating 
them, comments anthropologist F. Clark Howell of the University of California, 
Berkeley. Like Potts, Howell suspects that Homo erectus groups living in Asia 
developed their own traditions of hand ax production when suitable rock became 
available.

 Stanley H. Ambrose, an archaeologist at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, disagrees. The double-edged Bose tools are indistinguishable 
from those in Africa and southern Asia, he contends.

"You could lose the Bose stuff in the [stone artifacts] from Africa that we 
have in our university collection," Ambrose maintains.

 Widespread forest destruction caused by the ancient meteorite event probably 
spurred H. erectus groups in India to migrate into eastern Asia, where they 
made the Bose hand axes, he proposes.

 Some more western population must have brought an established hand ax 
tradition to eastern Asia, concurs archaeologist Ofer Bar-Yosef of Harvard 
University. For the bulk of the Stone Age, ancestral peoples rigidly adhered to 
toolmaking styles dictated by cultural conventions, not the type or amount of 
rock available, Bar-Yosef argues.

 For instance, some European Stone Age sites contain good rock for hand axes 
but yield only simpler stone flakes, he notes.

"The Bose finds are an exception," Bar-Yosef says. "They don't destroy the 
Movius line."


