More Waters Test Positive for Drugs: Science News Online, April 1, 2000

 More Waters Test Positive for Drugs

 Janet Raloff

 Over the past decade, European chemists have been documenting widespread 
pharmaceutical contamination of their lakes, streams, and groundwater. In San 
Francisco this week, U.S. and Canadian scientists offered preliminary 
confirmation that traces of drugs, excreted by people and livestock, similarly 
pollute American waters.

 They presented their findings at the first major American symposium on 
pharmaceuticals in water, held as part of the American Chemical Society's 
spring national meeting.

 Water pollution by drugs "is a newly emerging issue," observes Christian G. 
Daughton, a symposium co-organizer and chief of environmental chemistry at the 
Environmental Protection Agency's National Exposure Research Laboratory in Las 
Vegas. By offering a U.S. venue for the meeting-and participation by many 
European leaders in this field (SN: 3/21/98, p.187: )-he hoped to awaken 
domestic interest and catalyze research on the topic, he says.

 Ironically, Daughton notes, EPA scientists examining the sludge from a U.S. 
sewage-treatment plant 20 years ago found that the incoming sewage contained 
excreted aspirin, caffeine, and nicotine. Daughton says that the findings were 
written off as a curiosity and all but forgotten.

 At about the same time, recalls Herman Bouwer of the U.S. Agricultural 
Research Service in Phoenix, the cholesterol-lowering drug clofibric acid 
turned up in a groundwater reservoir being tapped to meet the Phoenix 
community's thirst. The drug had entered with treated sewage, which the city 
had been using to replenish the aquifer.

"At the time," Bouwer recalls, "we didn't pay attention to the finding." It 
should have been a wake-up call, he now argues, because if clofibric acid could 
pass through a sewage-treatment plant and percolate through soil unscathed, so 
could a host of other drugs.

 And they do, new studies show.

 Chris Metcalfe of Trent University in Peterborough, Ontario, reports finding a 
broad mix of drugs, including anticancer agents, psychiatric drugs, and 
anti-inflammatory compounds. "Levels of prescription drugs that we have leaving 
sewage-treatment plants in Canada are sometimes higher than what's being seen 
in Germany," he says.

 He explains that many North American cities employ more rudimentary sewage 
treatment than those in Germany. Daughton observes also that some 1 million 
U.S. homes send their essentially untreated sewage directly into the 
environment.

 Two years ago, the symposium's other co-organizer, Thomas A. Ternes, 
documented unexpectedly high concentrations of drugs-many measured in parts per 
billion (ppb)-both in raw sewage and in water leaving treatment plants in 
Germany. The chemist, who is at the Institute for Water Research and Water 
Technology in Wiesbaden, Germany, now finds that these drugs enter groundwater.

 Sewage effluent can amount to at least half the water in many of Germany's 
smaller rivers, he notes. Groundwater fed by streams carrying relatively 
undiluted effluent can be tainted with 1 ppb carbamazepine, an anticonvulsive 
drug. Ternes has also detected similar amounts of the anti-inflammatory drug 
diclofenac and up to 2.4 ppb of iodine-based drugs used to improve contrast in 
X rays.

 Because people discard their excess drugs, the town dump can also be a source 
of pharmaceutical pollution. Under one landfill, Ternes found groundwater 
tainted with 12 ppb clofibric acid and 1 ppb phenazone, an analgesic.

 The latter medication also turned up in groundwater-but at far higher 
concentrations-under a leaking dump in Zagreb, Croatia, notes Marijan Ahel of 
the Rudjer Boskovic Institute in Zagreb. Some of his water samples had the drug 
at as much as 50 times the concentration detected by Ternes.

 In the United States, federal scientists recently began probing another source 
of drug pollution-large feedlots for livestock. An estimated 40 percent of the 
antibiotics produced in the United States is fed to livestock as growth 
enhancers. Geochemist Mike Meyer of the U.S. Geological Survey in Raleigh, 
N.C., and his colleagues have begun looking for antibiotics in hog-waste 
lagoons.

 Three drugs frequently show up, one in concentrations approaching 1 part per 
million. The same three antibiotics, which are also prescribed for people, 
often appear in local waters-though usually only at one-tenth to one-hundredth 
the concentrations in the lagoons, Meyer notes. "So, it appears we're getting 
transport of these antibiotics into surface and groundwaters," he told Science 
News.

 His colleagues at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta 
have begun sampling bacteria from the tainted waters to investigate their 
responses to the antibiotics present, Meyer says. Their findings could begin to 
resolve a long-standing question: What is the contribution, if any, of 
livestock to potentially dangerous reservoirs of bacteria (SN: 6/5/99, p. 356: 
) resistant to common antibiotics?

 Traces of drugs are sometimes making it all the way into tap water. Thomas 
Heberer of the Technical University of Berlin reported finding traces of at 
least three pharmaceuticals in samples from his home tap. The concentrations, 
however, were near the limits of detection, a few parts per trillion. Moreover, 
he found that running this water through an activated-carbon filter removes all 
vestiges of the drugs.

 Ternes' studies confirm that two disinfection agents-activated carbon and 
ozone-which are used in many European drinking-water plants, generally remove 
any traces of drugs. It's because these relatively costly technologies aren't 
employed for treating sewage, he notes, that a large share of the drugs flushed 
down toilets can reach open waters.

 To date, the symposium's scientists noted, few if any toxicological studies 
have evaluated risks posed by chronic exposure to trace concentrations of 
drugs. Most of the participants suspect, however, that the biggest risks face 
aquatic life-which may be bathed from cradle to grave in a solution of drugs of 
increasing concentration and potency.

 David Epel of Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station in Pacific Grove, 
Calif., expressed special concern about new drugs called efflux-pump 
inhibitors. Designed to keep microbes from ejecting the antibiotics intended to 
slay them (SN: 2/12/00, p. 110: Available to subscribers at .), efflux-pump 
inhibitors also impede the cellular pumps that nearly all animals use to get 
rid of toxicants, he says. If pump-inhibiting drugs enter the aquatic 
environment, Epel worries that they might render wildlife vulnerable to 
concentrations of pollution that had previously been innocuous.


