The Buck Starts Here: Science News Online, April 1, 2000

 The Buck Starts Here

 The U.S. Mint performed some neat tricks to make a golden dollar

 Corinna Wu

 Poor Susan B. Anthony. A pioneering 19th-century advocate of women's rights, 
she suffered the misfortune of having her stalwart visage stamped on a wildly 
unpopular U.S. coin. Because the Susan B. Anthony dollar looks confusingly like 
a quarter, it never won the public's acceptance.

. .

..

..

..

..

 Now, 21 years after its introduction, the Susan B. Anthony is about to retire. 
On Jan. 27, the United States Mint shipped new golden dollar coins 
simultaneously to Federal Reserve Banks and the discount megastore Wal-Mart. 
Last month, the mint began an advertising campaign to introduce the coin to the 
public.

 The new dollar is different from the Susan B. Anthony, inside and out. No 
stern mugshot adorns this coin. Instead, the luminous face of Sacagawea, the 
young Shoshone woman who guided the Lewis and Clark expedition from 1804 to 
1806, gazes from the coin's face. She carries her sleeping infant son, Jean 
Baptiste, on her back. Its unique color and other features distinguish this 
coin from the Susan B. Anthony and the quarter.

 The choice of metals used in the golden dollar took as much, if not more, work 
than the design did. "We pulled off a trick, a really nifty trick, when we 
chose the alloy for this coin," said Philip N. Diehl, the director of the U.S. 
Mint, addressing the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., on Feb. 23. That 
trick saved companies from the expensive task of retooling millions of vending 
machines and coin-operated devices around the country.

 So far, it seems that the lessons learned from the Susan B. Anthony fiasco 
have paid off. The mint expects that within the first 3 months of release, 
demand for the Sacagawea dollar will reach more than half a billion coins, says 
Diehl. It took the Susan B. Anthony 14 years to reach that demand. The mint 
"cannot be satisfied with proving that the golden dollar is a beautiful 
racehorse," he adds. "Our goal is for it to become the workhorse of American 
coinage."

 Most successful

 Even though consumers deemed the Susan B. Anthony a dismal failure, it's 
actually the most successful dollar coin the country has ever had. Nine hundred 
million are in circulation. The United States minted silver dollars 
sporadically between 1794 and 1935 and copper-nickel dollars bearing the image 
of Dwight D. Eisenhower from 1971 to 1978. In 1978, Congress authorized the 
minting of the Susan B. Anthony.

 Why does the country need a dollar coin? For the mint, it's a good investment. 
The Sacagawea dollar coin, which costs 12 cents to make, can last 30 years. A 
dollar bill, costing 3.5 cents, heads for the shredder after about 18 months. A 
popular dollar coin could earn a hefty profit for the U.S. Treasury, just as a 
successful product does for a private company.

 Coins also work a lot better than bills in vending machines. "Paper money is 
fickle," says Thomas E. McMahon, vice president and counsel for the National 
Automatic Merchandising Association in Chicago. "Too many times, it's not read 
properly, which results in a lost sale or at least a frustrated customer." 
Also, machines give coins as change more easily than bills.

 The escalating price of vending machine items and the dwindling supply of 
Susan B. Anthony dollars minted in 1979 and 1980 prompted Congress to enact 
legislation authorizing a successor. The United States Dollar Coin Act of 1997 
specified that the new dollar coin be golden in color, have a distinctive edge, 
and be the same size as the Susan B. Anthony. In other words, the coin has to 
look and feel different to consumers but resemble the Susan B. Anthony closely 
enough to fool vending machines.

 Importantly, the act did not eliminate the dollar bill. Legislation that would 
have done that "sat in Congress and went nowhere for about 15 years," Diehl 
says. The proposal to make a coin along with the current dollar bill "flew 
through Congress [and] landed on the president's desk within 4 or 5 months."

 Golden luster

 The Sacagawea coin has the same luster as 14-carat gold, though it does not 
actually contain the precious metal, says Michael White, a U.S. Mint 
spokesperson. It has a wider border than other coins do and a plain, smooth 
edge just like the nickel. It's 26.5 millimeters in diameter and weighs 8.1 
grams, making it slightly larger than the quarter.

 Testing done by the mint shows that consumers, both sighted and visually 
impaired, can pick out the coin by feel without trouble, says White.

 Whereas the coin must be distinctive to people, the country's 15 million 
vending machines need to treat it the same as the Susan B. Anthony. Had 
businesses been obliged to retune all of their machines, says McMahon, many 
would have been unwilling to do so, which would in turn have hurt the coin's 
success.

 A new alloy developed by Olin Brass in East Alton, Ill., which has supplied 
the U.S. Mint with materials since 1964, allowed Sacagawea to masquerade as 
Susan B. Anthony. Vending machines identify a coin by its weight, size, and 
so-called electromagnetic signature. Vending machines typically test a coin's 
electrical conductivity by passing an alternating current through it and 
measuring the induced magnetic field, says Dennis R. Brauer, Olin's vice 
president of technology.

 Metallurgists at the mint could match the Susan B. Anthony's size and weight 
easily, but duplicating its electromagnetic properties proved to be much 
trickier. That signature depends on both the type of metal and the construction 
of the coin.

 Like all silver-colored U.S. coins, the Susan B. Anthony consists of a pure 
copper core sandwiched by two layers of a copper-nickel alloy. The material is 
durable, easy to stamp with a design, and tarnish-resistant. To make test 
coins, the mint asked Olin Brass to provide about 25 alloys in different 
thicknesses-a total of more than 30,000 samples. They hoped to find a coin that 
would duplicate the Susan B. Anthony's electromagnetic signature.

 Nothing worked. "All the golden color alloys had three times too much 
conductivity," Brauer says.

 What's more, different companies use different frequencies of alternating 
current in their coin acceptors, compounding the problem. "The higher the 
frequency, the shallower the penetration into the coin," Brauer explains. "At 
higher frequencies, you measure only the surface conductivity. Lower 
frequencies penetrate into the core."

 Metallurgists at the U.S. Mint tried many different combinations of alloys and 
coin constructions, trying to offset the higher conductivity with different 
metal-layer thicknesses. "They could easily match it for one machine, but it 
was not universal," Brauer notes.

 Last May-3 months before manufacturing was to start-the mint was ready to 
concede and go with an alloy that did not satisfy the electromagnetic 
requirements. Researchers at Olin Brass, however, had a final brainstorm. They 
knew of some manganese alloys that have low conductivities, but these materials 
are pink, Brauer says. By adding enough manganese and zinc to copper, the 
researchers thought they might get a golden alloy with the right 
electromagnetic properties.

 The strategy worked. After adding some nickel for tarnish resistance, they 
told the mint about the brand-new material. "I sent them five sample coins, 
then eventually a 40,000-pound lot, and the rest is history," says Brauer.

 The final alloy consists of 77 percent copper, 12 percent zinc, 7 percent 
manganese, and 4 percent nickel. The pure copper core makes up half of the 
metal in the coin, with the two layers of manganese brass each taking up 
one-fourth of the thickness.

 For coins, counterfeiting isn't a big problem-it's more profitable for a crook 
to print fake twenties and fifties. Vendors do worry, however, about 
unscrupulous customers feeding slugs, or fake coins, into their machines.

 The sandwich design as well as the unique properties of the alloy make 
slugging difficult to carry off. Olin Brass casts the material in 10-ton 
ingots, then squeezes them between rollers to get them down to the proper 
thickness. "It's not something you can do in your garage," Brauer notes.

 Because the new dollar costs only 12 cents to make, Diehl notes, the mint 
recovers a healthy 88-cent profit on every dollar coin it sells. The Sacagawea 
dollar will help the U.S. Mint continue to make a lot of money-in more ways 
than one.

 Public comment

 In designing the coin, the U.S. Mint took the unprecedented step of soliciting 
comments from the public. More than 130,000 people sent their ideas via 
letters, faxes, and electronic messages. In June 1998, a design advisory 
committee that reviewed the input recommended that the dollar coin honor 
Sacagawea.

 The mint then invited 23 artists to submit designs. After consulting 
representatives of the Native American community, historians, artists, 
educators, and the public, the mint chose sculptor Glenna Goodacre's design. 
For the eagle on the coin's reverse side, it chose a design by mint engraver 
Thomas D. Rogers Sr.

 The Sacagawea design is "surprisingly effective," says John M. Kleeberg, 
curator of modern coins at the American Numismatic Society in New York. "So 
much of the stuff produced by the U.S. Mint has been terrible. The modeling of 
Sacagawea is nicely done, and the pose is an unusual one. We don't know what 
she looked like, but [on the coin] she doesn't look like a cold goddess."

 Coins with simple designs continue to look good even as they wear down, 
Kleeberg says. The new golden dollar follows that precept.

 People seem to be taken with the Sacagawea dollar, Diehl says. "Banks and 
retailers that never indicated any interest in this coin and had never ordered 
a single Susan B. Anthony coin wanted it immediately because the American 
people wanted it. . . . It really is a stunningly beautiful product. . . . It 
connects with people, and they want to have and hold it."

 People who want to pocket the new dollars can get them a variety of ways. The 
mint sells the coins on its Web site (), banks and Wal-Mart stores carry them, 
and a few lucky breakfast-cereal eaters might find them in boxes of Cheerios.

 The U.S. Mint predicts that demand for the golden dollar will reach 1 billion 
coins by the end of the year, more than the Susan B. Anthony could muster in 
its entire lifetime.

 And though there's no gold in the circulating dollar coin, collectors will be 
happy to know that the mint will start making a 22-carat-gold version this 
summer-for anyone who can come up with considerably more than a buck.


