Researchers enjoy bitter taste of success: Science News Online, March 25, 2000

 Researchers enjoy bitter taste of success

 Tina Hesman

 Taste has been the most elusive of the five senses. Now, genetic work is 
revealing how taste buds handle the chemical information that washes over them.

 Researchers have discovered a large family of taste-cell proteins that seem to 
latch onto bitter chemicals, the first step in perceiving the flavor. The team 
also presents the first molecular genetic evidence for differences in taste 
perception, says Nicholas Ryba of the National Institutes of Health in 
Bethesda, Md.

 Scientists from NIH and the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) 
describe these findings in the March 17 Cell. The report comes soon after the 
first identification of a functioning taste receptor. It detects umami-the 
meaty flavor of monosodium glutamate and parmesan cheese (SN: 1/29/00, p. 68: 
Available to subscribers at ).

 The team looking for bitter-flavor receptors had previously found two 
candidates (SN: 2/27/99, p. 132: ). However, those proteins weren't made by the 
taste cells that produce the signaling protein, called gustducin, that's known 
to be important for recognizing bitterness, says Ryba. So, he, Charles S. Zuker 
of UCSD, and their team had to look again for the bitter receptors.

 Geneticists have known for a long time that some people can taste a bitter 
chemical called 6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil, or PROP, while others are oblivious to 
it (SN: 7/12/97, p. 24: ). When other researchers pinpointed a region of the 
human genome where the gene for PROP tasting lies, the NIH-UCSD group examined 
the area's DNA sequence. They found a gene there that encodes a protein similar 
to receptors in the nose that recognize odors.

 By searching human DNA databases, the group turned up 25 similar genes. Some 
of these had been linked to the taste of certain bitter compounds like quinine 
and cycloheximide. People may have 40 to 80 genes for bitter-recognizing 
proteins, Ryba estimates.

 Fruit flies also have a family of taste-receptor genes, Yale University 
researchers report in the March 10 Science.

 Cells that make any of the newly found mammalian receptor proteins also 
produce all the others and gustducin. However, not all gustducin-producing 
cells make bitter receptors. Those cells may be involved in detecting 
sweetness, suggests taste researcher Nirupa Chaudhari of the University of 
Miami.

 When mixed with a bitter chemical in a test tube, the receptor proteins link 
to gustducin to trigger the next step in taste signaling, the NIH-UCSD team 
finds.

"Taste is something that's more than just a test-tube reaction. It's a 
sensation," Ryba says. "So, in the end, you have to relate everything back to 
an animal model." The researchers used two strains of laboratory mice-only one 
of which tastes cycloheximide. Mice that perceive the chemical all have one 
form of a bitter receptor called T2R5, while non-tasting mice had another.

 The new research gives a much more complete picture of how taste cells 
identify flavors, says Sue C. Kinnamon, a neuroscientist at Colorado State 
University in Fort Collins. "What they've done is a major tour de force in the 
field of taste," she says.

 The characterizations of the family of bitter receptors and the umami receptor 
have paved the way for scientists to finally understand how taste works, says 
Steven D. Roper of the University of Miami, a codiscoverer of the umami 
receptor. "We've finally gotten a foot in the door, and the door is starting to 
open," he says.

 The NIH and UCSD researchers say in their article that they hope to identify 
chemicals that will block bitter receptors "and in a small but significant way, 
eliminate bitterness from the world."


