Looking for Mr. Goodoxide: Science News Online, March 25, 2000

 Looking for Mr. Goodoxide

 The hard-pressed semiconductor industry strives to replace silicon's 
near-perfect mate

 Peter Weiss

 Breaking up is hard to do-especially after 40 years together. It's even 
tougher when those 40 years were spent constantly side by side, fostering an 
upstart technology that has changed the world.

 Most everyone has heard that silicon is the material primarily responsible for 
the miraculous surge in computing power that is reshaping society. That's true, 
but silicon couldn't have done it alone. The well-known semiconductor's oxide, 
which chip makers grow or deposit on exposed silicon surfaces, has also played 
a crucial role.

 Little noticed outside the semiconductor industry, silicon dioxide has 
supported and protected silicon, as well as facilitated the element's special 
electronic properties.

"The guys like us who work with the stuff every day consider silicon dioxide 
the greatest gift from God," says John S. Suehle of the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) in Gaithersburg, Md.

 Nonetheless, the semiconductor industry now wants to divorce silicon from its 
loyal oxide. The first signs of a breakup came nearly a decade ago, when one 
sector of the industry-makers of random-access-memory chips-ran into problems 
with the material and found ways to pair silicon with another compound, silicon 
nitride.

 Today, the disaffection is spreading to computing circuits. Circuit features 
are becoming so small that chip makers are battling on many fronts to keep up 
with the pace of change (SN: 11/8/97, p. 302: ). In the confines of smaller 
circuits, silicon dioxide's even-handed skill at managing passels of unruly 
charges has become a flaw.

 Consequently, research groups in the industry and elsewhere are searching for 
alternate materials. Although they don't know what will successfully replace 
silicon dioxide, manufacturers are specifying new machinery and otherwise 
making accommodations to handle likely alternatives in their production lines. 
Chip makers are already using some substitute materials on a limited scale in 
their products.

"If we can't replace silicon dioxide, it's a showstopper for device 
scaling"-the main process by which the industry has made circuit elements 
smaller and smaller, says James H. Stathis of the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research 
Center in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.

 The semiconductor industry will part with silicon dioxide only reluctantly. 
Chip makers are chafing at the uncertainty and expense of switching to what may 
prove to be a less-than-perfect substitute, electronics specialists say.

 Circuit manufacturers would do much worse, however, not to change, they add. 
Unless the divorce takes place-and soon-the astounding pace of innovation on 
which the semiconductor industry thrives could slacken for the first time.

 Component density

 The density of components on microcircuits has grown exponentially since the 
early days of the industry, doubling roughly every 18 months. It's a grueling 
rate of change that the industry has come to expect. For anyone who can't keep 
up, "the penalty is death," Robert D. Miller of the IBM Almaden Research Center 
in San Jose, Calif., grimly jokes.

 When fashioning an integrated circuit on a chip, manufacturers use light to 
project patterns onto surfaces of silicon or other semiconductors. Each pattern 
defines the contours of a layer of material deposited on the surface. By 
repeatedly applying patterns and adding to or carving away those layers, chip 
builders create and wire together millions of circuit components on one chip.

 To achieve greater component density, circuit makers use optical methods, such 
as lenses, to shrink the patterns-a strategy called scaling. They must then 
make other adjustments, such as altering the recipes and thicknesses of 
deposited materials, in order for the diminished devices to work properly.

 From the start, silicon dioxide has been one of the stars of this scaling 
process. However, circuits have become so small that the material can no longer 
keep up, transforming it from God's gift to semiconductors to silicon's 
soon-to-be ex.

 Paradoxically, silicon dioxide is losing its attractiveness in different 
microcircuit applications for opposite reasons. In its role in the transistors 
of integrated circuits, it no longer promotes accumulation of electric charge 
strongly enough. In engineering parlance, it has too low a value of a property 
called the dielectric constant, or k.

 At the same time, silicon dioxide's value of k is turning out to be too high 
for its other main function, electrically isolating wiring between devices.

 To continue making faster circuits, chip makers have recently switched from 
aluminum wiring to copper, which has less resistance and therefore increases 
signal speed (SN: 9/27/97, p. 196). But that's not enough.

 For insulation, circuit fabricators need a low-k material because charge 
storage, or capacitance, between wires slows signals. It also encourages 
signals to bleed from one wire to another.

 To protect wires in some commercial products, manufacturers already spike the 
silicon dioxide with a little fluorine to drive down the mixture's dielectric 
constant, Miller says. In a few years, however, the industry will have to break 
completely with silicon dioxide as the wiring insulator, he says.

 This problem with silicon dioxide as a wiring insulator cropped up a little 
sooner than the transistor woes, so chip makers have already gone much further 
in dealing with it. Research into low-k materials is making progress, Miller 
says. "There are people very far along on that, far enough along that we know 
it can be done," he says. Some researchers have even explored replacing silicon 
dioxide insulation with wispy, highly porous aerogels (SN:12/14/96, p. 383) or 
simply with air (SN: 7/18/98, p. 37).

 Replacing silicon dioxide

 The challenge of replacing silicon dioxide in transistors looms ahead. Suehle 
says that it may be "the most serious challenge" among many that the industry 
faces.

 Transistors are the workhorses of integrated circuits. In essence, a 
transistor is like a valve: It modifies flow. Applying voltage or current to 
one of the three terminals of a transistor controls the current moving between 
the other two.

 Most commonly used in integrated circuits is the complementary metal oxide 
semiconductor, or CMOS, transistor. There, a layer of silicon dioxide serves as 
an electrical insulator, or dielectric, preventing unwanted vertical current 
flow between the control electrode, known as the gate, and the underlying 
silicon.

 Because of its high capacitance, the gate-silicon dioxide-silicon sandwich can 
store substantial amounts of electric charge. That charge accumulation controls 
the flow of electricity that traverses a thin skin of silicon just beneath the 
oxide.

 As circuit devices have shrunk, so too has the area of the gate. However, the 
area in part determines how much charge the gate can hold. To keep the 
capacitance up, designers have had to make the gate oxide thinner with each 
scaling.

 Materials scientists figured out how to grow silicon dioxide films so free of 
defects, such as pinholes and impurities, that the gate oxides insulated well 
even when pared down from hundreds of nanometers thick in the 1970s to only 
about 2.5 nm today.

"Being able to make [the oxide] thinner and thinner is what has really allowed 
us to continue scaling," says NIST's Eric M. Vogel.

 But even thinness and purity can't keep a relationship going forever. As the 
oxide becomes thinner, a quantum-mechanical effect known as tunneling permits 
more and more electrons to slip like ghosts through the oxide wall. Although 
transistors can function despite tunneling leakage, they require more power. 
Circuit makers find this power loss unacceptable, especially as electronic 
products are increasingly becoming portable and battery-powered.

 A new partner

 The time has come for silicon to find a new partner, most semiconductor 
specialists agree. Circuit builders need a substitute that they can pile more 
thickly under the gate electrode, to prevent tunneling, without at the same 
time reducing capacitance to an unacceptable level.

 To continue scaling, "the only option is to go to higher-k materials. There is 
no choice," Miller says.

 With the change to copper and to silicon dioxide substitutes, "the industry is 
going to be facing the most significant [materials] changes ever," says Howard 
R. Huff of International Sematech, a research consortium based in Austin, Tex., 
and sponsored by 13 semiconductor companies.

 The high-k imperative has sent academic and industry researchers racing 
through the periodic table. In particular, scientists are focusing on the 
so-called transition metals, such as titanium, tantalum, and zirconium. These 
elements form high-k compounds, some of which have long been used in 
capacitors. Investigators also became acquainted with them during initial 
attempts to replace silicon dioxide in memories.

 Considering oxides and silicates of transition metals and more complex 
combinations of several metals and perhaps other substances, "we have hundreds 
of candidates," says Tso-Ping Ma of Yale University.

 Mr. or Ms. Right

 Like someone searching for Mr. or Ms. Right, researchers trolling for high-k 
dielectrics can't afford to focus on just one appealing trait. Making their 
task particularly daunting is the way solid-state physicists and engineers 
recite lists of good things about silicon dioxide. The tributes read like 
Elizabeth Barrett Browning's poem "How Do I Love Thee?"

 Semiconductor specialists enumerate: Silicon dioxide is hard, tough, and 
dense. It grows naturally on silicon. Water can't dissolve it. It transfers and 
withstands heat well. It leaks little current and tolerates high voltages. It 
can be deposited as a vapor and piled up nearly defect-free. And on and on.

"If you want all those things, it's hard to find another material like silicon 
dioxide," Miller says.

 At the top of all the lists: Silicon dioxide mates with the silicon surface in 
such a way that so-called dangling bonds become satisfied.

 That's not just idle pleasure. Dangling bonds stick up from the surface when 
sausage-like silicon crystals are sliced into wafers. Ordinarily bonded to four 
other silicon atoms, many silicon atoms at a cut surface find themselves bereft 
of a bond or two.

 When the first CMOS transistors were invented, those hungry bonds spoiled the 
performance of the devices. Then, in 1958, a group of scientists at Bell 
Telephone Laboratories found that growing a thin layer of silicon dioxide on 
the surface fulfilled the bonds.

 In the view of researchers at the time, noted Chih-Tang Sah of the University 
of Florida in Gainesville in a 1988 article about transistor history, that 
discovery was the "most important and significant technology advance" leading 
to silicon-integrated circuit technology.

"Next to silicon, [silicon dioxide] is really what ignited the industry," adds 
Robert R. Doering of Texas Instruments in Dallas.

 How good are the best prospects-mainly transition-metal oxides-on the high-k 
horizon? They quash tunneling currents admirably in laboratory experiments and 
also maintain a hefty gate capacitance thanks to dielectric constants 6 to 20 
times that of silicon dioxide.

 Ma's Yale group and three other research teams reported such performance 
results last December at the 1999 Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers International Electron Devices Meeting in Washington, D.C.

 Yet in some ways, those new dielectrics leave semiconductor specialists pining 
for silicon dioxide.

 Troubles arise at the silicon-dielectric boundary, for instance. Researchers 
find lower-k compounds forming there, silicon dioxide itself or byproducts of 
reactions between silicon and the new partner materials.

 Huff notes also that none of the leading high-k candidates can tolerate the 
heat of the current process for fabricating circuits. The industry should be 
cautious not to jump prematurely into major, costly changes to manufacturing to 
accommodate the materials, he says.

 It may be wiser to cope with circuit leakage by counteracting it with 
power-conserving designs and more judicious placement of the thinnest silicon 
dioxide layers. Given uncertainty about the new materials, he asks, "Are you 
going to overthrow 40 years of industrial experience with silicon dioxide?"

 Realizing the change may turn out to be necessary, however, Huff helps lead a 
Sematech team that is rushing to meet a June deadline. By then, the group must 
produce specifications for a machine capable of depositing on circuits whatever 
high-k materials will be ready for pilot studies 3 years from now. Very likely, 
those will be a stopgap measure-silicon-based compounds already familiar to the 
industry but only modestly higher k than silicon dioxide.

 Cutting the knot

 No one knows when silicon and its oxide will finally cut the knot. The 
Semiconductor Industry Association in San Jose, Calif., gives manufacturers no 
more than 5 years to take the high-k plunge. Otherwise, the industry's growth 
rate will slow, the association says.

 In its latest guide, or roadmap, to the industry's future, the group dryly 
notes, however, that "history has shown that changes of this magnitude 
ordinarily require 10 years or more to implement."

 In 1998, Stathis and Donelli J. DiMaria, also of IBM's Watson Center, sent 
tremors through the industry by predicting that gate oxides would start to fail 
at a thickness of about 2.2 nm, which at that time was only a year or so away.

 A more optimistic prediction-1.6 nm-came out of the December 1999 electron 
devices meeting. The IBM researchers revised their estimate to 1.8 nm, Stathis 
says, although he warns that setting a hard-and-fast limit is difficult.

"Certainly by 2005, we'll hit that point," he predicts. "It could come a bit 
sooner."

 When it does, the microchip world in which silicon and silicon dioxide have 
been the perfect couple will slip away. While the semiconductor industry toasts 
silicon's new companion materials, some technologists may quietly mourn the end 
of the good thing that silicon and its oxide had for so long.


