Greenhouse Gassed: Science News Online, March 25, 2000

 Greenhouse Gassed

 Carbon dioxide spells indigestion for food chains

 Tina Hesman

"The last thing I'd want to get reincarnated as is a caterpillar," says David 
N. Karowe. He doesn't have anything personal against caterpillars; it's just 
that the future doesn't look very rosy for the fuzzy leaf chewers.

 Increased malnutrition, attacks by parasitic wasps, and death rates await 
caterpillars in the coming decades, predicts the entomologist, who's at Western 
Michigan University in Kalamazoo. The ultimate perpetrator of the anticipated 
tribulations of these and other insect herbivores is a change in Earth's 
atmosphere.

 The concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere has risen steadily 
since the beginning of the industrial revolution and is expected to double from 
today's global averages in the next 50 years. While scientists continue to 
debate whether elevated concentrations of CO2 and other greenhouse gasses, such 
as methane, will lead to significant changes in Earth's temperature, they agree 
on one thing. Boosting atmospheric CO2 makes plants grow faster.

 Paradoxically, that effect could spell disaster for plant eaters, from 
caterpillars to antelope, as well as the animals that dine on these herbivores, 
new research suggests. Fast growth often leads to poor nutritional value.

 Until recently, scientists focused on figuring out how CO2 will affect global 
weather. Now, a handful of researchers around the world is investigating how 
some of the multitude of animal species may react. The early results indicate 
that both wildlife and farmers may suffer as plants soak up the extra CO2.

 Plants beef up

 Carbon dioxide in the air acts like fertilizer, says David E. Lincoln, a 
biologist from the University of South Carolina in Columbia. Bathed in extra 
CO2, plants rev up their photosynthesis, take in the gas, and use the carbon to 
build new fiber and starch. Even as the plants beef up on carbs, the amount of 
nitrogen-an indicator of protein-in their leaves goes down.

 All that extra roughage might be a dieter's dream, but for caterpillars 
looking to bulk up before they pupate, it's a digestive nightmare. New leaves 
on plants grown in CO2-rich air are starchy but protein poor. With less protein 
in caterpillars' leafy greens, they need to eat more to get the same amount of 
nutrition. Sometimes a lot more, says Karowe.

 Karowe fed cabbage white butterfly caterpillars with leaves from plants grown 
in two different CO2 chambers-one in which the air matches today's CO2 
concentration and one with air containing twice as much of the gas. The 
caterpillars that ate carbon-enriched leaves consumed up to 40 percent more 
plant material than their brethren did.

 Unlike people who go on pasta binges, the caterpillars that ate extra 
carbohydrates didn't gain extra weight. In fact, their growth slowed by about 
10 percent, says Karowe. It took these young insects much longer than normal to 
develop into adult butterflies, he says. When the adults finally emerged, they 
were smaller than adults that hatched from caterpillars fed on regular leaves. 
Karowe discussed his work last November at a meeting of the Council for the 
Advancement of Science Writing in Hershey, Pa.

 The phenomenon of lightweights that overeat is not limited to cabbage 
butterflies, notes Richard Lindroth of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He 
has found that caterpillars and gypsy moths also cram their bellies with 
significantly more food when researchers feed them leaves from aspen, birch, 
and oak trees exposed to elevated concentrations of CO2.

 Only caterpillars that graze on carbon-enhanced sugar maple leaves are able to 
fill up on the same amount of leaves as caterpillars that eat normal sugar 
maple leaves, he reports. Lindroth doesn't know why the sugar maple eaters fare 
better than other caterpillars.

 Several other studies have demonstrated that, in general, moth and butterfly 
larvae tend to eat more and weigh less when they eat plants grown with more CO2 
in the air, says Lindroth.

 A real homebody

 To learn how much moths and butterflies eat, researchers usually study the 
insects in a laboratory. Working with caterpillars in the wild is much more 
difficult, says Peter D. Stiling, an ecologist from the University of South 
Florida in Tampa. Caterpillars range around on plants, and individuals and 
their eating habits are hard to track. Stiling and his colleagues have turned 
to a real homebody in the insect world-leaf miners-to investigate what happens 
to insect populations when CO2 concentrations rise.

 Leaf miners are ideal experimental subjects, says Stiling, because the larvae 
spend their entire lives inside blisters, or mines, that they carve inside 
leaves. Researchers can easily gauge the leaf miners' appetites by measuring 
the size of their mines.

 The mines also provide hard evidence of the insects' fates. If the larva 
starves to death, its shriveled body will be in the mine. Wasp ambushes and 
predators' attacks leave telltale signs, too. After predatory wasps devour the 
leaf miner, they burst from the mine, creating shotgun-like holes. Ants, 
spiders, and lizards instead rip open the blisters to get at the larvae inside. 
Leaf miners that manage to make it through the larval stage slice a distinctive 
round or crescent-shape escape hole in the mine, then drop to the forest floor 
and begin the transformation to adulthood.

 At NASA's Kennedy Space Center near Cape Canaveral, Fla., Stiling and his 
colleagues are determining how entire ecosystems will respond to rising CO2. 
Here, in sight of Space Shuttle launches, the scientists built clear-plastic 
cylinders around 16 clusters of scrubby oak trees, the species that dominates 
the south Florida landscape. The researchers left the 3.5-meter-diameter 
chambers open at the top so that both moisture and insects can get in and out. 
Carbon dioxide was continuously pumped into eight experimental chambers, and 
normal air was pumped into the other eight. The experimental chambers had twice 
as much CO2 as the control chambers.

 Over the course of the growing season, the scientists surveyed thousands of 
leaves in every cylinder and recorded the fates of the leaf miners. Those in 
the chambers with elevated CO2 dug out mines that were 20 percent 
larger-indicating they ate that much more leaf fiber-than did leaf miners in 
the chambers filled with standard air.

 Yet autopsies revealed that miners raised in elevated CO2 chambers were twice 
as likely to starve to death as the miners living in the air-filled cylinders 
were. "Although they may eat more per individual, a lot of them die before 
they've eaten their fill," says Stiling. The protein-poor leaves are "not rich 
enough to support them," he says. "They're all striving to succeed, but there 
are fewer of them making it."

 Moreover, compared with miners in chambers with normal air, four times as many 
leaf miners were killed by parasite attacks in the chambers containing high 
concentrations of CO2. Stiling speculates in the February 1999 Ecological 
Applications that bigger blisters might make the miners easier for the wasps to 
find. Also, if a miner spends more time growing before it leaves its mine, its 
enemies have more time to attack it.

 Signals in the air

 Increased concentrations of CO2 in the air around them may prompt insect 
herbivores to inadvertently signal their enemies, says Karowe. Plants release 
chemicals into the air when wounded by an insect bite, and parasitic wasps home 
in on these signals.

 In addition to the plants' calling in waspish air attacks, the caterpillars 
themselves produce beacons for wasps. There's nothing a parasitic wasp finds 
more attractive than caterpillar droppings, Karowe says. Caterpillars raised on 
plants grown in high- CO2 atmospheres produce up to twice the normal amount of 
waste-both because they are eating more and because the leaves are harder to 
digest, he says.

 Even though the caterpillars raised on extra CO2 are easy pickings, they're no 
picnic for the wasps, says Karowe. Because parasitic wasp larvae rely on the 
hospitality of host caterpillars for survival, when the caterpillars get 
indigestion, the parasites feel it too.

 Malnourished caterpillars can't support as many parasites as normal-size 
caterpillars can. Female wasps that lay their eggs on caterpillars exposed to 
high concentrations of CO2 aren't doing their offspring any favors, Karowe 
found. The wasps that emerge from malnourished caterpillars tend to be smaller, 
lay fewer eggs, and live shorter lives.

 Aphid explosion

 Not all insects appear to be doomed in the CO2-enhanced atmosphere of the 
future. Sap-sucking aphids, which are major agricultural pests, may in fact 
experience a population explosion, says Caroline S. Awmack, an ecologist from 
the IACR-Rothamsted agricultural research center in Harpenden, England. Aphids 
reproduce 10 to 15 percent faster under conditions of elevated CO2, Awmack has 
found.

 Unlike leaves, plant sap doesn't seem to vary much when there is more carbon 
dioxide around. Awmack doesn't know exactly what in the aphids' diet gives them 
a population boost in abundant CO2.

 Aphids seem to know what's good for them, though. Awmack, now at the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, put the tiny insects, one at a time, into a 
Y-shaped tube. The arrangement gave the aphid a choice of dining on wheat grown 
in air with a normal concentration of CO2 or in a carbon-rich atmosphere. The 
aphid took a whiff of vapors coming off the wheat samples and made a beeline 
for the plant grown under carbon-rich conditions.

"They're making a sensible decision," Awmack says.

 Sensible decisions for aphids, however, can translate into big trouble for 
plants. When CO2 concentrations are high, bean plants infected with aphids 
can't make flowers or new shoots, Awmack found. Aphids may literally suck the 
life out of nascent buds.

 If global atmospheric change increases populations of the little sap suckers, 
certain crops such as beans could be badly damaged, she says in a study that 
will be published in Agricultural and Forest Entomology.

 Awmack may have found the aphids' Achilles heel, however. Normally when an 
aphid is disturbed, it gives off a pheromone as a chemical alarm, which warns 
other aphids of danger. In experiments with elevated CO2 concentrations, aphids 
stop making the pheromone in response to stress and also don't respond to the 
pheromone if the researchers provide it. Such complacent aphids would be easy 
targets for a parasitic wasp and a no-hassle meal for a roving ladybug.

 Awmack is beginning work to see if a compromised alarm system in wild aphid 
populations under high-CO2 conditions puts them in greater-than-average danger 
from predators.

 What's good for an aphid might not be so great for the spittlebug, says 
ecologist John B. Whittaker of Lancaster University in England. Instead of 
feeding on phloem sap, the sugary sap that nourishes growing parts of the plant 
and also aphids, spittlebugs suck the xylem sap, which carries water and 
dissolved minerals.

 Whittaker and his colleagues have followed several generations of spittlebugs 
living in CO2-enriched chambers. Like leaf miners and caterpillars, spittlebugs 
failed to thrive in high concentrations of CO2. Instead of adapting to the bad 
food over time, spittlebugs do worse and worse. Survival rates dropped 27 
percent over three generations.

 Not the only issue

 The differences between classes of plant eaters could lead to shifts in the 
ecological balance among insects and the plants on which they feed, says 
Whittaker. It probably will be harder for some plants than others to adapt to 
rapid increases in certain pest populations, he says.

 The threat of crop devastation by ravenous insects is not the only issue 
concerning ecologists. Rises in CO2 may affect every plant-eating animal and 
disrupt many different food chains, experts say. "No one may be interested in 
little insects on oak trees in Florida," says Stiling. However, if rising CO2 
affects zebra and antelope on the African savanna, "that would be quite 
dramatic."

 Until now, scientists simply extrapolated from insect data to predict what 
might happen to bigger animals. Experiments to determine the effects of 
atmospheric changes on large herbivores are difficult.

"All you can do is lead a tethered antelope into a chamber [holding 
CO2-enriched air] and see if it eats more," Stiling says.

 Researchers in ranching areas are now doing exactly that kind of experiment to 
predict how the changing atmosphere will affect valuable livestock. Scientists 
in Kansas and New Zealand are leading sheep to carbon-enriched pastures to 
explore what will happen to grazing animals and their grasslands when CO2 
concentrations rise.

 Just as for many insects, the quality of diet for large herbivores goes down 
as CO2 concentrations go up, says Clenton Owensby, a grasslands-management 
researcher at Kansas State University in Manhattan.

 Owensby and his colleagues erected greenhouses over patches of the Kansas 
prairie and pumped CO2-laden air into some and ambient air into others. The 
researchers turned sheep loose in the greenhouses and then collected food from 
the animals' throats before they digested it. Sure enough, the chosen prairie 
grasses grown in high CO2 had much less protein than those from the control 
houses.

 Unlike insects that compensate for protein-poor diets by eating more, 
cud-chewing animals like sheep tend to eat less, Owensby says. That's because 
bacteria in the guts of such ruminants control how much food the animals take 
in. The bacteria digest plant matter, extracting maximum nutrients for their 
host, but the microbes need protein to do their job. As the protein content of 
the diet falls, so does the bacteria's digestive activity. The grazing animal 
soon fills its rumen to capacity and must wait for the bacteria to finish 
digestion before it can graze again.

 All that waiting around between meals could mean a longer stay on the farm 
while the animal gains the weight it needs to be marketable. Farmers and 
ranchers can feed their livestock protein supplements to make up for what's 
lacking in the animals' diet. Of course, that may greatly increase the cost of 
meat, Owensby says.

 Researchers in New Zealand are also studying sheep, but in a slightly 
different way, says Paul Newton of AgResearch in Palmerston North. The 
scientists have encircled several pastures with poles that pump CO2 into the 
open. Air inside each ring of poles contains twice the concentration of CO2 as 
the surrounding atmosphere does.

 Newton and his colleagues have turned loose a herd of about 300 sheep 
outfitted with backpacks to roam through the rings and surrounding pastures. 
The scientists want to know if the sheep prefer the carbon-enhanced plants or 
their regular diet. Sensors that send signals into the backpack monitor how 
much food and what types of plants the sheep eat and measure how much methane 
the animals produce.

 The researchers have already learned that the mix of plants in a pasture 
changes when they add sheep. More protein-rich legumes grow in the CO2-enriched 
areas where sheep graze than in those where they don't, Newton says. Strangely, 
the sheep tend to eat more of the legumes than other grasses, but the legumes 
still increase in number.

 Because wild animals aren't as accommodating as sheep and caterpillars, 
scientists can only speculate what rising CO2 concentrations will do to 
wildlife populations. Right now, Owensby says, "these are things only a mystic 
can come up with."

 While rising CO2 in the world's atmosphere could hit meat producers in the 
wallet, wildlife may face even higher costs. "Wild ruminants won't be so lucky 
to have someone chasing after them giving them protein supplements," says 
Owensby.


