How whales, dolphins, seals dive so deep: Science News Online, April 8, 2000

> How whales, dolphins, seals dive so deep

 Susan Milius

 A nerve-racking effort to attach cameras to marine mammals has shown how four 
species dive the impossible dive.

 Previous calculations just hadn't explained how certain champion divers use so 
little oxygen, notes Terrie M. Williams of the University of California, Santa 
Cruz. Now, she and seven colleagues report that a 10-year project that fit 
video cameras onto free-swimming animals has revealed a crucial trick.

 The blue whale, bottlenose dolphin, Weddell seal, and elephant seal all cut 
diving energy costs 10 to 50 percent by simply gliding downward, the team 
reports in the April 7 Science. The creatures' buoyancy decreases because water 
pressure squeezes their bodies into a smaller volume and flattens air sacs in 
their lungs. As the animals sink, they save energy for the swim back up.

"This is the first time we've really been able to see what marine mammals do on 
deep dives," Williams says.

 Scuba diving scientists have managed to swim with animals for only about the 
first 30 meters of the drop. "We're pathetic," Williams says. Her team 
documented seal depths of nearly 400 m.

 Previously, instruments recorded times and depths but not swimming technique. 
Fixed cameras gave only glimpses, although they did show that the animals' 
chests caved in as pressure increased.

"We had to wait for the technology to come along," Williams recalls. Finally, 
researchers at Texas A&M University in College Station and the National 
Geographic Society in Washington, D.C., created video backpacks: a small camera 
plus monitoring instruments. Then came the puzzle of how to attach the package 
to an animal.

 Glue works on the hairy seal bodies, but "nothing sticks to a dolphin," 
Williams sighs. Tapes slip off its skin, and even superglue fails. The dolphin 
team finally used suction cups like those on a non-slip shower mat.

 The suction cup had to be dinner-plate-size for the blue whale. John 
Calambokidis of Cascadia Research in Olympia, Wash., drew on his long 
experience in politely approaching whales to place the pack. He eased a 22-foot 
inflatable boat up to an 80-foot whale off the California coast. Leaning over 
the bow, John Francis of the National Geographic Society maneuvered an aluminum 
pole to position the camera. Fortunately, "blue whales aren't flighty," he says.

 The researchers didn't just wave good-bye to cameras worth tens of thousands 
of dollars. They hauled a backpack-bearing elephant seal out to sea and 
predicted that it would hasten back to its basking place on the beach. Their 
dolphin returned on command, thanks to its Navy training. The whale suction cup 
had magnesium plugs that dissolved in 90 minutes, breaking the vacuum so the 
camera floated up for retrieval.

 In Antarctica, the scientists hovered around a hole that they had drilled in a 
solid expanse of ice and hoped the three backpack-bearing Weddell seals 
wouldn't find another place to surface. "We were breaking open a champagne 
bottle the first time the Weddell's camera came back," Williams remembers.

 Body motions captured by the cameras let the researchers correlate the 
animals' swim strokes with their progress. To judge oxygen expenditure, a team 
sampled exhalations of Weddell seals after dives and shallower explorations. 
Williams found that stroking demanded more oxygen than gliding downward.

 Work on robotic fish had raised the odd possibility that gliding demands more 
energy than stroking, observes Frank Fish, who studies swim biomechanics at 
West Chester (Pa.) University. The new work, however, makes this unlikely in 
marine mammals, he notes. He adds, "It's interesting in that it adds to the 
database of how clever animals are."

 Morphologist Ann Pabst of the University of North Carolina at Wilmington 
praised the new study for being "so broadly comparative." She points out that 
the dolphin is only about one-tenth the length of a blue whale, but the gliding 
strategy still works. Also, she says, the similar underwater diving routines of 
the four species must have evolved in at least two separate lines of mammals.

 Williams, T.M. . . . J. Calambokidis, et al. 2000. Sink or swim: Strategies 
for cost-efficient diving by marine mammals. Science 288(April 7):133-136. 
Abstract available at .


