Pushing the Mood Swings: Science News Online, April 8, 2000

> Pushing the Mood Swings

 Social and psychological forces sway the course of manic depression

 Bruce Bower

 Manic depression, also known as bipolar disorder, has a well-deserved 
reputation as a biologically based condition. Wayward brain chemicals and genes 
gone bad seem to bully people back and forth between weeks of 
moderate-to-intense euphoria and comparable spells of soul-deadening 
depression. A few weeks of relative calm often separate these disparate moods.

 Manic depression, however, may nurse a more sensitive side. Its intense mood 
swings increasingly appear to reflect a variety of social and psychological 
influences.

 Research finding such relationships raises hopes that new forms of 
psychotherapy may improve the treatment of bipolar disorder. "This illness 
wreaks havoc with what makes us most human-our attitudes, our relationships, 
how we feel about ourselves, and our ability to trust our judgments about those 
closest to us," remarks Thomas A. Wehr, a psychiatrist at the National 
Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md. "Even though it's tough to go 
through, psychotherapy makes sense as a way to understand this condition."

 Until recently, treatment hopes largely rested on biological investigations. 
When tools for genetic analysis emerged around 15 years ago, making it possible 
to link signature pieces of DNA to specific illnesses, researchers quickly took 
aim at manic depression. Its tendency to run in families makes it a promising 
target. Although investigations have yet to identify genes that contribute to 
this mental condition, the search area has narrowed considerably.

 Whatever its biological basis, manic depression shows remarkable tenacity. 
Only a small minority of bipolar patients who improve on psychiatric 
medications avoids a return of mania or depression in the ensuing 5 years. As 
many as one-fifth of the estimated 3 million people in the United States who 
develop bipolar disorder eventually find the emotional ride intolerable and 
kill themselves.

 Treatment with lithium chloride or any of several other drugs helps to even 
out the emotional peaks and valleys for about two-thirds of people with bipolar 
disorder. Ironically, the leavening of intense feelings causes up to one-half 
of these drug responders to stop taking medication at some point. None longs to 
plunge back into depression's cold waters. Yet many crave mania's intoxicating 
pleasures, such as heightened creativity and a sense of unbridled potential.

 Repeated forays into both mania and depression, however, lay waste to 
marriages, friendships, and other social ties. Moreover, people with bipolar 
disorder frequently observe that the quality of their close relationships 
affects their moods. In many cases, whether or not medication helps, bipolar 
sufferers seek psychotherapy in hopes of gaining insight into their volatile 
lives.

"Lithium . . . makes psychotherapy possible," says psychologist Kay Redfield 
Jamison of Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore in An Unquiet Mind 
(1995, Alfred A. Knopf). "But, ineffably, psychotherapy heals."

 Jamison speaks about manic depression from an insider's perspective. She has 
personally struggled with the condition since adolescence.

 Investigators are now beginning to explore the impact of intimate 
relationships, social stress, individual styles of thinking, and psychotherapy 
on the course of bipolar disorder.

 Mood sensitivity

 People who suffer from bipolar disorder have perhaps more frequently noted the 
sensitivity of their moods to social influences than have mental-health 
clinicians. Still, case reports published decades ago described how stressful 
events and disturbed relationships sometimes trigger episodes of mania and 
depression.

 Over the past decade, several studies have found that bipolar patients 
released from psychiatric hospitals more often climb back on the emotional 
roller coaster if they encounter a lot of daily stress. Living with a hostile, 
critical family ranks high among such strains.

 In contrast, social circumstances that contribute to healing have received 
scant attention from researchers. A new investigation finds that people treated 
for an episode of mania or depression recover within about 8 months if they 
have supportive families and friends, reports psychologist Sheri L. Johnson of 
the University of Miami in Coral Gables. Bipolar patients who lack these 
helping hands have a recovery time of more than a year.

 However, the benefits of positive personal relationships fade in the face of 
the death of a loved one, job loss, or other major setbacks. These can extend 
recovery time to more than a year, Johnson and her colleagues reported in the 
November 1999 Journal of Abnormal Psychology.

 The cruel slap of an unexpected loss or growing friction in a cherished 
relationship usually signaled the imminent return of depression, but not mania, 
according to the study.

 Any of a variety of social, psychological, and biological mechanisms may 
provoke depression, the scientists theorize, but only a single brain network 
inspires mania. That network, involved in positive emotion and striving for 
rewards, responds to a narrow spectrum of external influences, they suggest.

 Johnson's team studied 59 adults diagnosed with bipolar disorder, most of whom 
entered the study during an episode of either mania or depression. Of that 
total, 36 took lithium or other prescribed medications, as they had before the 
trial. The findings held regardless of whether participants received drug 
treatment.

 A related investigation, published in the same journal issue, indicates that 
some people with manic depression prove more psychologically vulnerable to 
stressful events than others do.

 Psychologist Noreen A. Reilly-Harrington of Harvard Medical School in Boston 
and her coworkers used questionnaires to probe the thinking styles of 49 people 
who had previously been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, 97 individuals who had 
suffered from major depression (which recurs without periods of mania), and 23 
who had never been diagnosed with a psychiatric condition.

 Most participants in these three groups weren't receiving any mental-health 
treatment.

 Over a 4-month period, depression increased only among those individuals with 
either bipolar disorder or major depression who displayed negative thinking 
styles and reported a death in the family, divorce, or other stressful 
experience. Negative thinkers blame themselves for personal misfortunes and 
consider themselves incompetent.

 Such a mix of negative thinking and stressful events also heralded rises in 
manic symptoms for volunteers with bipolar disorder, the researchers say.

 It's possible that in bipolar disorder, manic episodes serve as a 
psychological defense or counterpunch against a relentless propensity for 
sinking into depression, Reilly-Harrington and her colleagues propose. 
Psychoanalytically inclined clinicians have long articulated this position.

 Reilly-Harrington's group suggests that along with negative thinking and 
personal misfortunes, disruptions of a person's daily routines or sleep-wake 
pattern appear to promote mania.

 This view is supported by a 1998 study directed by psychologist Susan 
Malkoff-Schwartz of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. Her group 
found that bipolar patients tended to become manic within about 2 months of 
having their daily routines rearranged, even temporarily. These alterations 
included air travel across several time zones and losing a full-time job 
without immediately starting another.

 Building evidence

 In fact, evidence is building that efforts to initiate a steady pulse of daily 
activities and sleep can tame manic depression.

 Using a treatment dubbed interpersonal-and-social-rhythm therapy, psychologist 
Ellen Frank of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine and her 
co-workers are trying to dampen bipolar extremes by stabilizing social routines.

 In this approach, psychotherapists help bipolar patients recognize the 
interplay between their moods and the inevitable ups and downs of everyday 
existence. Counseling sessions also focus on how emotional turmoil in 
relationships can disrupt a person's daily routines and bring on a bout of 
mania or depression. Bipolar patients then learn to plan and hold to a daily 
routine, adhere to prescribed medication doses, and work on relationship 
problems as they arise.

 At the halfway point of a 2-year study, Frank's team has observed that this 
form of psychotherapy helps prevent recurrences of bipolar-disorder symptoms. 
Unexpectedly, though, they found that patients benefited most from staying in 
the same treatment program throughout the first year of the program, even if it 
wasn't interpersonal-and-social-rhythm therapy.

 The researchers randomly assigned 82 people diagnosed with bipolar disorder to 
regular sessions of either interpersonal-and-social-rhythm therapy or clinical 
management (consisting of advice and support from a concerned therapist) or to 
a 1-month period with one of those therapies followed by a switch to the other 
method for the remainder of the year. Participants who changed therapies 
retained the same therapist.

 Most patients who stayed in either type of therapy for 1 year managed to avoid 
return episodes of mania and depression, Frank's group reported in the November 
1999 Journal of Abnormal Psychology. Those who switched from one therapy to 
another fared considerably worse.

 The ongoing study may eventually reveal specific benefits attributed to the 
social-rhythm treatment, Frank predicts. Still, even modest changes in the 
nature of psychotherapy appear to throw bipolar patients seriously off-kilter, 
she says.

 For example, a person who improves with clinical management and then changes 
to interpersonal-and-social-rhythm therapy abruptly confronts instructions to 
explore sensitive areas of conflict with loved ones. This may undercut the 
sense of stability achieved in support-oriented discussions that didn't probe 
emotional sore spots.

 Moreover, Frank notes, 25 bipolar volunteers who changed therapists but not 
treatments during the study-due to a clinician's maternity leave or departure 
from the clinic-maintained their initial improvement after the switch.

"It appears that the consistency of routines, including the routine of the 
patient's psychosocial treatment, is a protective factor in the course of 
[bipolar] disorder," remark David J. Miklowitz of the University of Colorado at 
Boulder and Lauren B. Alloy of Temple University in Philadelphia. The two 
psychologists wrote a comment on Frank's, Johnson's, and Reilly-Harrington's 
studies in the same issue of the Journal of Abnormal Psychology.

 Bed rest and sleep

 A dose of stability-in the form of extended nightly bed rest and sleep-may 
help prevent mania as well as a particularly severe form of bipolar illness, 
according to Wehr.

 He and his colleagues prescribed 10 hours of nightly bed rest in the dark for 
a 51-year-old man diagnosed with bipolar disorder. The man had begun to shift 
from full-blown depression to relatively severe mania every 6 to 8 weeks, with 
no calm period in between. Psychiatrists refer to this speedy mood turnaround 
as rapid cycling. Lithium and other medications had provided no relief.

 The man's condition dramatically improved after several weeks of enforced 
night rest. During nearly 4 years of adhering to this routine, his sleeping 
pattern and mood largely stabilized, Wehr's team reported 2 years ago.

 Staying up late night after night under the glare of artificial lights, an 
unheard-of activity until quite recently (SN: 9/25/99, p. 205: ), may worsen 
some forms of bipolar illness, Wehr theorizes. Under these circumstances, the 
timing of the body's sleep-wake cycle appears to come unhinged from the outside 
world's daily cycle of light and darkness, he suggests.

 Swiss researchers led by Anna Wirz-Justice of the Psychiatric University 
Clinic in Basel had similar success in treating a 70-year-old bipolar woman 
with 10 hours of nightly bed rest for several months. An extremely rapid 
cycler, going from severe depression to mania within 1 week, the woman had been 
hospitalized on and off for 24 years.

 Along with prescribing the lengthy night rest, the scientists administered 30 
minutes of bright light to the woman each morning after she awoke. 
Wirz-Justice's case report appeared in the April 1999 Biological Psychiatry.

 Although Wehr suspects that sleep critically influences bipolar disorder, 
other features of his intervention may help corral wild moods. Increased 
activity during the day and consistent timing of behaviors, as well as the 
quiet, isolation, and darkness at night, represent possible agents of 
improvement.

 Whether or not larger studies carve out a place for sleep therapy, people with 
bipolar disorder will continue to clamor for psychotherapy, Wehr and others 
hold. "If nothing else, psychotherapy has an important role in helping people 
to accept that they have this illness and need ongoing treatment," Frank says.


