Loosen Up: Science News Online, April 22, 2000

 Loosen Up

 Bacterial toxin may lead to less painful treatments for diabetes and brain 
cancer

 John Travis

 Take the nasty bacterium that causes cholera, delete the gene for its 
well-studied toxin, and you should end up with a harmless microbe that can 
immunize people against the real thing. It sounded like a good plan, recalls 
Alessio Fasano of the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore.

 The scheme failed, however. A decade ago, when Fasano and his colleagues used 
a genetically stripped Vibrio cholerae to vaccinate 10 people, half the 
volunteers developed mild diarrhea. The altered bacterium obviously had some 
bite left in it.

 The effort to understand what went wrong in that vaccine experiment has 
shifted the interests of Fasano and his colleagues to topics far from cholera. 
In 1991, they identified a second V. cholerae toxin that contributes to the 
diarrhea of the disease. Since then, they've learned that this toxin mimics a 
protein that the body uses to regulate the permeability of the seams between 
cells within the intestine, brain, heart, and other tissues.

 Fasano sees many uses for this human protein. By helping drugs slip out of the 
intestine and into the bloodstream, the protein may become a component of an 
insulin pill that replaces a diabetic person's periodic shots. A similar 
approach could enable scientists to sneak medications past the formidable 
blood-brain barrier.

 Moreover, the discovery of the way the body normally controls tight junctions, 
the specialized seams between cells, may help investigators explain why the 
junctions sometimes aren't tight enough. Leaky junctions occur in disorders 
including diabetes, celiac disease, and even some brain illnesses.

"It's the typical example of scientific serendipity. We were looking for one 
thing and came up with something totally different," chuckles Fasano.

 Bricks in a wall

 If the cells that line the intestine represent bricks in a wall, tight 
junctions are the mortar that binds them together, or so scientists long 
thought. More recently, as they've identified some of the proteins that make up 
a tight junction, investigators have begun to realize that the 
bricks-and-mortar analogy is misleading. "Our molecular understanding of the 
junction complex is just exploding now," notes Mark Donowitz of the Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.

 Tight junctions have proven to be far more flexible and dynamic than mortar. 
Although the junctions in the intestine usually prevent proteins, water, and 
other molecules from passing between adjoining cells, they occasionally permit 
some molecules to slip through. In fact, cells can signal the tight junctions 
to alter their permeability, says Fasano.

 The cholera toxin that his group discovered has now led the researchers to a 
regulator of the junction. The cholera toxin identified earlier directly 
increases secretions from the cells lining the intestine, resulting in 
diarrhea. Fasano's toxin instead opens tight junctions, enabling water and 
other molecules from blood to seep between the cells and into the intestine.

 Drawing on the scientific name for tight junctions, the investigators dubbed 
the bacterial protein zonula occludens toxin, or Zot. They also identified the 
protein on intestinal cells to which Zot binds, triggering the loosening of the 
tight junctions.

 Fasano and his colleagues immediately wondered if there was a human protein 
resembling the bacterial toxin. After all, because of their intimate and 
long-term association with the organisms they infect, bacteria are among the 
best cell biologists around. The microbes frequently make proteins that mimic 
some of the host's molecules.

 Sure enough, the investigators found a Zotlike human protein, which they named 
zonulin. Zonulin, too, makes the intestine "leakier," says Fasano. To confirm 
that the human intestine produces this protein, the scientists obtained various 
tissues from a cadaver and screened them for zonulin by using antibodies that 
latch onto Zot. As expected, intestinal tissue contained the protein, but so 
did heart, brain, and a few other tissues.

 This briefly perplexed the researchers, until they remembered that tight 
junctions join cells in many different regions of the body. Indeed, next to the 
intestinal lining, the best-known locale for tight junctions is the blood-brain 
barrier. This sheet of cells lines the blood vessels that snake through the 
brain, creating a barricade that protects the delicate nerve tissue from 
potentially damaging molecules within the bloodstream.

 In the January Journal of Neurochemistry, Fasano's group confirms that brain 
tissue contains the cell-surface protein that zonulin binds to induce a cell to 
open its tight junctions. Furthermore, the scientists have confirmed that in 
pieces of the blood-brain barrier grown in dishes, both zonulin and Zot open 
the tight junctions.

"We have precious little understanding of the cell biology of 
blood-brain-barrier tight junctions. This adds to that. It's a nice piece of 
work," says William M. Pardridge of the University of California, Los Angeles.

 Fasano calls zonulin a key that opens a gate between cells. He notes that the 
human body actually has several similar keys. Zonulin made in the intestine 
differs by a few amino acids from the ones produced in the brain or in other 
tissues. The subtle alterations seem to prevent zonulin meant for one tissue 
from altering the tight junctions of another.

"It makes sense," says Fasano. "[The body] may have a need to make the 
intestine leakier but leave the blood-brain barrier unaffected, or vice-versa."

 Tight junctions

 While intrigued by zonulin's potential to help elucidate the workings of tight 
junctions, Fasano is far more excited by the prospect of using the protein to 
improve human health. He envisions physicians administering zonulin or Zot to 
deliver drugs through the intestine into the bloodstream. This technique might 
eliminate the need for injecting many drugs, he says.

"We can make the intestine leakier to the point that we can allow passage of 
molecules not normally absorbable by the intestine. The implications of this 
are tremendous," says Fasano.

 An obvious candidate for such a strategy is insulin, the hormone that people 
with diabetes take to control their blood sugar. Like many other proteins with 
medical uses, insulin molecules are too large to be absorbed by intestinal 
cells or to slip past the tight junctions. So, oral insulin stays in the 
digestive tract, where it gets broken apart. That's why people must inject 
themselves with the drug, an onerous task, especially for kids.

 In a 1997 mouse study, Fasano's team found that Zot dramatically increases the 
intestine's ability to absorb insulin. Moreover, mice given oral-insulin doses 
with Zot controlled their glucose levels just as well as mice receiving insulin 
injections did. Recently, the same approach has controlled the blood-glucose 
concentrations of diabetic monkeys, adds Fasano.

 Wouldn't the toxin trigger diarrhea? None of the animals experienced that side 
effect or suffered any other problems, says Fasano.

 Water from the bloodstream does seep into the intestine, but the colon, where 
Zot has no effect, apparently reabsorbs it. This suggests that Zot alone can't 
trigger diarrhea and that other molecules made by V. cholerae must contribute 
to that symptom. Moreover, the Zot-induced change in intestinal tight-junction 
permeability reverses itself within a half hour, Fasano adds.

 The University of Maryland, which owns several patents stemming from the 
zonulin research, has assigned most of them to Zone Therapeutics, a firm in 
Rockville, Md. With the success of the animal testing, the company now plans to 
ask the Food and Drug Administration for permission to start testing the 
insulin-Zot or insulin-zonulin strategy on people.

 There's certainly a strong demand for an insulin pill. When Fasano and his 
colleagues published their study of mice, people with diabetes besieged his 
office with requests for oral insulin.

 Frustrating barricade

 The investigators believe that Zotlike compounds will also let them breach the 
blood-brain barrier. This barricade has frustrated drug developers for many 
years. "More than 98 percent of all drugs do not cross the blood-brain 
barrier," notes Pardridge.

 Because of this obstacle, physicians targeting the brain must directly inject 
most drugs through the skull, a risky and infection-prone procedure. Working 
with mice and a tracer that mimics drugs, Fasano's group has tried something 
far simpler-with success.

"When we administer both Zot and a tracer, we see the tracer reaching the 
brain," says the researcher. Buoyed by these still unpublished results, he 
suggests this strategy could help physicians get chemotherapy drugs to brain 
tumors.

 Pardridge expresses skepticism about this approach, however. "If you're going 
to deliver drugs by disrupting the blood-brain barrier, you're going to let in 
everything else in the bloodstream," he warns, pointing out that other 
compounds that disrupt the barrier have induced seizures in animals.

 Fasano counters that those compounds irreversibly destroy the barrier, whereas 
Zot or zonulin would open tight junctions of the blood-brain barrier just long 
enough to allow transport of a drug across it. Preliminary tests with rodents 
support this belief, he says.

"If well used, zonulin should not cause any side effects, since the process is 
quick and reversible within a few minutes," asserts Fasano.

 Overly optimistic

 Researchers other than Pardridge also worry that Fasano is overly optimistic 
at this early stage in his research. They note that he hasn't yet announced the 
finding of the gene for zonulin or provided a detailed description of the 
protein in a scientific journal.

"The story sounds wonderful, [but] there's information that needs to be filled 
in: the precise identity of the protein, where it's made [in the body], and how 
it works," cautions Jeffrey B. Matthews of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
in Boston, who studies intestinal permeability.

 Fasano says that his group has such data but waited for the University of 
Maryland to patent zonulin and its uses. A number of publications should appear 
soon, he says.

 Fasano predicts that besides delivering drugs, zonulin will help explain 
facets of several diseases. Take celiac disease, an enigmatic intestinal 
disorder seemingly triggered by abnormal sensitivity to gluten, a component of 
wheat, barley, and other grains. People with celiac disease suffer a broad 
array of symptoms, including diarrhea, weight loss, and malnutrition. 
Curiously, people with celiac disease also seem to face an unusually high risk 
of developing autoimmune disorders, such as type I, or juvenile-onset, diabetes.

 Scientists have yet to develop a good explanation for what goes wrong in 
celiac disease, but Fasano's team may have found an important clue. It's been 
known for some time that intestinal tight junctions become more permeable in 
celiac disease, especially when the disorder flares up. "These gates are stuck 
open, and we don't know why," says Fasano.

 He and his colleagues recently reported at a meeting of pediatricians in 
Agricento, Italy, that intestinal tissue from people with acute celiac disease 
contains much more zonulin than does similar tissue from people free of the 
disease. The investigators hypothesize that gluten, for a still unknown reason, 
stimulates inappropriate zonulin production, leading to the condition's varied 
symptoms.

 They also speculate that the leaky tight junctions in a person with celiac 
disease may allow molecules to leak from the intestine into the blood and 
trigger autoimmune reactions. To support this idea, Fasano has examined 
laboratory rats that spontaneously develop diabetes because their immune 
systems begin attacking insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. These rodents, 
he finds, always have an increase in intestinal permeability several weeks 
before the diabetes symptoms appear.

 As scientists pay more attention to zonulin and its ability to regulate tight 
junctions throughout the body, they may link the protein to additional 
illnesses, Fasano predicts. Although no one has yet implicated zonulin in 
Alzheimer's disease, one of the symptoms of the disorder is a breakdown of the 
blood-brain barrier.

 We have also identified an important heart disease in which zonulin seems to 
be involved," says Fasano, hinting at a new line of investigation.

 Not bad for a failed vaccine experiment.


