A Comet's Long Tail Tickles Ulysses: Science News Online, April 8, 2000

> A Comet's Long Tail Tickles Ulysses

 Ron Cowen

 When a newly discovered comet named Hyakutake passed near Earth about 4 years 
ago, it made a major spectacle of itself. As well as flaunting two dust tails, 
it sported a ghostly bluish-white stream of charged particles, extending a 
third of the way across the sky (SN: 6/1/96, p. 346).

 This ion tail, it now turns out, went on for an even longer stretch. A recent 
review of 1996 data from the Ulysses spacecraft reveals this tail as the 
longest ever recorded. Spanning at least 571 million kilometers-about 3.5 times 
the Earth-sun distance-the tail might have extended to the fringes of the solar 
system, researchers report in the April 6 Nature.

 Astronomers say that they are amazed to find an intact ion tail so far from 
its parent.

 This is the first time that the tail of a known comet has been detected by 
analyzing the solar wind, the breeze of charged particles that blows out of the 
sun. Scientists had thought that the only way to sample comet material was to 
fly costly missions close by the object. They now plan to look for undetected 
comets simply by searching for their tails.

"A spacecraft could travel through regions of the solar system picking up ions 
from the many invisible comet tails that probably crisscross our solar system," 
says George Gloeckler of the University of Maryland, College Park. He 
coauthored one of the two Ulysses studies in the Nature issue. A NASA-European 
Space Agency mission launched in 1990, Ulysses explores the polar regions of 
the sun.

 Gloeckler and his colleagues weren't hunting comets when they sifted through 
data on the composition of the solar wind. They were looking for changes in the 
wind that would indicate a solar eruption. However, when they examined the 
composition of the solar wind hitting Ulysses on May 1, 1996, the researchers 
found something puzzling.

 The population of highly ionized gas particles-the main constituents of the 
solar wind-abruptly dropped to a fifth of its previous value. At the same time, 
the density of singly ionized particles, including carbon and oxygen, rose 
dramatically. Such ions are rare in the solar wind but common in the tails of 
the few comets, such as Halley's, that astronomers have examined extensively. 
Whenever the solar wind runs into an ion tail, it carries the tail material 
along with it.

 But if the craft had intercepted a comet's tail, where was the comet? No known 
comets resided at Ulysses' distance from the sun, nearly four times the 
Earth-sun separation. Using the velocity of the solar wind, the team calculated 
that 8 days earlier, Comet Hyakutake had been more than half a billion 
kilometers distant, yet in the right place-along the line connecting the sun 
and the spacecraft-to have generated the ions.

 A team based in London came to the same conclusion after analyzing data from a 
magnetometer aboard Ulysses.

 That detector revealed that on May 1, 1996, the magnetic field traveling along 
with the solar wind had an unusual configuration, report Geraint H. Jones and 
Andre Balogh of Imperial College and Timothy S. Horbury of Queen Mary and 
Westfield College. The field exhibited a hairpin shape, a sign that the solar 
wind had run into some dense obstacle and the magnetic field had draped around 
it. Comets are prime suspects in such behavior: The high density of ions near 
the core of a comet is highly effective at slowing the solar wind.

 The magnetic field disturbance indicated that the tail was curving away from 
the sun, the researchers say. This geometry is characteristic of a rapidly 
moving comet, such as Hyakutake, at its closest approach to the sun.

"The two papers together make a very convincing case," says comet researcher 
John C. Brandt of the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. He suggests that 
the ion tail remained intact as it was pushed more than half a billion 
kilometers because the polar solar wind is remarkably steady. Had the tail been 
carried by the sun's gusty equatorial wind, it might have been torn apart, 
Brandt speculates.

 If planetary scientists can find small comets by detecting the tails, he 
notes, they will be better able to test models that describe how these amalgams 
of dust and ice formed in the early solar system.


