Telltale Dino Heart Hints at Warm Blood: Science News Online, April 22, 2000

 Telltale Dino Heart Hints at Warm Blood

 Tina Hesman

 He could tell just by looking that this dame had a heart of stone.

 When PI (paleontological investigator) Michael (Mike) Hammer stumbled across 
the big-eyed dinosaur that he calls Willo on a South Dakota ranch in 1993, he 
noticed her chest cavity right away. Preserved in the curve of the dinosaur's 
ribs was a rock that Hammer was convinced was a heart.

 The professional fossil collector, who runs Hammer and Hammer Paleotek in 
Jacksonville, Ore., took the dinosaur in for a medical X-ray scan. The scan 
confirmed that the beast had a heart with a structure that could finally help 
dinosaurs beat the rap as cold-blooded killers.

 The fossil heart is built more like bird and mammal hearts than like the 
hearts of reptiles, says Dale A. Russell, a paleontologist at North Carolina 
State University in Raleigh, who was part of the team that reported the finding 
in the April 21 Science.

 Like those of birds and mammals, this heart probably had four chambers with a 
single aorta-a large artery that carries blood to the body, says Russell. 
Crocodiles, alligators, and other reptiles have two aortas. Hammer and his 
colleagues say they can clearly make out the aorta and two ventricles in the X 
rays.

 Hearts with a single aorta tend to be more efficient at delivering oxygen to 
the body, says Michael K. Stoskopf, a North Carolina State veterinarian on the 
team. A more efficient heart could support a more active animal and may 
indicate that dinosaurs had high metabolic rates-a prerequisite for being 
warm-blooded, the authors say.

"This is finally evidence for our side," says paleontologist Jack Horner of the 
Museum of the Rockies at Montana State University in Bozeman, who has argued 
that dinosaurs were warm-blooded animals.

 The organ is remarkably well preserved. "Really, it's a stunner," says 
Russell. Still, the fossil has lost some components that would strengthen the 
team's case, says John A. Ruben of Oregon State University in Corvallis. Ruben 
described the liver and diaphragm of another dinosaur last year (SN: 2/20/99, 
p. 127). "It's too incomplete to say anything as definitive as the authors 
would like to," he says.

 A pulmonary vessel-which carries blood to the lungs-is conspicuous in its 
absence and may be a clue that the dinosaur had a second aorta, Ruben says. 
"It's like the dog that didn't bark in Sherlock Holmes," he explains.

"It would have been nice to see [the pulmonary artery]," agrees Stoskopf, but 
he adds that the aorta is much heartier and more likely to survive in fossil 
form. The missing pulmonary vessel "doesn't negate what we did see," Stoskopf 
says.

]If the authors have correctly interpreted the results, "it's a very cool 
discovery," says James O. Farlow of Indiana University-Purdue University in 
Fort Wayne. However, just because the dinosaur had a heart that could support a 
high metabolism doesn't mean the animal was warm-blooded, he says.

 Willo is a Thescelosaurus-one of the so-called bird-hipped dinosaurs. Despite 
the name, these animals form a separate lineage from the lizard-hipped 
dinosaurs that may have given rise to birds, says Russell. The researchers say 
the one-aorta heart may have existed in the common ancestor of all dinosaurs or 
evolved several times in different dinosaur lineages. "I'm putting my money on 
the double evolution," says Russell.

 The researchers urge other fossil hunters to look for traces of internal 
organs. "In the old days, this would have just been [regarded as] a hard rock 
in the way, and I would have destroyed it," says Hammer.

"We may have been throwing away the best parts," says Stoskopf.

 The discovery is likely to fuel the debate about whether dinosaurs were warm- 
or cold-blooded animals, but "mostly what it does is show us that the best 
discoveries are made when we least expect them," says Horner.


