Calcium may become a dieter's best friend: Science News Online, April 29, 2000

 Calcium may become a dieter's best friend

 Janet Raloff

 There's encouraging news for people who've been losing the battle of the 
bulge. Weight loss may be at hand-if that hand begins reaching for a glass of 
milk, slice of cheese, or dish of yogurt, all low-fat, of course.

 At the Experimental Biology 2000 meeting last week in San Diego, scientists 
from the University of Tennessee in Knoxville reported dramatic findings from a 
weight-loss study in mice. How much calcium the animals consumed-and its 
source-greatly affected what share of their meals turned to fat.

 Reanalysis of data collected earlier on women supports that finding, another 
scientist adds.

 The Tennessee team used mice that model human patterns of obesity. The animals 
had been genetically engineered to express in their fat cells a gene called 
agouti, which normally operates in human but not mouse fat cells. This gene 
strongly influences whether a fat cell burns energy-containing molecules or 
converts them to fat.

 Michael B. Zemel, who directs the university's Nutrition Institute, and his 
colleagues put these mice onto a low-calorie diet for 6 weeks. Their meals 
contained just 70 percent as much energy as the rodents would normally choose 
to eat. One group received a diet that was also deficient in calcium. Its 
calcium content, adjusting for species differences, is "almost exactly what 
American women are consuming," Zemel notes, "about 500 milligrams per day." 
That's well below the recommended daily allowance of 1,300 mg calcium.

 The calorie-restricted mice lost 8 percent of their body fat and 11 percent of 
their weight.

 Zemel's group again restricted the food but boosted calcium intake of another 
two groups of the mice. Each received the mouse equivalent of a human dose of 
1,600 mg calcium per day. Mice getting this as a carbonate supplement lost 42 
percent of their body fat and 19 percent of their weight. Those that consumed 
the extra calcium as nonfat dry milk-substituted for an equal amount of dietary 
protein-lost 60 percent of their body fat and 25 percent of their weight.

 A fourth group, receiving twice as much dairy-derived calcium, showed little 
extra benefit, Zemel notes.

 These differences occurred even though all of the low-calorie groups got the 
same exercise and mix of dietary fat, protein, and carbohydrates. The results 
show that varying dietary calcium alters the animals' metabolism, says Zemel. 
Among the dieting animals, core body temperature-a measure of basal energy 
use-fell during the low-calcium diet but climbed with the high-calcium chow.

 Under low-calcium conditions, the Tennessee scientists find, the agouti gene 
directs calcium channels to open. "That turns out to be a bad thing," Zemel 
says, because it activates fat synthesis while suppressing fat breakdown.

 Zemel's group is now testing whether a 6-month augmentation of dietary calcium 
will offer similar weight-loss benefits to obese women.

"I'm impressed by this," says Robert Marcus of the Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center in Palo Alto, Calif., referring to the mouse data reported last week.

 When endocrinologist Robert P. Heaney of Creighton University in Omaha, Neb., 
first learned of preliminary data by Zemel's group last year, "I thought they 
made sense-but I still had a degree of skepticism," he says. So, he reanalyzed 
data from five calcium-supplement trials he had conducted in people over the 
years.

"And in all five," he says, "we found a significant weight effect that we had 
ignored." These data, to be published soon, show that women consuming the least 
calcium weighed the most.

 Ironically, Zemel says, among weight-conscious teens, "the first thing they 
jettison from their diet is dairy." This choice, he suspects, is "moving them 
farther from their goal, not closer."


