Cloning extends life of cells—and cows?: Science News Online, April 29, 2000

 Cloning extends life of cells-and cows?

 John Travis

 Last year, the scientists who created Dolly the cloned sheep raised the 
concern that she was aging prematurely. Their fear was prompted by the finding 
that protective tips on her chromosomes seemed shorter than normal for a lamb 
her age. A new study of cloned cows counters that disquieting finding, however. 
It even suggests that cloning can create cells, and perhaps animals, that 
thrive longer than normal.

 In the April 28 Science, Robert P. Lanza of Advanced Cell Technology in 
Worcester, Mass., and his colleagues report that they've cloned cows from aged 
cells. They find that cells from the clones have longer DNA tips, or telomeres, 
than the original cells and show other signs of youthfulness.

 One telomere researcher says that the new data should dispel concerns that 
clones will die earlier than normal. "It provides great reassurance," says 
Robert A. Weinberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 Lanza suggests that his group's use of cells that have survived a long time 
may have a benefit. "Cloning from cells with a long life span may lead to 
animals with a long life span," he speculates.

 Whether the cloned cows will enjoy extra years-and Weinberg expresses 
skepticism-cells from the animals do keep dividing in lab dishes longer than 
normal. Achieving the same result with human cells could have important medical 
benefits. In a strategy called therapeutic cloning, scientists would like to 
use a person's DNA to generate immature cells that they could then coax into 
forming nerve, muscle, heart, liver, or any other needed tissue.

 Scientists had been concerned that cells created through therapeutic cloning 
would exhaust their proliferative ability before producing enough specialized 
cells. The new findings may eliminate that worry. "The extended life span of 
[cloned] cells could lead to a billionfold, if not even trillionfold, increase 
in the number of replacement cells we can use for tissue engineering and 
transplantation," says Lanza.

 Questions swirling around Dolly's telomeres and her true age motivated the new 
research. Whenever most cells divide, their telomeres shrink, which has led 
many scientists to view the dwindling tips as a ticking clock that reflects a 
cell's age. Some scientists dispute that, however, and others contest that the 
buildup of aged cells with shrunken telomeres explains the overall aging of an 
animal.

 In their work, Lanza and his colleagues grew cow skin cells in the laboratory. 
As expected, after about 50 to 60 doublings, the cells became larger and 
underwent other physical changes marking their entry into a nondividing stage 
called senescence. Scientists have theorized that this transition occurs when 
telomeres shrink to a certain length (SN: 1/17/98, p. 37).

 To see if senescent cells could be used to make a clone, the investigators 
transferred the genes from these cells into cow eggs stripped of their DNA. 
Surprisingly, the success rate proved comparable to cloning experiments that 
begin with younger cells.

 Moreover, when the scientists examined skin cells from the clones, they found 
that the telomeres were longer than those of the original senescent cells and 
even longer than those of typical newborn calves. One cloned cow that's now 2 
years old has the telomeres of a calf, says Lanza.

 Also, a gene normally turned off in senescent cells was even more active in 
cells of the clones than in normal young cells. Finally, instead of doubling 
only 50 to 60 times in lab dishes, cells from the clones divided around 90 
times before becoming senescent. Lanza suggests that his team's use of 
senescent cells, which represent proven survivors, explains the general boost 
in cellular longevity in the cloned animals.


