Boning up on calcium shouldn't be sporadic: Science News Online, April 22, 2000

 Boning up on calcium shouldn't be sporadic

 Janet Raloff

 Calcium supplements can preserve and even build bones in the large share of 
the population that steadfastly consumes diets deficient in the mineral. Yet 
two new federal analyses indicate that the gains can quickly disappear when 
people stop taking extra calcium.

 Building strong bones in childhood and maintaining them through adulthood 
offer the best protection against osteoporosis and debilitating fractures in 
old age, explains endocrinologist Bess Dawson-Hughes of the Agriculture 
Department's Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University in 
Boston.

 Data from children and the elderly, however, show a consistent and 
disconcerting picture, she noted this week in San Diego at the Experimental 
Biology 2000 meeting, where she chaired a symposium on calcium supplementation.

 Even in people over age 50, who typically are losing bone, only some 60 
percent of men-and less than half of women-consume the recommended daily 
allowance, or RDA, of calcium, she says. For teens, who need extra calcium for 
growth spurts, the situation is far worse. Only about one in four boys, and a 
mere one in 10 girls, consumes the RDA.

 At the meeting, pediatrician Steven A. Abrams of the Department of Agriculture 
Children's Nutrition Research Center in Houston reviewed 10 studies in which 
scientists gave children supplemental calcium. "Without exception," Abrams 
says, those getting supplements built more bone than did their unsupplemented 
counterparts, who in one study were their twins.

 Four of the projects followed children for up to 2 years after they stopped 
taking calcium supplements. In three of those studies, Abrams notes, the 
increased bone density due to supplementation diminished or disappeared. Though 
bone benefits persisted in the fourth study, the follow-up period was short, he 
notes, so it's uncertain how long gains were maintained.

 Dawson-Hughes unveiled a similar follow-up for 295 men and women whom she has 
been following since 1992. They were part of a group of people, all 65 or 
older, who had been randomly assigned to consume daily for 3 years either a 
tablet containing 500 milligrams of calcium and 700 international units of 
vitamin D or a look-alike placebo.

 By the end of the study, the supplemented men and women retained significantly 
more bone than did those getting the placebo. As importantly, Dawson-Hughes 
says, the supplements cut the bone's turnover-the rate at which old and 
potentially damaged bone was replaced or remodeled. This turnover fell by 9 
percent in men and 14 percent in women.

 Remodeling weakens bone, much as home renovations that replace supporting 
beams temporarily compromise a building's structural integrity. An area of bone 
undergoing remodeling doesn't get back to full strength for some 40 to 60 
weeks, notes Robert P. Heaney of Creighton University in Omaha, Neb.

 Indeed, Dawson-Hughes suspects that the lower fracture incidence among the 
supplemented participants-roughly half that of the others-stems primarily from 
their reduced bone remodeling.

 Unfortunately, she says, even after learning of the supplements' benefits, 35 
percent of the volunteers who had received the tablets stopped taking extra 
calcium once the study ended. By comparing their bone mass and turnover with 
those of the study's unsupplemented participants, researchers found that a 
clear picture emerged. Women retained no residual bone benefit within a year of 
stopping supplements, Dawson-Hughes reports. Men lost their benefits within 2 
years of stopping.

 She says these findings, along with those from studies of children, reinforce 
the view that "meeting the calcium requirement should be a lifetime commitment."

 Yet data from a third new Agriculture Department study, also reported at the 
meeting in San Diego, suggest that today's children may be getting off to a 
substantially worse start in this regard than were youngsters 20 years ago.

 Alanna Moshfegh and her team at the Beltsville (Md.) Human Nutrition Research 
Center analyzed beverage-drinking trends in three large national surveys. 
Between 1977 and 1998, the share of children ages 6 to 9 years who drank any 
milk daily fell nearly 10 percent-to 84 percent-the researchers found. 
Moreover, these youngsters' average daily milk consumption fell 25 percent, to 
12 ounces, while juice intake rose nearly 50 percent, to 8 oz.

 Most troubling, the latest data show that although 72 percent of the children 
who drank milk with lunch went on to meet the RDA for calcium during the day, 
only 40 percent of kids drinking juice or soft drinks did.

 Worries Moshfegh, "If you don't develop the habit of consuming good sources of 
calcium when you're young, you probably won't when you're 20 or 30, either."


