Balloon Sounds Out the Early Universe: Science News Online, April 29, 2000

 Balloon Sounds Out the Early Universe

 Ron Cowen

 Intrepid explorers braved the unknown to find that the world is round. Now, a 
detector suspended from a balloon circling the frigid Antarctic has measured 
the curvature of the universe and revealed that it's perfectly flat.

 The balloon-borne experiment detected tiny fluctuations in the temperature of 
the cosmic microwave background, the whisper of radiation left over from the 
Big Bang. This energetic radiation cooled to microwave energies as it traveled 
through space for some 13 billion years.

 The new data, from the Italian-U.S. experiment BOOMERANG (Balloon Observations 
of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics), represent the most 
detailed images ever taken of the infant universe, says Andrew E. Lange of the 
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

 Several fundamental parameters lie hidden in the maps of the microwave 
background that Lange and his colleagues have constructed, researchers say.

 The new findings, several cosmologists note, strongly support a theory called 
inflation, in which a burst of expansion enlarged the cosmos from subatomic 
size to cosmic proportions-all within a minuscule fraction of a second. In the 
process, tiny fluctuations in density would have been amplified, giving rise to 
today's superclusters of galaxies.

 Lange and his colleagues describe their findings in the April 27 Nature.

"This is what we've been hoping for the last few years, that we would enter 
into an era of precision cosmology, where we're able to study the properties of 
the early universe," comments Wayne Hu of the Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton, N.J. In 1991, the Cosmic Background Explorer first revealed 
fluctuations in the microwave background but averaged temperature variations 
over huge patches of sky. Such large-scale measurements can't trace in detail 
the conditions in the infant cosmos, Hu notes.

 BOOMERANG measures the microwave background on much smaller scales. Its data 
provide the clearest evidence for primordial sound waves, which theorists have 
suggested are part and parcel of the microwave background. These sound waves 
"probe the conditions of the early universe as a kind of cosmic ultrasound," Hu 
writes in a commentary in the same issue of Nature.

 In the very hot, very young universe, he explains, matter and 
photons-particles of light-were tightly coupled. Photons bounced between 
electrons and couldn't travel freely. Whenever gravity compressed the matter, 
the pressure exerted by the photons offered resistance, reversing the motion 
and setting up acoustic oscillations-alternations of higher and lower pressure 
with the same physical form as sound waves. The compression raised the 
temperature of the microwave background ever so slightly, while expansion 
lowered it-creating the hot and cold spots seen by BOOMERANG and similar 
experiments.

 After about 300,000 years, the cosmos cooled enough for electrons and protons 
to combine to form hydrogen atoms. Because photons aren't bounced back and 
forth by atoms, they could suddenly stream freely into space. This radiation, 
detected by BOOMERANG 13 billion years later, reveals the pattern of the sound 
waves, which bears the imprint of the shape and other characteristics of the 
early universe.

 Cosmologists have long tried to measure cosmic curvature, the extent to which 
matter and energy curve space according to the principles of Einstein's theory 
of general relativity, notes Michael S. Turner of the University of Chicago and 
the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill. A host of other 
experiments, he says, including a test flight of BOOMERANG, had already 
suggested that the universe isn't curved. This means that the cosmos has just 
the right density of matter and energy to expand forever instead of collapsing 
in a Big Crunch. The new data, from BOOMERANG's 11-day flight in late 1998, 
show "that the pattern of hot and cold spots on the microwave sky is undeniably 
that of a flat universe," Turner adds. "Our equations really seem to mean 
something."

 Combined with other measurements, the new work confirms a gap in the cosmic 
ledger book. Because the mass that's been measured isn't enough to make the 
universe flat, there must be some additional "dark energy," Turner says. This 
energy could cause the universe to rev up its rate of expansion, a bizarre 
notion that recent observations support (SN: 2/12/00, p. 106: ).

 BOOMERANG reveals that the temperature fluctuations in the microwave 
background are greatest when measured over patches of sky of a certain size. 
This size, theorists say, corresponds to the longest sound wave that existed 
when the universe was 300,000 years old. If the inflation theory is correct, 
the microwave background must exhibit a series of such peaks corresponding to 
shorter wavelengths, just as a musical instrument plays several overtones. With 
only 5 percent of the 1998 experiment's data analyzed, BOOMERANG neither 
reveals nor excludes a second peak, Lange says.

 It's too soon to worry, says Turner. Other tests now under way and the 
expected launch next year of the Microwave Anisotropy Probe may yet reveal the 
missing peaks, he says.


