Motor City hosts top science fair winners: Science News Online, May 20, 2000

 Motor City hosts top science fair winners

 John Travis

 They may not have lived up to the classic Motown hit by dancing in the street. 
But more than a thousand high school students from around the world still had a 
ball last week in Detroit, where they gathered for the 51st International 
Science and Engineering Fair (ISEF). The students met with Nobel and Draper 
prize winners, toured high-tech automotive design centers, and visited a 
replica of Thomas Edison's laboratory. In addition to those diversions, they 
competed for $2 million in scholarships and awards, many of them from the 
primary sponsor of ISEF, Intel Corp. in Santa Clara, Calif.

"It's an incredible payoff for all the hard work we students do," says Nazanin 
Jouei of Coral Springs, Fla.

 Jouei, who modeled the biochemistry of a key step in vision, was one of three 
students who won a $40,000 Intel Young Scientist Scholarship. The other two top 
spots went to Karen K. Powell of Fort Pierce, Fla., and Jason L. Douglas of 
Milford, Ohio. Powell used PNA, a molecule similar to but more stable than DNA, 
to inhibit genes that control rodent appetite. Douglas developed a new way to 
solve Schrodinger's equation of quantum mechanics.

 As one of two winners of the Glenn T. Seaborg Nobel Prize Visit Award, Jouei 
also earned a free trip to Sweden to observe the festivities in Stockholm next 
December. Garrett J. Young of Branchburg, N.J., who experimented with plasmas, 
will join her.

 The Intel ISEF, run by Science Service, the publisher of Science News, also 
awarded trips to two teams. Travis M. Beamish and Avaleigh N. Milne, both of 
Kingston, Ontario, will travel in September to the European Union Contest for 
Young Scientists in Amsterdam to present their study of how soybean cells react 
to anesthetics. In January 2001, at the Young Scientist and Technology Exhibit 
in Dublin, Joseph E. Pechter and William H. Pechter of Vero Beach, Fla., will 
describe their software that converts text to speech for the blind.

 The fair's judges, totaling more than 1,000, said they were "astounded" and 
"humbled" by the projects. "I believe that the kids [who attended the fair] 
will leave footprints on history the same way the astronauts left their 
footprints on the moon," says Intel Fellow Eugene S. Meieran, one of the judges.

 In 14 different scientific disciplines and in team projects, the fair honored 
best-of-category winners with awards totaling $8,000 for each. In behavioral 
and social sciences, Kathy H. Li of Plano, Texas, studied the factors that 
determine musical preference among adolescents. In biochemistry, Joel L. 
Stevens of Montgomery, Texas, used DNA as a computational device. In botany, 
Yu-Jen Lee of Hsiu-Chu, Taiwan, looked at the development and breeding of the 
plant Cyathea spinulosa. In chemistry, Jouei's study of vision earned her this 
honor, too. In computer science, Robert Y. Wang of Conway, Ark., improved the 
way that computers render graphics. In earth and space sciences, Jay L. 
Michaels of Cocoa, Fla., investigated how a tornado arises.

 A project on robotics won the highest honor in engineering for Ryan R. 
Patterson of Grand Junction, Colo. In environmental sciences, Crystal L. Gammon 
of Eldon, Mo., tested the antiparasite medicine ivermectin. In gerontology, 
Benjamin C. Beranek of Lafayette, Ind., probed sex hormone effects on bone 
cancer. In mathematics, Ching Tang Chen of Taipei, Taiwan, devised a new kind 
of geometric transformation. In medicine and health, Joshua M. Levy of 
Gaithersburg, Md., scrutinized how cells commit suicide. In microbiology, Linda 
J. Arnade of Palm Bay, Fla., studied the role of bacteria and nitric oxide in 
atherosclerosis.

 Michael T. Hasper of Tallahassee, Fla., probed the acoustics and construction 
of violins to prevail in the physics category. In zoology, Kerry A. Geiler of 
Massapequa Park, N.Y., compared how various ant species communicate. In the 
team-project category, Beamish and Milne took the top honor.

 Earlier this year, Geiler, Wang, and Levy were also among the finalists in the 
Intel Science Talent Search (SN: 03/18/00, p. 181: ).

 For the first time in ISEF's history, schools and local science fairs will 
share in the prize money. To promote science education, Intel awarded $1,000 
grants to many of the schools and fairs sponsoring winning students.


