Astronomers find evidence of missing matter: Science News Online, May 13, 2000

 Astronomers find evidence of missing matter

 Ron Cowen

 If astronomers were in charge of a lost-and-found department, they would have 
been fired long ago. Most have come to terms with the notion that at least 90 
percent of the matter in the universe must consist of some strange, dark 
material that they cannot directly detect. More embarrassingly, astronomers had 
lost track of most of the baryons-ordinary, visible matter made of protons, 
electrons, and neutrons.

 In the standard picture of cosmic evolution, so-called dark matter provided 
the scaffolding upon which the baryons collected. During the first several 
billion years of cosmic history, the baryons-mostly hydrogen-formed vast gas 
clouds. Some ended up in galaxies and galaxy clusters, but that accounts for 
less than half the baryons originally in the clouds.

 New observations suggest that astronomers may have found the missing material 
just where theorists predicted: in intergalactic space. Over billions of years, 
the vast clouds of hydrogen gas condensed into a spidery network of filaments 
connecting galaxies and galaxy clusters.

 Stripped of its electrons, the hydrogen in the filaments can't radiate light 
and isn't easily detected. Instead, the Hubble Space Telescope found evidence 
of that hydrogen by searching for highly ionized oxygen. Forged at the core of 
stars and dumped into space when the stars died an explosive death, the ionized 
oxygen associated with the ionized hydrogen.

 To look for the oxygen, Todd M. Tripp and Edward B. Jenkins of Princeton 
University and Blair D. Savage of the University of Wisconsin-Madison studied 
light from a distant quasar that slices through billions of light-years of 
space. The ionized oxygen absorbs specific wavelengths of light from the quasar 
beacon. Tripp's team used the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph on Hubble to 
find the characteristic fingerprints.

 Looking at the quasar QSO H1821+643, the researchers detected four 
fingerprints that serve as evidence of relic gas clouds, they report in the May 
1 Astrophysical Journal Letters. With the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic 
Explorer (FUSE) satellite, Tripp and other colleagues found an additional 
absorption feature, they note in an upcoming issue of the same journal.

 Although Tripp emphasizes that he's working with small numbers, he says the 
remnant clouds that his team has found indicate that relatively nearby reaches 
of intergalactic space could hold about half the missing hydrogen. Other 
studies with FUSE and Hubble corroborate the finding, he notes.

 The observations, says Jeremiah P. Ostriker of Princeton, confirm the results 
of computer simulations that he and Princeton colleague Renyue Cen had 
previously developed (SN: 6/20/98, p. 390). According to their model, half of 
all cosmic baryons are now floating in intergalactic space at temperatures 
between 100,000 and several million kelvins.

 Richard Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., 
says that he's now calculating whether NASA's Chandra X-Ray Observatory can 
record the faint emission from gases in that temperature range. If Chandra 
succeeds, astronomers will have more confidence that they've finally located 
some of the missing matter that roams the universe.


