Building Blocks of Talk: Science News Online, May 27, 2000

 Building Blocks of Talk

 When babies babble, they may say a lot about speech

 Bruce Bower

 When you tell someone to stop babbling, your meaning is obvious: Quit talking 
gibberish and speak clearly.

 Give the youngest babblers a break, though. Scientists now suspect that the 
inveterate babbling of 7- to 12-month-old babies contains remarkably systematic 
vocal features that, soon enough, render them able to utter such parental 
favorites as "No," "More," and "Why?" A better understanding of babbling may 
even allow researchers unprecedented glimpses into the controversial prehistory 
of human languages.

 In fact, the gift of gab appears to grow out of roots that go much deeper than 
babbling. One line of research finds that by age 3 months, babies communicate 
by combining vocalizations with facial expressions. Infants exploit their 
hand-to-mouth existence-whatever their hands grasp gets jammed into their 
mouths-to learn how to communicate with precisely timed words and gestures, 
according to other investigators.

"Words are put into play by movements of the human body," says psycholinguist 
John L. Locke of the University of Cambridge in England. "Physical effects [on 
learning to speak] may be more pervasive, and languages less arbitrary in 
structure, than linguists have previously supposed."

 Jaw movements

 Babbling research has come of age over the past 20 years. Investigators have 
established that between ages 7 and 10 months, infants begin to alternately 
lower and raise the jaw while making consonant and vowel sounds. Babbling of 
repeated sequences of consonant and vowel combinations then takes off.

 For instance, opening and closing the lips with the tongue flattened allows a 
baby to say "baba." Open the lips and thrust the tongue tip off the mouth's 
roof to get "dada." Bunch the tongue up against the back of the mouth for 
"gaga."

 Little by little, yet with astounding speed, these manipulations of speechlike 
sounds usher children across the threshold of talk.

 During the same period that babbling research got off the ground, several 
maverick teams of linguists searched for speech sounds that are applied 
comparably in all or most of the world's languages. They reported such 
universal language consistencies as the use of single, distinct consonants and 
syllables that consist of a consonant followed by a vowel.

 Enough of these shared linguistic properties exist to allow for the 
reconstruction of precursor languages all the way back to a prehistoric "mother 
tongue," according to some of these renegade researchers.

 Mainstream linguists reject such claims. They argue that rampant changes and 
innovations by speakers of a language erase any of the features it might have 
shared with other languages more than about 5,000 years ago. The relentless 
pace with which people tweak their native tongues renders hopeless the search 
for linguistic universals, according to this view (SN: 6/9/90, p. 360).

 Support for the mavericks' argument now comes, literally, from the mouths of 
babes. Peter F. MacNeilage and Barbara L. Davis, both psycholinguists at the 
University of Texas at Austin, say that a handful of basic sound patterns lurks 
within babies' babbling, infants' first words, and the reconstructed words of 
long-dead languages. Moreover, reconstructed words that have similar meanings 
across different language families usually contain matching arrangements of 
these fundamental sounds, MacNeilage and Davis report in the April 21 Science.

"Our findings provide totally independent support for the theory that there was 
one original language, a mother tongue," MacNeilage says. "It's wrong to assume 
that related languages cover up their tracks every 5,000 years."

 Strings of speech sounds

 MacNeilage and Davis statistically analyzed strings of speech sounds in the 
babbling of six babies and the first words of 10 slightly older infants. Tiny 
microphones attached to bibs worn by the diminutive participants, ages 6 to 18 
months, recorded their vocalizations as they played with an English-speaking 
parent. The researchers also examined extensive lists of words from 10 modern 
languages, including English, Japanese, and Swahili.

 MacNeilage and Davis identified three sequences of sound patterns common to 
babbling and words in general. Each consists of a consonant-vowel combination: 
lip consonants leading into vowels generated in the center of the mouth with a 
flattened tongue (such as "mama"); tongue-front consonants preceding vowels 
produced at the front of the mouth (such as "dada," the vowel pronounced as in 
"daddy"); and tongue-back consonants followed by back-of-the-mouth vowels (such 
as "gogo").

 Additional studies directed by MacNeilage and others have identified these 
three sound sequences in the babbling of infants exposed to native French, 
Swedish, Japanese, Portuguese, and Quechua, a language spoken in Ecuador.

 A fourth, more complex sound sequence appeared in infants' first words and 
across all 10 languages, but not in babbling. Sounds in this three-part 
sequence start with a lip consonant, followed by a vowel and then a 
tongue-front consonant (as in "mad"). Other researchers have noted that people 
have an easier time articulating speech sounds from the front to the back of 
the mouth, such as "pug," than the reverse, such as "gap."

 The physical arrangement of the mouth and the vocal tract-which by a baby's 
third month lengthens and bends dramatically-encourages certain sequences of 
oral movements, or frames, during speaking, MacNeilage theorizes. The first 
words of human ancestors may have been built out of these frames and thus may 
have sounded much like the first words of modern infants, he proposes.

 Attempts to string together frames in more complex ways-as in the 
front-to-back-of-the-mouth articulations of budding talkers-then fueled the 
evolution of more complex words, in MacNeilage's scenario. He refers to this 
two-step process as the frame-content theory of speech evolution. According to 
the theory, mouth movements essential for simple speech sounds would have laid 
the groundwork for devising a meaningful vocabulary.

 The three consonant-vowel frames found in babies' babbling also frequently 
appear in lists of words from 27 ancestral languages from different parts of 
the world, the Texas researchers say. Maverick linguists reconstructed these 
lists from groups of related modern languages. In addition, reconstructed 
ancestral words contain many more instances of the front-to-back sequence of 
consonant and vowel sounds observed in infants' first words than of 
back-to-front sequences.

 MacNeilage says the new data challenge claims by critics of ancient language 
reconstruction that the sound similarities of words with the same meaning in 
different languages often arise by chance.

 Frame content

 Among scientists who study babbling and other types of infant vocalizations, 
the frame-content theory has attracted considerable interest. MacNeilage set 
out his position in the August 1998 Behavioral and Brain Sciences and received 
generally favorable comments in 27 published peer reviews from psycholinguists 
and developmental psychologists.

"I think the frame-content hypothesis has real merit," remarks psycholinguist 
D. Kimbrough Oller of the University of Maine in Orono, who didn't write a 
published review of MacNeilage's paper. "This provides an interesting addition 
to the debate over the reconstruction of ancient languages."

 Beginning around 20 years ago, Oller helped pioneer the study of speechlike 
sounds infants make while babbling. He summarizes research to date on infant 
vocalization in The Emergence of the Speech Capacity (2000, Erlbaum).

 Before 6 months of age, infants emit a variety of sounds that appear to 
prepare them for babbling, Oller notes. These include squeals, growls, 
incomplete speech sounds, and the lip-rattling blasts known as raspberries. 
Such vocalizations, as well as smiling, gain in frequency when infants younger 
than 6 months gaze at their mothers.

 Moreover, youngsters begin to coordinate vocalizations with their facial 
expressions months before they start to babble, presumably to communicate with 
their caregivers, Oller and his coworkers reported in the March 1999 
Developmental Psychology.

 The scientists videotaped 12 infants, each at age 3 months and again at age 6 
months, interacting with one of their parents. Each parent was instructed to 
divide time between playing with the child and staring at a picture on the wall 
while maintaining a neutral facial expression.

 In these situations, both 3-month-old and 6-month-old infants paired specific 
vocalizations with their facial expressions, Oller holds, although the older 
kids did so more frequently. For instance, a 3-month-old child confronted with 
a wall-gazing parent blurted out growling noises just after adopting an angry 
expression. The ominous sounds faded out shortly before the youngster stopped 
looking upset.

 Vocalizing that precedes babbling may even contain rudimentary types of 
syllables, according to psychologist Kathleen Bloom of the University of 
Waterloo in Ontario. She argues that from around 3 to 6 months of age, infants 
make "syllabic" sounds that have more in common with babbling than with growls 
and most of the other prebabbling sounds cited by Oller. Syllabics consist of 
sustained vowellike and consonantlike sounds with acoustic frequencies 
comparable to those measured for babbling, Bloom asserts.

 In a series of studies from 1988 to 1996, Bloom reported that parents and 
other adults talk more to infants who make syllabic sounds, view those infants 
more favorably, and tend to regard infants' syllabic sounds as attempts at 
communication.

 Syllabic sounds increase in length and acoustic complexity from around 2 
months to 4 months of age but then become shorter and less distinct for about a 
month before regaining momentum toward babbling, according to a long-term study 
of 13 infants that was directed by psychologist Hui-Chin Hsu of the University 
of Georgia in Athens.

 Vocalization, from prebabbling to speech, requires the coordination of more 
than 70 muscles and many different body parts, ranging from the diaphragm to 
the lips, Hsu's team says. The temporary setback in the ability to vocalize 
probably results from major structural changes in the vocal tract that occur at 
around 4 months of age, upsetting the balance of the vocalization system that 
infants had been working to master.

 Vocalization may thus develop in fits and starts that vary greatly from one 
child to another, the researchers propose in the March Infant and Child 
Development. Other researchers have applied this perspective, known as 
dynamic-systems theory, to motor development (SN: 3/20/99, p. 184).

 A contrasting view of speech development posits the existence of progressively 
unfolding, genetically controlled stages of vocal ability that diverge little 
from one child to the next. This approach draws inspiration from the 
influential theory that infants have a genetically programmed ability to 
understand grammatical rules (SN: 5/3/97, p. 276: ).

 Oller sees much value in dynamic-systems theory. However, he and many other 
psycholinguists remain skeptical about reports of syllabic vocalizing by 3- to 
6-month-olds. Syllabic sounds are poorly defined acoustically, Oller contends.

 Seamless combination

 From a dynamic-systems perspective, infants and young children learn to 
communicate by seamlessly combining two movement systems, one for speech and 
the other for gestures, according to Jana M. Iverson of the University of 
Missouri in Columbia and Esther Thelen of Indiana University at Bloomington. 
It's time to reconsider the popular notion of gestures as a decorative sideline 
to the real business of saying what you mean, the two psychologists argue. 
Instead, gabbing and gesticulating go hand in hand.

"In adults, language and movement are very closely related in the brain," 
Iverson says. "The question then becomes, How did they get that way?"

 Mental activity arises through bodily interactions with the world, a process 
that forges a deep connection between talk and gestures, Iverson and Thelen 
argued in the November/December 1999 Journal of Consciousness Studies. For 
example, as Iverson and a colleague reported in 1998, even blind speakers 
gesture while talking to blind listeners. Arm movements apparently play an 
integral role in a speaker's ability to express ideas, whether or not anyone 
else sees the motions.

 In learning to communicate, infants probably employ some type of general 
ability to produce rhythmic sequences of both hand movements and speech sounds, 
Iverson suggests. Rhythmic arm and hand movements emerge at about 6 months of 
age, at roughly the same time as rhythmic babbling.

 The tight linkage of mouth and hand movements also explains the emergence of 
so-called "manual babbling" in both hearing and deaf infants, Iverson says. 
First reported for deaf babies in 1991, manual babbles consist of cycles of 
repeated gestures that have no meaning. For instance, a child might 
rhythmically jab the index finger of the left hand into the palm of the right 
hand.

 Researchers initially explained this as evidence for an innate 
language-learning facility that works through gestures instead of speech in 
deaf babies. However, a 1995 study found that hearing infants with no exposure 
to sign language babble with their hands as well as their mouths.

 Manual babbling represents a rhythmic behavior that appears during a child's 
transition to achieving fine-motor control over the hands, just as rhythmic 
vocal babbling heralds a shift to speech-worthy control over the vocal tract, 
Iverson argues.

 By adulthood, people unthinkingly time each of their gestures to coincide 
precisely with the word or phrase it accompanies, she notes. Investigators have 
found that when a speaker stutters over a word, an accompanying gesture tends 
to freeze until the moment that speech resumes.

 Still, comprehensive explanations of speech development-and the capacity for 
understanding grammar in particular-elude scientists. If the babies babbling 
into microphones and repetitively poking their palms have an opinion on the 
matter, they're not saying.


