U.S. smog limit permits subtle lung damage: Science News Online, May 13, 2000

 U.S. smog limit permits subtle lung damage

 Janet Raloff

 This week, weather forecasters in Washington, D.C., issued their first ozone 
alerts of the year. Announcing the arrival of "code orange" weather, an 
unhealthy confluence of heat and pollution, they advised people with 
respiratory problems to stay indoors and avoid exercise.

 However, even robust individuals may suffer temporary, subtle damage-leaky 
lungs-by breathing ozone concentrations below those needed to trigger such 
alerts, according to a European study reported this week in Toronto at the 
American Thoracic Society meeting.

 The study indicates that even in regions meeting the U.S. air-quality standard 
for ozone, "there's a potential risk to human health," contends study leader 
Alfred Bernard of the Catholic University of Louvain in Brussels, Belgium. As 
such, he told Science News, the current U.S. ozone limits appear to offer "no 
margin of safety."

 For the past several years, Bernard's team has been developing blood assays of 
CC16, a protein produced by the cells that form the lungs' outer barrier. 
Explains Bernard, detection of CC16 in the blood serves as a sensitive 
indicator that this barrier has been breached.

 Lungs appear to rely on the protein as an antioxidant to fend off damage from 
free radicals, he says. In animals, he's found, strains producing the most CC16 
suffer the least damage from ozone.

 His team has now used its new assay to gauge ozone effects in 24 healthy 
cyclists; each participated in two tests at various times in July. These young 
adults pedaled down Italian roads at a brisk clip for 2 hours. Researchers at 
the University of Parma then supplied Bernard's lab with blood that they had 
collected before and after each cyclist's exertions.

 CC16 concentrations in the blood increased during exercise. The changes went 
in lockstep with increasing outdoor ozone-beginning on days when ozone was just 
0.07 parts per million (ppm) in air, Bernard reports. The current U.S. ozone 
limit is 0.08 ppm averaged over 8 hours. During the 25 percent of days when 
ozone was highest, the cyclists' blood contained up to 50 percent more leaked 
protein than during the 25 percent of days when airborne ozone was lowest.

 The researchers also exposed an especially sensitive strain of mice to the 
same ozone conditions. After exercise, the animals exhibited a comparable 
release of CC16 into blood and a similarly inappropriate movement of a 
different protein from blood into the lungs.

 The lung's leaky barrier can repair itself quickly once ozone exposures 
subside. However, Bernard now worries that during the leaky period, people may 
face an increased vulnerability to invasion by bacteria and asthma-provoking 
pollutants. The risk would be proportional to the ozone dose.

 A report of these new findings on the cyclists and animals will appear in the 
June Environmental Health Perspectives.

 Though earlier laboratory studies by others had shown that lung leakiness 
could occur at relatively low concentrations of ozone, "it's always important 
to see that the same thing happens in the real world," notes pulmonologist 
William S. Beckett of the University of Rochester (N.Y.) School of Medicine. 
These "well-done" studies confirm just that, he says.

 The leakiness that Bernard's team is studying "is important because it's an 
indication that there's a biological effect-even at very low concentrations of 
ozone," says David J. McKee of the Environmental Protection Agency in Research 
Triangle Park, N.C. Moreover, he notes, the new assay sounds less unpleasant 
for the participant than past techniques, such as lavage-"injecting a saline 
solution into the lungs and then suctioning it out."

 However, McKee argues, low-level leakiness may present no clinical harm, 
"unless it is repeated throughout a summer or throughout life. Then, you can 
develop chronic effects"-such as inflammation or scarring of lung tissue.

 Beckett says that the direction of the trend Bernard reports is worrisome. 
Moreover, he maintains, it suggests that "paradoxically, the people who are 
most likely to be affected by ozone may be the healthiest, most robust 
individuals"-those with the stamina to exercise despite unhealthy air.

 Concerned that other groups-perhaps grannies or babies-might be even more 
sensitive, Bernard's team is now beginning a study of lung leakiness from 
ozone, which will include different age groups and European countries.


