Downtown Fisheries?: Science News Online, May 13, 2000

 Downtown Fisheries?

 Advances may make fish farming a healthy prospect, even for inner cities

 Janet Raloff

 An economic renaissance is apparent in much of Baltimore, including the 
cobblestoned, 225-year-old Fells Point neighborhood that hugs a northern edge 
of the city's Inner Harbor. Some 18th-century storefronts display antiques, 
others feature homemade ethic cuisine. Construction on towering new hotels 
booms overhead.

 Inside a nondescript, greenish-beige waterfront warehouse, marine biologists 
are laboring over their own contribution to this area's economic 
revitalization. The ambitious goal of these researchers at the University of 
Maryland's Center of Marine Biotechnology (COMB) is to redesign aquaculture, 
bringing teeming tanks of seafood to urban centers. Though they're starting 
with Baltimore, the next site could be Detroit, Iowa City, or even Phoenix.

 At the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in Blacksburg, 
researchers are spearheading similar efforts to move aquaculture to 
nontraditional venues-in this case, depressed farm towns.

"For folks used to the commitment that a farm takes, such as milking dairy 
herds twice a day, fish may represent a welcome break," observes George J. 
Flick. A full-scale prototype that his Virginia Tech team is constructing in 
rural Saltville, Va., should "take at most only a couple hours a day to run," 
he says.

 Key to the efforts of both groups is an emerging technology known as 
recirculating-tank aquaculture.

 Conventional aquaculture raises fish in the open. Fish farmers usually corral 
marine species-sometimes in bays, other times within pens floating in the open 
ocean. Growers of freshwater species usually rear animals to market size in 
outdoor artificial ponds. These systems all rely on large volumes of clean 
water flowing to the fish and carrying waste away.

 Over the past decade, such operations have been coming under intense criticism 
for fouling the environment.

 Moving to tanks that recycle their water would not only limit the input of 
clean water but also reduce-and perhaps eliminate-discharges of waste streams. 
To achieve this, fish farmers have been adapting some of the technology that 
keeps finned specimens alive in home aquariums and zoo tanks. However, because 
the purpose of fish farming is not display, the aquarists' glass-walled tanks 
have given way to huge, opaque fiberglass pools-many holding at least 25,000 
gallons of water.

 Moreover, as the aquatic analog of cattle feedlots, aquaculture's 
recirculating tanks must nurture a far denser population of fish than standard 
aquariums do. They must also foster quick growth-while not compromising fish 
health. Overall, it's a tall order.

 Yet if that order can be filled affordably, this technology could open 
aquaculture to new species and applications, notes Yonathan Zohar, COMB's 
director.

 For instance, scientists have begun rearing fish for restocking the wild. 
Among them are species threatened with extinction. For some, their early life 
stages require more protection or more tightly controlled conditions than open 
pens or pools offer.

 Zohar's team is breeding a tasty marine fish, known as bream, that doesn't 
naturally inhabit U.S. waters. The COMB researchers weren't permitted to import 
the fish until they assured federal regulators that none of the finned stock 
could escape, even into sewers.

 Though a few commercial fish farms have already begun investing in 
recirculating-tank technology, such operations remain niche players in the 
United States' $900 million aquaculture industry, observes Jim McVey, director 
of aquaculture programs for the Commerce Department's National Sea Grant 
College Program in Silver Spring, Md. However, he argues, advances in this 
emerging technology leave it poised to assume a major role in satisfying the 
nation's appetite for freshwater fish and seafood.

 Imported fish

 Each year, the United States imports fish and shellfish valued at some $14 
billion, McVey notes. Led by $2 billion worth of shrimp, this industry has 
evolved into one of the largest import sectors. "In terms of natural products," 
he explains, "it's second only to oil."

 While precise numbers aren't available, McVey estimates that 60 to 80 percent 
of those aquatic imports have been farmed. He'd like to see the United States 
reclaim much of the market.

 Because the young of marine species tend to be "smaller and more delicate than 
their freshwater cousins," he observes, they have been difficult to raise in 
captivity. Moreover, to be attractive to growers, stocks must spawn on demand, 
so that commercial-size fish can come to market year-round. Yet even in 
conditions emulating their spawning environment, the captive females of many 
marine species don't ovulate.

 The coddling that recirculating systems permit makes this technology the best 
hope for growing marine fish, McVey says. With it, growers can precisely 
control temperature, wave action, oxygen supplies, nutrients, and daylight. 
There is a catch, however. Such operations today cost more than ordinary 
fishing or open aquaculture.

 That's why growers who've begun investing in this technology tend to raise 
only high-value fish. Zohar acknowledges that economics provides one reason 
that his team works with gilthead bream. U.S. imports of bream now command up 
to $14 a pound.

 Marine ovulation

 In the mid-1980s, several fish reproductive endocrinologists, including Zohar, 
closed in on the problem of ovulation in marine species. The pituitary gland 
inside the brains of captive females had plenty of a particular gonadotropin, a 
hormone important to reproduction. In healthy spawners, the pituitary releases 
this hormone into the blood, but the hormone wasn't found in the blood of 
captive females. The finding suggested that these fish might be deficient in 
another class of hormones, called gonadotropin releasing hormones, or GnRHs.

 Injecting captive bream with GnRH jump-started a cascade of events, including 
a release of the pituitary's gonadotropins into the blood. However, the 
injected GnRH broke down before it had its full effect. For instance, a bream 
might spawn for only a day or two following an injection-not daily for months, 
as it would in the wild.

 So, Zohar, who was then at the Israeli National Center for Mariculture in 
Eilat, and his colleagues developed scores of synthetic GnRHs that could resist 
breakdown. Yet even with the best, Zohar notes, "we needed to inject fish more 
than once, which is not only labor-intensive but also stresses the fish."

 Eventually, Zohar spent a sabbatical in Massachusetts working with chemists 
who specialize in the development of materials for the controlled release of 
drugs. There, he homed in on a polymer that could be used to deliver GnRH to 
the fish's body, meting out the hormone over a period of months.

 When he moved to Baltimore a year later, in 1990, he began testing GnRH 
implants in U.S. fish that were infertile in captivity. These included 
Maryland's beleaguered striped bass.

 COMB's Fells Point warehouse contains two 3,200-gallon recirculating tanks of 
7-year-old progeny from that experiment-broodstock averaging 15 pounds apiece. 
Zohar's group is currently looking for the genetic controls that prevent GnRH 
production in the captive fish.

 Together with commercial hatcheries, "we have now tested the [GnRH-implant] 
technology on more than 20 important species from around the world," Zohar 
notes. When dosages are tailored for each species, the technique works in them 
all.

 These implants are crucial to the operation of George Nardi's 4-year-old 
commercial, recirculating-tank flounder farm at GreatBay Aquafarms in 
Portsmouth, N.H. He has long run a hatchery and is now looking to grow some of 
his young fish to market size.

 The State of Maryland also relies on GnRH implants to trigger spawning of 
captive striped bass, shad, and Atlantic sturgeon-all endangered species that 
state biologists are rearing to restock rivers feeding the Chesapeake Bay.

 In February, COMB announced a millennial milestone. By implanting each fish 
with GnRH and then modulating the conditions in the recirculating tanks late 
last year, the center's biologists fooled female bream into thinking they'd 
reached their Mediterranean spawning ground. In late December, the fish began a 
3-month wave of daily egg laying. Their first young hatched on New Year's Day.

 Larval survival

 Though larval survival in traditional hatcheries can be as low as 5 percent, 
COMB biochemist Allen R. Place notes, "our rates are probably already above 70 
percent." He credits this success to nurturing methods, disease-free 
recirculating tanks and a fat-enriched additive that he's developed to feed the 
hatchling's live prey.

 Initially, the tiny fish feed on microscopic animals called rotifers. After 2 
weeks, they graduate to Artemia, somewhat bigger species, better known as sea 
monkeys. A month or so later, scientists wean the larval fish onto an adult 
diet of pellets-an artificial blend of nutrients.

 The problem with rotifers and Artemia, Place observes, "is that they are not 
nutritionally balanced for the [young] fish." So, his team has been "playing 
games" with the fingerling's tiny prey, tinkering with their fats, he says.

 Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), one of the primary omega-3 fish oils, plays 
important roles in neurological function and reproduction across a range of 
species, including humans. Fish and other vertebrates also rely on arachidonic 
acid, another fat, to make compounds for managing stress and immunity.

 Most rotifers and Artemia have little DHA, Place notes, and some possess far 
less arachidonic acid than fingerlings need. So, he's developing feed to enrich 
these small animals in those fats.

 However, the quantities of each fat that are right for bream might not serve 
another hatchling well. They might not even serve bream well later in their 
development, observes Moti Harel, also at COMB.

 His data indicate that at first, fish need a high-DHA diet. Larvae without 
enough arachidonic acid grow well until metamorphosis and other periods of 
stress, such as when fish are moved between tanks or shipped to growers. 
Without this fat, the fish die in large numbers the first time they're stressed.

 Harel's currently working to identify the optimal ratio of the two fats at 
various stages of a cultured fish's life. With that information, Place and 
others will be able to further improve the nutritional value of the prey.

 How much food?

 Scientists are investigating not only what to feed delicate young fish but 
also how much.

 With recirculating tanks, Flick notes, "you can see what the fish are eating. 
You can deliver just the right amount." That's important because feed may 
amount to 60 percent of a fish farm's fixed costs.

 Moreover, excess food pollutes the water and can tie up its oxygen. Well-fed 
fish produce large amounts of feces, too.

 Unlike open-aquaculture systems, Place notes, where wastes whisk away with the 
ocean current or effluent stream, recirculating tanks can quickly develop 
lethal concentrations of nutrients and wastes if the filters become overwhelmed.

 The more crowded the fish, the bigger the challenge to a filtering system. Yet 
a high fish density is required for aquaculture to turn a profit. With 
freshwater tilapia, "we've been able to get up to 60 kilograms of fish per 
cubic meter," Place notes. "Essentially one-third of the tank is fish."

 Spending a year or more in essentially the same water, these fish rely as much 
on filters as astronauts living aboard a spacecraft do.

 The filters are large vessels-separate from the fish tanks-filled with water, 
a mixture of naturally occurring waste-degrading bacteria, and plastic beads. 
Fish farmers buy the components from supply houses, combine them on site, and 
then wait days or weeks for the bacteria to grow and coat the beads.

 The bacteria in this biofilter can persist for weeks, months, or years, then 
die in a matter of days for reasons that remain a mystery, observes Harold 
Schreier, a microbial molecular biologist at COMB. It's a costly puzzle since a 
crash wipes out all the fish in the tank.

 Schreier's group and others are now developing tests to identify signs of an 
impending crash. They are also considering techniques-such as changing the 
water's pH or salinity-to head off a filter's breakdown.

 Finicky nature

 Despite their finicky nature, recirculating tanks can offer big advantages 
over conventional aquaculture, Nardi says. Summer flounder in the wild or in 
open pens take 3 or 4 years to grow to a commercial size of several pounds. His 
pilot-scale operation, producing 10 tons of fish per year, can bring those 
flounder to market in just 2 years.

 Keeping these fast-growing fish healthy, he says, requires tight control of 
temperatures and day length. Recirculating systems liberate growers from 
vicissitudes of climate and need for copious water.

 Nardi would like to see research deliver more reliable components for 
recirculating tanks-especially biofilters-energy-saving techniques for the 
power-hungry systems, and a better understanding of what it takes to scale up 
components. Quintupling the size of a tank, for instance, may require 
substantially more than five times as much filtering.

 At least as important as these technical issues, Flick believes, are the 
financial ones. Virginia Tech's 12-year-old recirculating-tank aquaculture 
program has brought in economists to estimate the costs of each process 
employed in its new 80,000-square-foot Saltville facility. Sometime next year, 
it should begin producing 7.5 tons of yellow perch every 9 months-this 
freshwater species' period of maturation in recirculating tanks.

 By detailing all of the system's costs, Flick's group hopes to help investors 
evaluate where this technology might succeed commercially. For instance, 
farmers with an empty barn might be able to set up an aquaculture operation 
without buying additional land or building a new structure. Others might shave 
costs by tapping waste heat emitted by an industrial neighbor or exploiting the 
low-cost water and shelter offered by an abandoned mine.

 If transportation or labor costs turn out to be high, investors might save 
money by siting tanks within low-tax urban-revitalization areas, near a ready 
source of labor and consumers of their product.

 A totally closed system might be engineered to meet even stringent urban 
environmental standards. Most recirculating tanks today still release a few 
percent of their volume daily to sewer systems as disinfected waste water. The 
goal, Flick and others note, is tanks that don't discharge any liquid wastes.

 Although the federal government has been funding research into recirculating 
aquaculture for 30 years, Flick cautions that "it's still a new and developing 
science"-one with plenty of kinks to work out.

"We have tended to fund research on individual components," McVey says, like a 
new filter or better fish food. "Now, we need to see what it takes to integrate 
all of these into standardized systems" that prove reliable and affordable on 
the farm or in the city. Where these systems finally take off and when, he 
says, "will, in the end, all come down to economics."


