Bdelloids: No sex for over 40 million years: Science News Online, May 20, 2000

 Bdelloids: No sex for over 40 million years

 Susan Milius

 Talk about a dry spell. Microscopic bdelloid rotifers have seemingly evolved 
without sex for millions of years and probably don't exist in male form, say 
Harvard University biologists.

 The bdelloid genome shows an odd pattern of differences between versions of 
the same genes, report David Mark Welch and Matthew Meselson. This pattern most 
likely arose during eons without sex, they argue in the May 19 Science.

 If further tests prove them right, they will have confirmed the first example 
of ancient asexuals, organisms much sought after in biology.

 Of the planet's 2 million named species, only about 2,000 appear totally 
asexual, Meselson notes. Hardly any of these lineages seem old, and fossil 
evidence has suggested that asexuality is a dead end. "It's not because asexual 
species don't appear," Meselson says. "It's because they don't last."

"Although evolutionary biologists agree that sex is essential, they cannot 
agree on why," say Olivia P. Judson of Imperial College at Silwood Park in 
England and Benjamin B. Normark of Harvard in the same issue of Science. They 
note some 20 explanations that they find "ranging from the sublime to the 
ridiculous."

 Meselson raises hopes that creatures that evolved for a long time without sex 
could reveal what's so special about it. "This is the beginning of a molecular 
attack on the problem," he says.

 One of the strongest candidates for ancient asexuals, bdelloid rotifers date 
back at least 40 million years. That's the age of the oldest bdelloid recovered 
from amber. Despite bdelloids' asexuality, they've diversified into 360 species.

 Extrapolating from sexual rotifers, bdelloid specialist Bill Birky at the 
University of Arizona in Tucson speculates that males, if they existed, would 
be "small swimming hypodermic syringes full of sperm." He pictures them zooming 
up to females to inject sperm right through the body wall. Instead, females 
just seem to produce eggs that hatch into more bdelloids without fertilization. 
Among biologists, bdelloids have been called an evolutionary scandal.

 Several past claims for asexual species collapsed, recalls sex evolutionist 
Laurence D. Hurst at the University of Bath in England. For example, a scale 
insect turned out to have males, albeit "wee things that stick to the females' 
legs," he says. "And how often do you see humans having sex? If you were a 
Martian looking around, you'd be pretty sure we were asexual."

 For a molecular test, Meselson focused on four bdelloid genes. Sexual 
organisms inherit a copy of a gene from each parent. If two-parent reproduction 
vanishes, the organism just keeps copying its own genes. Like a fax of a fax of 
a fax, the genome gets glitches. If they aren't harmful, they build up. One 
copy of a gene in an ancient asexual can develop very different mistakes from 
the same organism's other copy. Without sex to spread them around, copies of 
the same gene within an organism can look as different from each other as if 
they began diverging when sex stopped.

 That's what Welch and Meselson found when they checked genes in four bdelloid 
species. A few more scenarios, all complicated, could create this pattern and 
must be ruled out before the asexuality claim is bulletproof, Meselson says.

 Still, Judson and Normark welcome the new report as "robust evidence," and 
Birky calls it "very solid." Hurst comments, "They haven't fully nailed it, but 
they've tilted the balance of probability very, very firmly." The remaining 
possibilities, he says, "mean that bdelloids are doing something seriously 
weird with their genome."

 This study alone won't topple, or prove, any of the major theories of the 
importance of sex, Meselson predicts. Most can be tweaked to allow long-term 
asexuality under certain extraordinary circumstances.

 Such theories cluster into two groups, Meselson says. One asserts that sex 
speeds the process of dumping bad mutations, and the other focuses on spreading 
benefits. The Red Queen hypothesis, for instance, finds the main benefit of sex 
in shuffling the genome quickly, making it difficult for parasites to lock onto 
weaknesses.

 Meselson ranks "what goes wrong without sex" as "one of the deepest questions 
in biology," bearing on who perishes and who prevails. "Extinction and 
splitting into other species-we're not exempt from that," he points out. "We're 
a species, too."


