Intergalactic magnetism runs deep and wide: Science News Online, May 6, 2000

 Intergalactic magnetism runs deep and wide

 Peter Weiss

 Hunting for magnetic energy in intergalactic space, researchers have found an 
unexpected motherlode of it. Both in the gaps between galaxies that are 
clustered and in the lonelier neighborhoods outside those clusters, magnetic 
fields are remarkably strong, a scientific team reports.

 As their hunt widens, the scientists find that they are detecting more 
extensive fields, says Philipp P. Kronberg of the University of Toronto, leader 
of the decades-long search. Kronberg reported the results April 29 at an 
American Physical Society meeting in Long Beach, Calif.

 This is evidence of a tremendous energy source that astronomers have 
overlooked, comments theorist Stirling A. Colgate of Los Alamos (N.M.) National 
Laboratory. At the meeting, he argued that enormous dynamos powered by black 
holes have cranked up these intergalactic magnetic fields. Other researchers 
suspect instead that the fields arose during the early history of the universe.

 The magnetic field observations might help researchers understand the origins 
of the highest-energy cosmic rays and, ultimately, sort out whether magnetic 
fields have helped shape the universe.

 One way that astronomers measure cosmic magnetic field strengths is by 
detecting how light from more distant quasars rotates its angle of polarization 
as it travels through a region of interest, say a galaxy or galaxy cluster. The 
stronger the magnetism there or the denser the gas that the field pervades, the 
more the field rotates the light's polarization. To estimate the magnetic field 
strength, researchers compare the polarizations of quasar light that does and 
doesn't pass through the region, and they use data from an X-ray telescope to 
determine the density of the region's gas.

 A decade ago, Kronberg and other coworkers made such a calculation for Earth's 
largest nearby galaxy cluster-the Coma cluster in the constellation Coma 
Berenices. This cluster lies about 300 million light-years away. The scientists 
found to their surprise that the cluster's dilute intergalactic gas had 
magnetic fields of 2 to 3 microgauss (iG), similar in strength to those in the 
Milky Way.

 Because the Coma cluster has some unusual traits, the investigators remained 
uncertain about whether most clusters have potent magnetic fields. Other 
research groups have since measured other cluster fields. Some have reported 
still higher magnetic fields in regions where gravity strongly compresses a 
cluster's gas.

 At this week's meeting, Kronberg described extending the Coma cluster 
experiment to 24 clusters near Earth, purposely avoiding compressed regions. He 
finds on the average even higher field strengths, about 5 ?G, than he did a 
decade ago. "That tells us there's significant energy in space contained in the 
[intergalactic] magnetic fields," he says.

"I'm surprised, very surprised," says Russell M. Kulsrud of Princeton 
University, adding that he harbors some doubts that the strengths "are quite as 
high as [Kronberg] said." But even if the field strengths are a bit smaller, he 
adds, "they are still . . . very difficult to explain."

 To investigate the spatial extent of intergalactic fields, the researchers 
took a different tack. In the presence of a magnetic field, charged particles 
moving at velocities near the speed of light give off so-called synchrotron 
radiation. Mapping synchrotron radiation from a patch of sky with a radio 
telescope indicates both where and how strong magnetic fields are.

 About a decade ago, Kronberg and his coworkers had picked up 
synchrotron-radiation signals indicating field strengths outside the Coma 
cluster of a hundredth to a few tenths of the cluster's field strengths. Those 
first fields to be detected outside a cluster extended millions of light-years 
beyond the cluster's bounds.

 Radio-telescope improvements since then have made it possible for researchers 
to search for magnetic fields across a much larger patch of sky and to do so at 
lower frequencies, which are sensitive to weaker radiation, Kronberg says. In a 
test of that capability, he and his colleagues used the Very Large Array of 
radio dishes at Socorro, N.M., to look again at the environs of the Coma 
cluster.

 The new radio image shows essentially the same pattern of extended fields. 
However, it also contains patches of fields having roughly equivalent strength 
much further from Coma and extending into the surrounding population of 
galaxies. The image "confirms that these magnetic fields really exist in 
intergalactic space," Kronberg claims.

 Calling both sets of findings "very intriguing," Eugene N. Parker of the 
University of Chicago insists they offer no easy answers about the origins and 
influences of cosmic magnetic fields. Rather, he says, they are "a warning 
flag" indicating that scientists don't really understand how magnetic fields 
work.


