Code Breakers: Science News Online, June 3, 2000

> Code Breakers

 Scientists are altering bacteria in a most fundamental way

 Tina Hesman

 Something extraordinarily unnatural is about to take shape in Peter G. 
Schultz's laboratory.

 Except for its sweeping view of the Pacific Ocean, the lab itself, at the 
Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., seems unremarkable. It's a 
perfectly ordinary, if rather large, research facility. The researchers there 
work with the most commonplace of all laboratory bacteria-the ubiquitous 
Escherichia coli.

 But this familiar bacterium is about to become unique among creatures on Earth.

 Schultz and his colleagues, as well as a group at the University of Texas at 
Austin led by Andrew Ellington, are engineering E. coli with an altered code 
for translating DNA information into protein. The researchers are trying to 
move beyond the humdrum set of 20 amino acids that make up the building blocks 
for life today. They plan to add protein-building materials not found naturally 
in any living organism. The result will be a preternatural E. coli-an Uncoli, 
as the Texas group has dubbed its organism.

 The first bacterium with a laboratory-induced variation in its genetic code 
was created in 1983. Until recently, though, scientists have focused on 
altering individual proteins in a test tube to learn more about the way the 
molecules work. Now, researchers at Scripps and Texas hope to discover how to 
weave new patterns into the fabric of life by creating bacteria that follow 
exceptional translation programs. They say that they are close to having 
organisms that unequivocally work with a new plan.

"I think what they're doing is very exciting," says bioethicist Arthur L. 
Caplan of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania in 
Philadelphia. "On curiosity grounds alone, it's fascinating."

 A different life

 For decades, scientists have been speculating about how life would be 
different if it followed an alternative genetic code. "It's by imagining what 
the world would be like if it were different that will allow us to see why it 
is the way it is," says evolutionary biologist Olivia P. Judson of Imperial 
College at Silwood Park in England.

 David R. Liu, a chemist at Harvard University who had a hand in engineering 
the novel organism at Scripps, says, "Everybody who's considered this problem 
is tantalized by the question: Is life better with a different set of amino 
acids?"

 That had been a purely hypothetical, grass-is-greener query, but the Uncoli 
and its ilk could change all that. "This will be the first time we will have a 
nontheoretical answer to that question," says bio-organic chemist Thomas J. 
Magliery of the University of California, Berkeley and Scripps.

 Although the research is intrinsically intriguing, there are also practical 
reasons for building the novel bacteria. The unusual creatures might help clean 
up toxic wastes that would kill natural organisms. With the right protein 
components, Uncoli might spin polyester or other synthetic polymers.

 Unanticipated advances may stem from this research if it provides answers to 
some of the most basic questions about life on Earth-and, perhaps, elsewhere in 
the universe.

 If life on other planets uses building blocks that are very different from our 
own, scientists may have a hard time recognizing E.T. if they finally meet him. 
"We don't really know how to detect life with a very different biochemistry," 
says Michael H. New, an astrobiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffet 
Field, Calif.

 There are lots of stars and planets in the universe, New says, but scientists 
don't know which ones might harbor life. It's easy to guess that Earthlike 
conditions are necessary for developing a biochemistry like ours, he says, but 
where do you look for organisms made of different stuff? New speculates that 
the Uncoli may tell scientists something about where and how to look for life 
that may have an unexpected style.

"It's kind of like a truffle hunt," says New. "If you didn't know that truffles 
like oak forests, you might spend a lot of time looking for them in pine 
forests and never find a truffle." He says he hopes organisms with a different 
genetic code can help astrobiologists distinguish between the planetary 
equivalents of oak and pine forests to root out alien species.

 Expanding the genetic code

 Magliery and his colleagues at Scripps say that expanding the genetic code may 
illuminate the evolutionary path by which life arrived at the universal genetic 
code we have today. The four bases that serve as letters of the genetic 
alphabet are arranged in 64 three-letter words called codons. Each codon stands 
for one of the 20 amino acids that make up proteins or for one of three stop 
codons that signal the end of a protein chain.

 One of the first things that people notice about the genetic code is its 
redundancy, Judson says. Just as some languages have many words that mean snow, 
the genetic code has many codons that name the same amino acid. There are six 
different ways to say arginine, leucine, and serine, and most amino acids 
correspond to at least two codons. Only methionine and tryptophan are each 
spelled out by a single three-letter word.

 Theoretically, the 64 codons could designate 64 different amino acids, but 
that arrangement would leave no room for error, says Judson. Any change in the 
DNA would alter a protein's amino acids. Still, scientists have not settled on 
an explanation for why the code contains 20 amino acids as opposed to 30 or 
more. "We don't even know what having 20 amino acids gets you that 16 doesn't," 
says Judson.

 Some researchers suggest they may have discovered the reason behind the 
familiar genetic code. "Three billion years ago, it was all cutthroat 
competition for things that could resist errors the best," says evolutionary 
biologist Stephen J. Freeland of Princeton University.

 He argues that the universal genetic code mounts a championship error defense. 
In computer simulations, he assessed the severity of errors introduced by 
mutations in a million randomly generated genetic codes, and he found that the 
natural code "outperforms almost all of them."

 Judson points out, however, that nature itself has been experimenting with the 
universal code. Just take a look at mitochondria, the organelle inside cells 
that serve as power plants to generate energy. There, the genetic code is by no 
means universal. Only mitochondria in plant cells follow the rules of the 
standard code, she says. Mitochondria in most other organisms have pared down 
the code and appear to be moving toward one with only two codons assigned to 
each amino acid, she says. That would leave plenty of codons available to 
signify new amino acids.

 Many organisms are already living an alternative lifestyle when it comes to 
the genetic code, Freeland says. Even human biology bends the rules. Human 
cells have added an amino acid called selenocystine to their repertoire of 
building blocks. In a handful of proteins, they incorporate this 21st amino 
acid in response to some of the codons for cystine. These proteins can't 
function without selenocystine.

 Selenocystine provides the perfect example of how evolution continues to shape 
the genetic code, says biochemist Jeffrey Tze-Fei Wong of the Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology. "The 20 amino acids encoded by the 
universal genetic code were not happily and accidentally picked up by the early 
organisms. Instead, they were the end result of prolonged and ruthless 
mutations and selection," he says.

 Random alternatives

 Evolution has been experimenting with random alternatives to the genetic code. 
"We would like to expand the genetic code in a direction that is solely 
determined by the chemist," Liu says.

 The Scripps group described its progress toward making unnatural organisms in 
two studies, one published in the April 29, 1999 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences and a second that appeared this year in the May 24 Journal 
of the American Chemistry Society.

 Introducing a new amino acid is quite a molecular engineering feat. First, the 
researchers had to manipulate molecules that are part of E. coli's 
protein-building machinery. These include transfer RNA (tRNA), which operates 
as a decoder, and the enzymes that add amino acids to each tRNA. Liu chose to 
work with molecules from yeast that select and add the amino acid glutamine.

 Transfer RNAs have two business ends. At one, there's the anticodon-the part 
of the molecule that reads the codon. The other end of the tRNA receives the 
corresponding amino acid from the tRNA-synthetase.

 The researchers changed the anticodon in their new tRNA to match up with the 
UAG stop codon instead of the codon for glutamine. UAG is known among 
biochemists as the amber codon. Amber is the translation of Bernstein, the last 
name of one of the graduate students who first discovered the stop codon. Other 
scientists jokingly assigned the names ochre and opal to the stop codons UAA 
and UGA, respectively.

 Normally, when a mutation that results in a new UAG codon occurs in a 
protein-coding sequence, the cell doesn't complete the corresponding protein. 
The scientists' altered tRNA, however, reads the amber codon as if it were 
glutamine and adds that amino acid, enabling the protein to grow to its normal 
length.

 The Scripps researchers then turned to the second component of the 
protein-making machinery. They randomly mutated the gene for the synthetase 
molecule and examined the pool of variants that arose. Next, they selected 
those that add an amino acid other than glutamine to the tRNA. Some of the 
altered synthetases can hook up amino acids that scientists designed but that 
are not normally found in cells.

 Liu put the tRNA and the entire library of synthetases into E. coli that had a 
mutation in a gene that makes the bacteria resistant to the antibiotic 
ampicillin. The mutation introduced the amber stop codon, making the protein so 
short as to be ineffective and the bacteria sensitive to the antibiotic.

 Liu purposely chose to make this mutation at an innocuous site in the protein, 
so any amino acid-natural or otherwise-inserted there would produce a 
full-length, functional protein. He then fed the bacteria ampicillin and 
laboratory-produced amino acids. The only bacteria that survived were those 
that incorporated an amino acid-either a natural or an introduced one-at the 
location of the amber mutation.

 At this point, the researchers didn't know whether the cell was inserting a 
natural amino acid or one of the unnatural molecules, since both types of amino 
acids were available in the cell.

 To find out what amino acid was added, the researchers put the altered tRNA 
and synthetase molecules from the bacteria that grew on ampicillin into another 
strain of E. coli. These bacteria already had an amber mutation in a gene that 
encodes barnase, a protein that kills bacteria. This time, Liu didn't feed the 
bacteria any unnatural amino acids.

 If the translation molecules corrected the amber mutation with a natural amino 
acid, the bacteria would make barnase and die. If they, however, needed to 
insert the unnatural molecules, now unavailable, the bacteria wouldn't make 
barnase and would go on living. The experiment seems to have worked, but the 
researchers are still examining their most promising candidates.

 Magliery is using the same strategy with a tyrosine tRNA and synthetase taken 
from Methanococcus jannaschii, a methane-producing archeabacterium that lives 
in extremely hot hydrothermal vents in the ocean. He, too, has promising 
candidates among his altered E. coli.

 The Scripps researchers are also developing a system that employs four-base, 
instead of three-base, codons. "We're certainly not the only people who have 
thought of this. In fact, nature thought of it," says Magliery. Salmonella 
bacteria have devised a tRNA with a four-base anticodon, he says.

 Japanese researchers at Okayama University have used a four-base codon to 
insert two unnatural amino acids into a protein in a test tube, they reported 
in the Dec. 29,1999 Journal of the American Chemical Society.

 Ellington calls the Scripps group's work on tRNA and synthetase "a monumental 
step forward" in trying to create an unnatural organism. He points out that in 
their work, unlike his own, there's no evolution. To evolve and make full use 
of unnatural amino acids, he says, the organism would have to insert stop 
codons all over its genome.

 That's not likely to happen, says Ellington. More likely the organism would 
say, "'No, thank you. I do not want your 21st amino acid anywhere else because 
it's weird,'" he says.

 Unnatural amino acids

 In creating their Uncoli, the Texas researchers let evolution figure out how 
to deal with unnatural amino acids. Instead of engineering specific changes, 
the researchers used a strategy that might have gratified German philosopher 
Friedrich Nietzsche, who declared, "What does not destroy me makes me strong."

 Ellington gave the bacteria an amino acid-fluorotryptophan-that is normally a 
poison. He started with a mixture of fluorotryptophan and the natural amino 
acid tryptophan, then slowly decreased the concentration of tryptophan in the 
mixture. Some of the bacteria survived and grew in the brew with no tryptophan. 
They must be using fluorotryptophan in place of tryptophan, he and his 
coworkers surmise.

 They are now trying to determine how the E. coli transformed into these 
Uncoli. Ellington says that he still has to prove that all of the tryptophans 
in all of the proteins have been replaced with fluorotryptophan before he will 
be convinced that his group has created an organism with an altered genetic 
code.

 Although they may not have succeeded in making an unnatural organism yet, 
Schultz is encouraged by his group's progress. "It's a whole lot easier to push 
the door open wider than it is to get your foot in the door in the first 
place," he says.

 The method the Texas group used resembles the one that Wong used in 1983. Then 
working at the University of Toronto, he fed fluorotryptophan to a different 
bacterium, Bacillus subtilis.

 Wong's unnatural bacterium-given the modest designation HR15-made a surprising 
choice of poisons, says Ellington. In contrast to Uncoli, which is "a very 
grudging survivor" growing on flurotryptophan, HR15 grew happily on it. Not 
only did HR15 thrive on fluorotryptophan, it was poisoned by tryptophan. HR15 
is not just a picky eater, but an entirely new type of life, Ellington says.

 Wong agrees. "HR15 does represent a new form of life because the genetic code 
is the most basic attribute of living systems," he says. He calls the 
alteration of the genetic code, "the ultimate test-tube evolution."

"With other mutations, we are altering a macromolecule. With genetic code 
mutations, we are altering the whole organism," Wong says.

 The public has nothing to fear from these artificial organisms, says Schultz. 
HR15 has been stopped cold-it's tucked away in a deep freezer at Wong's lab. 
Any bacteria that escaped the lab would starve without the researchers feeding 
them the unusual amino acids.

 Bioethicist Caplan dismisses any charges that the researchers are playing God. 
He says the scientists are "playing man" and doing what people do best-creating 
new things. "There's nothing wrong, morally, with inventing things," he adds.


