Future Looks Cloudy for Arctic Ozone: Science News Online, June 3, 2000

> Future Looks Cloudy for Arctic Ozone

 Jessica Gorman

 Polar stratospheric clouds look lovely, glowing in streaks of spring Antarctic 
or Arctic sunrise. Yet the wispy wonders, around 20 kilometers up, are causing 
concern below. They create conditions that permit chlorine in the atmosphere to 
ravage the Earth's protective ozone layer.

 This week at the spring meeting of the American Geophysical Union in 
Washington, D.C., scientists announced that more polar stratospheric clouds 
formed in Arctic skies last winter than had ever been recorded previously and 
that the clouds lasted longer. Meanwhile, researchers say, they observed 
significant ozone loss.

 Polar stratospheric clouds hit the ozone layer with two punches. "These are 
the culprits in ozone loss," says NASA's Michael J. Kurylo of Washington, D.C., 
who is a leader of the project known as the SAGE III Ozone Loss and Validation 
Experiment (SOLVE).

 On the surfaces of particles within the clouds, inactive chlorine compounds 
derived from humanmade chlorofluorocarbons convert into a reactive form that 
destroys ozone. If they linger, the clouds also drip nitric acid, lowering the 
nitrogen concentration in the stratosphere. Nitrogen mitigates chlorine's power 
to destroy ozone, and nitrogen loss-a process called denitrification-leaves 
chlorine free to attack ozone.

 At the meeting this week, one international group of researchers reported 
preliminary results from last winter indicating more and longer-lived polar 
stratospheric clouds in the Arctic than they had expected. The data, obtained 
between December 1999 and March 2000, came from SOLVE instruments on aircraft.

"We did see patchy, severe denitrification," says SOLVE team member Eric J. 
Jensen of NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, Calif. However, he 
adds, the team must analyze more data before speculating on how widespread the 
phenomenon was and whether it might have contributed to the ozone losses 
observed last winter. Computer models suggest that even without 
denitrification, other processes can cause the lower stratosphere to lose 40 to 
50 percent of its ozone, says Katja Drdla of Ames. With severe denitrification, 
she says, the loss can total 60 to 80 percent.

 Also at the meeting, Azadeh Tabazadeh of Ames presented independent satellite 
measurements from the latest Arctic winter. Her group found that polar 
stratospheric clouds persisted 1.2 to 1.5 times as long as they did during the 
coldest winters of the 1990s. Her team reports signs of denitrification, "but 
it's not severe," Tabazadeh says. She adds, "Most of the [ozone] loss actually 
during this winter I don't believe was due to denitrification."

 The reports follow a study by Tabazadeh and her colleagues in the May 26 
Science that warned of unusually long-lived polar stratospheric clouds in the 
Arctic. They examined satellite measurements from a typical Antarctic winter in 
the 1990s and the two coldest Arctic winters of the decade. Tabazadeh's group 
found that polar stratospheric clouds lasted half as long in the Arctic as in 
Antarctica. Mathematical modeling by Tabazadeh's group suggests that if Arctic 
stratospheric cooling continues at 2@C per decade, such clouds could last twice 
as long in the Arctic during the coldest winters of the decade that will begin 
in 2010. The date could slip to the 2030s if cooling slows to 1@C each decade.

 Severe denitrification could increase Arctic ozone loss by 30 percent once 
polar stratospheric clouds become twice as persistent, Tabazadeh's team 
speculates.

"I think the study she's done is really good," says Drew T. Shindell of NASA's 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York. Aircraft studies and 
groundbased measurements depict localized conditions, he says, "but things 
change from region to region, so it's nice to have these global data sets from 
satellites."

"It's important to realize that the question is very closely connected to the 
bigger picture of carbon dioxide increases and [human-caused] climate change," 
adds Michael J. Newchurch of the University of Alabama at Huntsville. Earth's 
stratosphere cools as its surface warms.

 Still, Tabazadeh suspects that the Arctic will not continue its cooling trend 
or produce annual ozone holes rivaling Antarctica's. "I don't think it can keep 
cooling and cooling . . . . It should either slow down very much or even 
reverse."


