Viruses that slay bacteria draw new interest: Science News Online, June 3, 2000

> Viruses that slay bacteria draw new interest

 John Travis

 For people with a damaged liver or too much iron in their blood, enjoying raw 
oysters from the Gulf of Mexico is a deadly gamble. Most of the oysters harbor 
Vibrio vulnificus, a bacterium responsible for almost all seafood-related 
deaths in the United States. Healthy people shrug off the microbe, but 
susceptible folks who get a full-blown infection have more than a 50 percent 
chance of dying.

"You can be dead within 24 hours," says Paul A. Gulig of the University of 
Florida College of Medicine in Gainesville. Seeking a treatment that works 
faster than antibiotics do, he and his colleagues recently isolated a 
bacteria-killing virus, or bacteriophage, that targets V. vulnificus and can 
prevent the deaths of mice infected with it.

 Gulig's report was one of a handful on bacteriophage therapy presented last 
week at the American Society for Microbiology (ASM) meeting in Los Angeles. 
Other scientists described phages that attack bacteria that cause anthrax, 
wound and burn infections, and meat and poultry contamination.

 Although U.S. physicians today don't embrace the strategy, phage therapy dates 
back almost a century (SN: 6/1/96, p. 350). The viruses infect, reproduce 
within, and eventually burst bacteria. Since phages reproduce only as long as 
they have target bacteria to infect, Elizabeth M. Kutter of Evergreen State 
College in Olympia, Wash., calls the viruses "self-replicating, self-limiting 
antibiotics."

 In the V. vulnificus work, Gulig and his colleagues sampled muck from oyster 
beds and isolated phages that destroy the bacterium. They simultaneously 
infected mice with V. vulnificus and enriched the rodents' blood with iron, 
which helps the bacterium thrive. When given phages at the time of infection, 
five of eight mice remained healthy. Without such treatment, all mice succumbed 
within 18 hours.

 Gulig cautions that his team has just begun to examine phage therapy for V. 
vulnificus. The scientists plan to test a cocktail of phages and to find out 
whether phages can help rodents when treatment comes a few hours after 
infection.

 Like Gulig, Michael H. Walter of the University of Northern Iowa in Cedar 
Falls has turned to phages to defeat a deadly bacterium. His enemy is Bacillus 
anthracis, the germ responsible for anthrax.

 Since the anthrax bacterium is dangerous to handle, Walter's group has begun 
characterizing phages that infect a harmless relative, Bacillus cereus. Such 
viruses may prove useful in anthrax therapy, says Walter, or in destroying 
stockpiles of B. anthracis captured from terrorists or rogue countries.

 As bacteria increasingly develop antibiotic resistance, several U.S. companies 
have also taken an interest in phage therapy. One, the Baltimore firm 
Intralytix, works closely with the Eliava Institute of Bacteriophage, 
Microbiology, and Virology in Tbilisi, Georgia, which has developed phages for 
medical use since 1934. Physicians in the former Soviet Union regularly turn to 
phages.

 At the ASM meeting, Intralytix cofounder and Georgian scientist Alexander 
Sulakvelidze described his firm's progress in identifying phages that destroy 
the Salmonella bacteria that commonly infect meat, poultry, and eggs. One phage 
alone kills 90 percent of common Salmonella strains, and a cocktail of phages 
eliminates 95 percent, he says.

 Intralytix scientists bought chicken in groceries and seeded it with 
Salmonella. Spraying the poultry with phages dramatically reduced 
contamination, the researchers report. Sulakvelidze predicts that the poultry 
industry will begin testing this disinfection strategy in their processing 
plants within a year.

 Moreover, Intralytix plans to bring to market a U.S. version of a 
bacteriophage-impregnated, biodegradable polymer originally created by Georgian 
scientists. Intended to prevent infections in burns and wounds, the skinlike 
dressing has passed clinical testing in Georgia. Kutter calls it "the most 
exciting new phagetherapy product in recent years."

 Intralytix and several other firms are also studying whether phages can help 
people infected with strains of Enterococcus and Staphylococcus that are 
resistant to all antibiotics, including vancomycin, currently the drug of last 
resort. "There's nothing else we can use to treat these patients," says 
Sulakvelidze.


