Popularity of germ fighter raises concern: Science News Online, May 27, 2000

 Popularity of germ fighter raises concern

 John Travis

 Deodorants, mouthwashes, toothpastes, soaps, cutting boards, baby toys, high 
chairs, and carpeting. Even sweatsocks, underwear, and hunting clothes. On her 
visits to the local Wal-Mart, Maura J. Meade of Allegheny College in Meadville, 
Pa., found examples of those products and others that incorporate the 
bacteria-killing agent triclosan. "It's all over the place," she says.

 That pervasiveness may carry a price, Meade and two other investigators warned 
at this week's American Society for Microbiology meeting in Los Angeles. Each 
reported studies on triclosan-resistant microbes and expressed concern that the 
antiseptic's increasing popularity will encourage the evolution of bacteria 
impervious to drugs. For the moment, however, that worry remains theoretical, 
the scientists acknowledge.

"We may compromise the effectiveness of still-useful antibiotics," says Herbert 
P. Schweizer of Colorado State University in Fort Collins. "I don't want to 
ring the alarm bell too loudly, but I do think we have to start ringing it."

 Easily incorporated into liquids, fabrics, and solid surfaces, triclosan's use 
has soared since its introduction about 3 decades ago. Scientists once believed 
that bacteria can't develop resistance to triclosan because it acts more as a 
grenade than as a bullet. They thought the antiseptic killed bacteria in 
multiple ways rather than targeting a single protein, the modus operandi of 
most antibiotics.

 In the past few years, however, biologists have discovered that triclosan's 
main method of killing is very specific. It inhibits an enzyme involved in 
fatty acid synthesis. They've also shown that some bacteria with mutations in 
that enzyme's gene can resist triclosan. More troubling, an antibiotic commonly 
employed against the tuberculosis bacterium targets the same enzyme, raising 
the possibility that triclosan use will lead to new drug-resistant strains of 
the microbe.

 In his study, Schweizer focused on a second way that bacteria fend off 
triclosan. He found that almost all strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a deadly 
microbe that often strikes people with weak immune systems, thwart triclosan 
because of the action of so-called efflux pumps. The pumps remove the 
antiseptic and other toxic substances from the bacteria.

 When Schweizer mutated the gene for one key pump, the bacteria quickly 
regained their triclosan defense by increasing production of other efflux 
pumps. Since the pumps also rid bacteria of many antibiotics (SN: 2/12/00, p. 
110: Available to subscribers at ), he worries that triclosan's ubiquity will 
promote the evolution of microbes with multiple-drug resistance.

 Peter Gilbert of the University of Manchester in England questions the way 
that manufacturers use triclosan in products such as cutting boards. His study 
found that hard surfaces impregnated with the compound slowly release 
triclosan. This could expose nearby bacteria to sublethal concentrations of the 
agent, a situation that promotes development of resistance.

 To preserve the agent's effectiveness, Gilbert argues that triclosan-treated 
surfaces shouldn't be used unless there's a demonstrated health benefit. Few 
manufacturers can offer such proof, he says.

"You wouldn't want your cutting board at home to compromise the effectiveness 
of the gloves your surgeon wears," agrees Meade, noting that hospitals also use 
triclosan-treated clothes and gear.

 Gilbert also suggests that triclosan's widespread use encourages poor hygiene. 
"There's a tendency to become complacent," he says.

 Meade adds that overuse of triclosan will reduce the time until the agent 
stops working. She notes that her research group has found several strains of 
bacteria in nature that readily grow on the compound and one that may even use 
it as an energy source. Considering that bacteria frequently acquire traits 
from one another by exchanging genes, Meade says, triclosan's days are numbered.


