Spectrum deftly takes visible light's pulse: Science News Online, June 3, 2000

> Spectrum deftly takes visible light's pulse

 Peter Weiss

 Is there really treasure at the end of the rainbow? Yes, say scientists who 
have fired ultrashort laser pulses into a novel fiber that transforms one color 
into many. The remarkable spectrum exiting the fiber, when applied as a sort of 
ruler, takes the ordeal out of measuring visible-light frequencies. Before 
long, every university and industrial laboratory may routinely use the 
technique to achieve precision now attained only at national standards 
laboratories, the inventors predict.

 To many scientists, that improvement's as good as gold. "Completely 
revolutionary," comments Alan Madej of the National Research Council of Canada 
in Ottawa. "It's the biggest development in precision electromagnetic 
measurement since people started to measure laser frequencies" in the early 
1970s, he adds.

 Ernst O. Gobel of Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt in Braunschweig, 
Germany, says the new method "puts absolute frequency measurements in the 
optical regime on totally new grounds."

 Since 1967, researchers have defined a second of time by counting out 
radiofrequency waves of a 9.2-gigahertz oscillation of the cesium-133 atom (SN: 
8/7/99, p. 92). But scientists needing to precisely measure frequencies of 
early lasers found themselves in a bind: No electronic device counts fast 
enough to keep up with visible light's ripples, which wiggle at least 46,000 
times as fast as the cesium clock's oscillation.

 Instead, physicists laboriously created so-called frequency chains starting 
with the cesium signal. Each link, built from atomic clocks, other lasers, and 
electronic circuits, raised the frequency by a known ratio, ultimately stepping 
it up to the target's optical frequency.

 Now, all those intermediate links melt away, report researchers at JILA in 
Boulder, Colo.; Lucent Technologies' Bell Labs in Murray Hill, N.J.; and the 
Max Planck Institute for Quantum Optics in Garching, Germany.

 In an unusual fiber invented by two Bell Labs scientists, light pulses pick up 
new colors as they travel. Confinement by air tubes encircling the narrow glass 
core distorts pulses and adds colors, coinventor Robert S. Windeler explains.

 The May 29 Physical Review Letters and April 28 Science describe a series of 
laser pulses taking a centimeters-long joyride through such a fiber. What 
emerges is pulses containing a spectrum-wide set of optical beams evenly spaced 
in frequency. Cued by a cesium standard, the rate of entering pulses sets the 
gap between the ticks of this ruler.

 Led by Theodor W. Hansch, who devised the method's underlying concept, the 
Garching team has used the spectral ruler to measure certain hydrogen 
oscillations with unprecedented accuracy.

 As the technique becomes commonplace, perhaps in a desktop instrument, the 
entire gamut of physical and biological sciences could benefit because so many 
scientific probes involve color detection, says coauthor Scott A. Diddams, now 
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Boulder. The method 
may also lead to more rigorous tests of whether fundamental physical 
constants-and hence the laws of physics themselves-vary slightly over time, 
adds JILA team leader John L. Hall.


