Endgame for Epilepsy?: Science News Online, June 3, 2000

> Endgame for Epilepsy? Researchers look toward a cure

 By D. Christensen

 On screen, a baby waves her arms and gurgles happily, then tenses, scrunches 
her eyes shut, and clutches her tiny fingers together. Her arm jerks to one 
side, stiffens, and finally relaxes. She cries. Then the shaking starts again.

"I just wanted to hold her," says Susan Axelrod, her voice intense as she 
recalls the film shown at a recent conference on epilepsy. "I always held my 
daughter when she was having seizures."

 Axelrod raised a child with uncontrollable epilepsy and felt frustration with 
doctors who saw partial control of seizures and serious drug side effects as 
acceptable outcomes of their treatments. Her experience led her to found an 
organization called Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy in September 1998. 
The Chicago-based group enlisted Hillary Rodham Clinton's help and focused 
congressional attention, and new funding, on research aimed at a cure for 
epilepsy.

 Despite many decades of research, improvements in anticonvulsant drugs, and 
advances in surgical therapy, seizures can't be completely controlled in 20 to 
25 percent of the 2.3 million people in the United States with epilepsy. For 
these patients with so-called intractable epilepsy, current treatments at best 
lessen the occurrence of seizures and at worst cause debilitating side effects 
while having little or no benefit.

 However, recent advances in genetics, molecular biology, imaging techniques, 
and bioengineering have paved the way for attacks on epilepsy's cause as well 
as its symptoms, says Daniel H. Lowenstein, an epilepsy researcher at the 
University of California, San Francisco.

"In the past, cure has been seen as a distant objective," says Lowenstein. "We 
are finally making some real headway."

 Brief disruptions

 Epilepsy produces brief disruptions in the brain's electrical functions; 
seizures are the outward sign of these disturbances. Normally, brain cells 
communicate with each other through electrical impulses, working together to 
control body movements and keep organs functioning properly.

 In an epileptic attack, hundreds or thousands of electrical impulses, each 
more intense than usual, appear in unusually synchronous bursts. Like ripples 
in a pond, such disturbances spread throughout the brain. These interruptions 
in the brain's normal pattern of activity may result in seizures and can affect 
consciousness, sensations, and movement.

 There are many different types of epilepsy. Some develop in childhood, 
probably as the result of genetic mutations that cause abnormalities in brain 
wiring, an imbalance in the chemicals that the brain uses to send signals, or a 
combination of the two. Epilepsy can also develop when the brain makes abnormal 
nerve connections while attempting to repair itself after a traumatic head 
injury, stroke, or damage from chronic conditions such as Parkinson's disease.

 The National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., defines a cure for 
epilepsy as "the prevention of epilepsy before it occurs in people at risk, and 
the cessation of seizures without therapy-associated side effects in those who 
develop the disease." Lowenstein helped organize a conference at NIH in March 
that considered how to find such a cure.

 NIH's funding for basic and applied research into epilepsy increases from 
$81.7 million in fiscal year 1999 to a proposed $93.8 million in FY 2001. As 
announced at the conference, the latter amount includes about $1 million for 
research specifically looking into cures for the disorder.

 Researchers say understanding epilepsy may shed light on how the normal brain 
functions. Since many genes seem to be involved, the disease may also be a good 
target for scientists trying to understand how malfunctions within a complex 
array of genes can lead to disease.

"There's almost a palpable excitement about the growing opportunities to treat 
epilepsy," says Timothy A. Pedley of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in 
New York. "We're working to make the science fiction of today the reality of 
tomorrow."

 No cure

 The reality of today is that there's no cure for epilepsy. Current drugs 
prevent seizures by shutting down overactive nerve cells. Some boost the 
effects of chemicals in those cells that inhibit nerve signaling, while others 
block channels that control the flow of ions into and out of cells and thereby 
regulate nerve signals.

 These drugs may stop seizures, but they don't prevent the abnormal cellular 
processes that cause epilepsy. Nor can these drugs prevent the development of 
epilepsy in people known to be at high risk, such as children with particular 
brain defects or adults who have suffered severe head injuries.

 However, the basic science that's giving researchers a better understanding of 
epilepsy may yield preventive treatments, says Lowenstein. In the past few 
years, scientists have managed to tease out some of the chemicals in the brain 
that cause nerve cells to grow in a particular direction and to make 
connections with neighboring cells. These processes may be abnormal in people 
with epilepsy. Understanding the molecules that modify the growth of nerve 
cells, therefore, may offer insights into both inherited and acquired forms of 
epilepsy.

 Finding genes linked to epilepsy may be one of the best ways of discovering 
which of these molecular signals play roles in the development of epilepsy, 
says Jeffrey L. Noebels, a neurologist at Baylor College of Medicine in 
Houston. Epilepsy genetics is getting a big boost from studies in mice, he says.

 To find out what a gene does, scientists frequently create strains of mice in 
which they disable, or knock out, a single gene. For a surprisingly wide range 
of knocked-out genes, "epilepsy or seizures have been a common result," Noebels 
says.

 Several of these two dozen genes have turned out to encode ion channels, as 
many researchers had expected, he says. Others have unknown functions or-as is 
the case for the gene for a protease enzyme inhibitor called cystatin 
B-functions that don't seem to have any relationship to epilepsy.

 These unexpected connections "may teach us the most," says Noebels. "The 
beginning of the end [of the disorder] is finding out what these genes do in 
the brain and what targets we have for developing better drugs."

 New drugs

 Developing new drugs, though, takes a lot of time. After the discovery of a 
gene involved in a disease, researchers may work 10 to 12 years to create a 
drug that's effective at targeting that gene's action in the body, says Raymond 
Dingledine, a pharmacologist at Emory University in Atlanta.

 Moreover, drugs that interfere with nerve cell activity may have broad 
consequences. For example, one approach to calming brain activity is to target 
the so-called NMDA receptor. This ion channel permits calcium to enter nerve 
cells and thus trigger electrical signals between neurons. Drugs targeting this 
receptor have had severe side effects, presumably because the NMDA receptor is 
widespread and plays roles in normal brain development, nerve signaling, 
learning, and memory.

 An alternative strategy now being explored uses gene therapy to coax rats to 
develop antibodies to a specific part of the NMDA receptor. These antibodies 
may block the receptors when a seizure is occurring but not otherwise, thus 
limiting side effects, explains Matthew J. During of Jefferson Medical College 
at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia.

 He and his colleagues vaccinated rats with a virus that had been genetically 
engineered to produce a fragment of the NMDA receptor, and the rats developed 
antibodies to this protein. Normally, the so-called blood-brain barrier keeps 
antibodies produced outside the brain from seeping in. However, after trauma 
such as stroke or at the beginning of an epileptic seizure, the blood-brain 
barrier temporarily leaks.

 Just two of the nine treated animals developed seizures when given a chemical 
called kainate, which normally induces seizures, During and his colleagues 
reported in the Feb. 25 Science. In contrast, 13 of 17 unvaccinated rats and 6 
of 8 given gene therapy against an unrelated protein had severe seizures.

 The researchers also reported no behavioral differences in the rats they 
studied, suggesting that the vaccination didn't harm other brain functions.

"We don't know exactly how it works," During admits. "I think we have an 
approach with a lot of potential to prevent the development of epilepsy," he 
says. He and his colleagues plan to study the effect of NMDA antibodies in dogs 
and, eventually, in people.

"This is a really interesting and unique approach," says Oswald Steward, a 
neuroscientist at the University of California, Irvine. However, transferring 
therapies from mice to people is never a sure thing, he says.

 During's team can't say yet whether people will develop an immune response 
that will keep the injected antibodies from working. Nor can the researchers be 
sure vaccination won't cause an autoimmune disease or long-term damage to NMDA 
receptors in the central nervous system.

 Effective treatments

"Many of us feel that...it will take a while to move into therapies that 
prevent epilepsy," says Dennis Spencer, a neurosurgeon at Yale University 
School of Medicine in New Haven, Conn. "In the meantime, we need treatments 
that are more effective with fewer side effects."

 Physicians also need better ways of visualizing the brain's activity to 
understand where epileptic attacks begin, says Spencer. Before spreading to 
other parts of the brain, abnormal electrical signals arise in tiny regions 
called focal points.

 In some people, surgical removal of these focal points can reduce or even 
eliminate seizures. Surgery is far from a general cure for epilepsy, however. 
Not all areas of the brain can be easily accessed, not all patients with 
epilepsy have well-defined focal points, and not all focal points are 
expendable.

 New brain-imaging technologies are providing better pictures of epileptic 
focal points, says Brian Litt, a neurologist and biomedical engineer at the 
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

 Scientists are also using the imaging techniques and implanted electrodes to 
carefully monitor the brain's electrical activity to predict when a seizure 
will occur (SN: 5/23/98, p. 326).

 Taking advantage of faster, more powerful computers, Litt's team has monitored 
electrical activity in the brains of 17 people with a type of epilepsy called 
temporal lobe epilepsy. "Preliminary data suggest that seizures don't start as 
abrupt events," says Litt. Rather, the brain changes leading up to a seizure 
can start "perhaps days or hours ahead of time," he says.

 At a conference in Atlanta last October, he presented data from three patients 
with temporal lobe epilepsy. His computer analysis of electrical activity could 
predict seizures 20 to 50 minutes before they occurred.

 If these patterns hold true for people with other types of epilepsy, says 
Litt, it should be possible to develop an implanted device that can identify 
these abnormal electrical signals in plenty of time to abort the seizure by 
releasing small quantities of a drug or electrically stimulating focal points 
to ward off synchronized nerve impulses. Such an appliance would be a sort of 
pacemaker for the brain, say researchers.

 Setting the stage

 Figuring out how to prevent epilepsy may hinge on understanding the reasons 
why the disease takes so long to appear in some people. Epileptic seizures may 
begin as long as five years after a head injury, for example. Researchers 
believe that nerve death and repair during this latent period may cause "a 
whole set of events that don't in and of themselves cause a seizure, but they 
predispose the brain to hyperexcitability and seizures," says Dingledine.

 Since current antiseizure drugs don't seem to prevent epilepsy from 
developing, he suspects that the mechanisms that set the stage for seizures 
differ from the mechanisms that cause epileptic attacks. With the growth in 
animal models for epilepsy, tools are becoming available to use in searching 
for changes in the brain that bring about epilepsy, he says.

 Using DNA chips (SN: 3/8/97, p. 144), researchers have tracked the activity of 
hundreds of genes in mouse brains during this latent period. They've found 29 
genes expressed more strongly and 9 expressed more weakly in mice that later 
show epilepsy than in normal mice. However, the gene chips scanned only about 5 
percent of the total mouse genome, leaving scientists many more genes to 
examine. Moreover, the function of most of these genes has yet to be unraveled.

 In people, the interactions of genes and the environmental factors that cause 
epilepsy are likely to be even more complicated than they are in mice, says 
Samuel F. Berkovic of the University of Melbourne in Australia.

"Epilepsy is perhaps the best paradigm [to use] to understand diseases with 
complex causes," he says.

 The complicated nature of epilepsy may, in part, explain why this 
disease-mentioned in ancient Babylonian writings more than 3,000 years ago-has 
seemed supernatural to some people. In many countries, the condition is 
surrounded with mystical beliefs and social taboos, which make it difficult for 
researchers to study.

"Of all the disorders [recognized] in the brain, epilepsy is one of the 
oldest," notes Noebels. Yet he cites the recent NIH conference as "the very 
first meeting with scientists talking about a cure." He adds, "The idea of 
curing epilepsy seemed too remote . . . but now all of a sudden it seems like 
the right time to put things together."

 It's none too soon for Axelrod and her daughter. "I'm sick of 'living well 
with epilepsy,'" she says. "I don't want to live with epilepsy at all."


