Model Tracks Storms from the Sun: Science News Online, June 24, 2000

 Model Tracks Storms from the Sun

 R. Cowen

 Hell hath no fury like a solar storm.

 When the sun blows its top, it hurls billions of tons of electrically charged 
gas into space at speeds up to 2,000 kilometers per second.

 Now, a group of astronomers has developed a reliable method for predicting how 
long it will take these storms to hit Earth. There, they can disrupt 
satellites, hamper radio communications, and knock out power grids.

 Another team has gathered observations that confirm a model of how the sun's 
outer atmosphere, or corona, manages to store up enough magnetic energy to 
induce these upheavals.

 Both teams reported their findings this week at a meeting of the American 
Astronomical Society in Stateline, Nev.

 The new calculations of solar storms' arrival times relied on observations by 
two spacecraft. SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) stares directly at 
the sun and measures the speed of massive clouds of electrified gas known as 
coronal mass ejections. Those clouds that head toward Earth are detected by 
another spacecraft, called Wind, about an hour before they arrive.

 Predicting the travel time for a coronal mass ejection is a tricky business. 
Once launched from the sun, these clouds must make their way through the solar 
wind, the vast stream of ions that continuously blows out from the sun. Like 
the current of a great river acting on a tossed twig, the solar wind tends to 
pull slowermoving material up to its own speed and hold back material that sets 
off at a higher speed.

 By analyzing the initial and final speeds of 23 coronal mass ejections, as 
well as their transit times to Earth, Natchimuthuk Gopalswamy of the Catholic 
University of America in Washington, D.C., and NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center in Greenbelt, Md., and his colleagues determined the amount by which the 
solar wind sped up or slowed down each storm.

 Knowing the speed with which the sun has ejected the particles, astronomers 
can now estimate the acceleration or deceleration due to the solar wind, 
Gopalswamy says. That information will allow better predictions of when a 
coronal mass ejection will reach Earth. There has been no "standard model" for 
predicting the arrival of solar storms, he notes. "We have established a 
benchmark."

 The original model, which Gopalswamy and his collaborators published in the 
Jan. 15 Geophysical Research Letters, could only calculate arrival times within 
a window of 18 hours. Its precision was limited by the data from the SOHO 
spacecraft. Because SOHO lies directly along the line between the sun and 
Earth, it can only measure one component of the velocity of ejected solar gas.

 To improve the model, the researchers reviewed velocity measurements of 
coronal mass ejections made by earlier spacecraft with a variety of viewing 
angles. The combination of measurements enabled the team to better estimate the 
effect of the solar wind on coronal mass ejections both near and far from the 
sun. As a result, the team has now increased the precision of its predictions 
to a window of 12 hours, Gopalswamy reported at the meeting.

 Ernest Hildner, director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration's Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colo., says that 
forecasters in his office hope to use the model to predict magnetic storms 
"with better precision than we have in the past." He notes that the model could 
be further improved if follow-up studies determine how variations in the 
density and speed of the solar wind during the 11-year solar cycle change the 
arrival time of storms.

 Another study described at the meeting focused on the creation of solar 
eruptions. Researchers have long suspected that the rotation of the sun, 
combined with the roiling motions of its hot gases, can twist the magnetic 
fields rooted in the solar surface and impart tremendous energy to them. Unless 
the power is stored and suddenly released, however, the energy will leak away 
and an eruption might never occur, notes Spiro K. Antiochos of the Naval 
Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C.

 Antiochos, Guillaume Aulanier, also of the Naval lab, and other researchers 
have proposed that an overlying magnetic field in the corona, acting like the 
lid of a pressure cooker, permits the energy to build up. For an explosion to 
take place, the lid must develop a weak point. The researchers suggested that 
this may occur if the overlying magnetic field lies adjacent to a field of 
opposite polarity and somewhere along the border, the magnetic field drops to 
zero.

 Observations with the TRACE (Transition Region and Coronal Explorer) satellite 
have now confirmed this model, says Edward E. DeLuca of the Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Mass. In 1998, TRACE detected a flow of 
ionized gas along a region of high-altitude magnetic activity in the corona, 
exactly where Aulanier's team predicted a weak point should occur.

 The flow of gas "is a telltale signature" that the lid has weakened, DeLuca 
says. About 2 minutes after the flow began, a flare erupted, indicating that 
the lid had indeed been pushed aside, he notes.

 Antiochos says the same magnetic process may induce the flares that have been 
observed on other stars.


