Tsunami! At Lake Tahoe?: Science News Online, June 10, 2000

> Tsunami! At Lake Tahoe?

 Surprised tourists could catch the ultimate wave

 Kathryn Brown

 Postcards from Lake Tahoe all flaunt a peaceful, brilliant-blue stretch of 
mountain water. But geologists have been snapping a very different picture of 
the lake lately. Far beneath Lake Tahoe's gentle surface, they say, several 
hidden earthquake faults snake across the lake's flat bottom. These faults put 
the lake at a bizarre risk for an inland body of water.

 If the researchers are right, Lake Tahoe tourists could one day feel the 
ground tremble and, just minutes later, face a tsunami. Roiling waves of water 
would crest to 10 meters at the shore and crisscross the lake for hours.

 Tsunamis typically emerge in oceans, usually after a quake drops or lifts part 
of the seafloor. Undersea landslides-alone or following a quake-can also 
trigger these giant waves. In 1998, for instance, a tsunami devastated Papua 
New Guinea, sweeping away more than 2,000 people living on the country's 
northern coast (SN: 8/1/98, p. 69: ). And in the past decade, tsunamis have 
lashed the coasts of Japan, Nicaragua, and Indonesia, as well. But Lake Tahoe?

 While it may seem improbable, Lake Tahoe holds just the right blend of 
ingredients to brew a tsunami. For one thing, it has plenty of water. As the 
world's 10th-largest lake, Lake Tahoe stretches 35 kilometers long, 19 km wide, 
and, in some spots, 500 m deep. What's more, the lake sits smack in the middle 
of earthquake country, nestled in a fault-riddled basin that straddles 
California and Nevada. Dozens of minor or moderate quakes erupt along faults in 
the region every week, and the Lake Tahoe area is no exception. All it would 
take, scientists say, is a strong quake directly beneath the lake to send the 
waters spewing, tsunami-style.

 To get a better grip on Lake Tahoe's tsunami potential, University of Nevada, 
Reno geologists have been modeling different quake scenarios. According to 
their calculations, if a magnitude 7 quake struck either of two major faults 
under the lake, the bottom could open like a trapdoor, with a chunk of it 
suddenly dropping as much as 4 m. Just behind it would fall a huge, sinking 
slosh of water-generating a giant wave that would reach the surface, gather 
strength, and come barreling to shore as a tsunami.

 And that's just the beginning. The scientists think the tsunami, in turn, 
would create so-called seiche waves, mountainous waves that lurch from shore to 
shore for hours on end. "Think of the lake like a pan full of water. When you 
knock one end way down, the water surges and then sloshes back and forth for 
some time," says Gene A. Ichinose, a geophysics graduate student at Nevada-Reno 
and lead author of the group's study, which appeared in the April 15 
Geophysical Research Letters. As in a jostled pan of water, some waves would 
likely splash past their usual borders-right into the homes and hotels that dot 
the Lake Tahoe shoreline.

 As Ichinose puts it, "If you feel the earth shaking for 5 or 10 seconds, get 
to high ground."

 Grainy litter

 Inland tsunamis are extremely rare. Last year, geologist Jody Bourgeois of the 
University of Washington in Seattle reported evidence of a prehistoric tsunami 
in Possession Sound, a small body of water off Puget Sound. Bourgeois and her 
colleagues found a 2-centimeter-thick layer of sand smeared over a fossilized 
marsh in the area. It's the remnant, they say, of a tsunami that rolled in, 
picked up sand and debris, and then dumped the grainy litter right on top of 
the marsh. Their analysis is similar to that being used to detect ancient 
hurricanes (SN: 5/20/00, p. 333: ).

 The Seattle team's radiocarbon dating of the sediment layers places the 
tsunami between A.D. 800 and 950. This period coincides neatly with a large 
quake that struck a fault in Seattle, 30 miles to the south, between A.D. 900 
and 930.

 More recently, the surf came up at Hebgen Lake in Yellowstone National Park. 
Just before midnight on Aug. 17, 1959, a magnitude 7.5 quake struck nearby, 
sending a landslide into the lake and churning a series of seiche waves as high 
as tall trees that reportedly crashed from shore to shore for almost 12 hours 
before quieting.

 In other lakes, at other times, landslides and rock avalanches have generated 
waves twice that high, according to reports of the U.S. Geological Survey. The 
Army Corps of Engineers frequently checks the strength of the dams on lakes in 
high-risk places. Moreover, in 1980, a U.S. Bureau of Reclamation study 
modeling quake hazards prompted efforts to shore up a dam at Lake Tahoe.

 Until now, however, scientists haven't known just how a tsunami at Lake Tahoe 
might play out. Some clues emerged 2 years ago, when USGS researchers mapped 
Lake Tahoe's floor using sonar. Sending a small burst of sound into the lake, 
the team gauged the lake's depth at a specific point by measuring how long that 
pulse took to reach bottom and then reflect back. Applied in a pattern across 
the lake, this sonar bathymetry allowed scientists to draft a 3-D map of the 
lake bottom. The picture that emerged wasn't peaceful.

 While most of the lake floor is flat, parts are littered with huge rocks 
jumbled every which way. This debris, geologists say, came from a landslide in 
which one wall of the lake collapsed, possibly within the past 10,000 years. 
Given the location of the debris, it's likely that a quake along one of the 
underwater faults triggered the landslide-and also a tsunami, says Richard A. 
Schweickert, one of a team of Nevada-Reno geologists who used the USGS sonar 
data to help create a fault map of Lake Tahoe last year.

"Most people think of lakes as places where sediment quietly accumulates, 
little by little, over thousands of years," Schweickert says, "but this 
suggests a much more catastrophic process at work."

 Underwater faults

 If catastrophe struck Lake Tahoe once, why not again? "It's definitely a valid 
hypothesis," remarks geologist Craig M. dePolo of the Nevada Bureau of Mines 
and Geology in Reno. "It's clear there are faults right below the lake. And if 
they move, the lake will respond."

 Although scientists don't know how often Lake Tahoe's underwater faults have 
come alive, they do know that nearby faults on shore have acted up 
occasionally. In a 1999 study, dePolo and his colleagues found evidence for two 
prehistoric quakes, both about magnitude 7, along the so-called Genoa fault, 
which runs 10 km east of Lake Tahoe. According to radiocarbon dating of soil 
along this fault, the most recent quakes hit 500 and 2,100 years ago.

 It's reasonable to assume that the faults lying beneath Lake Tahoe are 
similar, Ichinose says. If so, they probably crack open about once every 1,500 
years with a magnitude 7 quake that lifts or drops part of the lake floor by 4 
m. Armed with these quake parameters, Ichinose and his colleagues cranked out 
computer simulations to learn how the lake would react.

 According to one scenario, a quake along the fault under the north end of the 
lake would send waves up to 6 m high racing toward the community of South Lake 
Tahoe on the southern shore. In a second scenario, a shift in the fault that 
runs along the lake's west side catapults 10-meter-tall waves into McKinney Bay 
on the western shore. In both cases, the initial tsunami gives way to dangerous 
seiche waves, which can be just as high as the tsunami and roll back and forth 
for hours.

 The good news, geologists say, is that a magnitude 7 quake under Lake Tahoe 
only has a 3 to 4 percent probability of striking in the next 50 years, given 
the 1,500-year quake-recurrence interval inferred from tremors along the Genoa 
fault. "If I were fortunate enough to own a lakeside home, I wouldn't sell it 
now," remarks John G. Anderson, head of Nevada-Reno's seismology lab and a 
coauthor of the modeling study.

 By comparison, people living in San Francisco face a roughly 70 percent chance 
of a similar-size quake in the same timeframe.

 Still, the risk at Lake Tahoe is high enough to warrant further study, says 
oceanographer Harold Mofjeld of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration's Tsunami Research Program in Seattle. "Our main concern would 
be the tourists, who might not be prepared for an event like this," says 
Mofjeld. "If residents knew what to expect, they could probably get to high 
ground in time."

 Though a quake lasts just seconds, a tsunami wave could take up to 15 minutes 
to reach Lake Tahoe's shore. That would be plenty of time for many people to 
scramble up a mountainside, adds Ichinose. He worries more about the lingering 
seiche waves, which could surprise folks returning home.

 Lake Tahoe is now on a growing list of tsunami-risk sites in the United 
States. For years, researchers viewed tsunamis as disasters rolling in from a 
distant shore-arriving in Hawaii, say, after rearing up on the coast of Alaska. 
While still deadly, long-distance tsunamis typically give U.S. coastline 
communities time to react.

 In the past few years, though, U.S. scientists have found more and more 
tsunami hazards at their doorstep. The new worries began when geologists 
discovered that the Papua New Guinea quake was centered on land, not at sea, as 
first thought. That suggests the quake didn't directly spark the subsequent 
tsunami but instead launched an undersea landslide that generated the giant 
waves.

 It so happens that the U.S. West Coast, from California to the Pacific 
Northwest and southern Alaska, has many similar spots. Coastal faults there 
could trigger moderate quakes, which would launch nearby underwater slides and 
then tsunamis. This cascade of events may have caused an 1812 tsunami in Santa 
Barbara, for example.

 The West Coast isn't the only area facing potential waves. In the May Geology, 
scientists report finding pockmarks on the continental shelf off Virginia and 
North Carolina. They appear to be scars from gas exploding through the 
seafloor. If these gas blowouts continue, the researchers say, the weakened 
shelf edge might collapse, sparking a landslide and tsunami that would flood 
part of the coast, including the Chesapeake Bay.

 Living proof

 Back at Lake Tahoe, scientists are working to confirm that prehistoric 
tsunamis really did surge from earthquakes or landslides. "Finding physical 
evidence, or actual tsunami deposits, would help the researchers make their 
case that a future tsunami is possible," says Bourgeois. "That kind of living 
proof is also good for raising the awareness among the public and hazard 
planners."

 Schweickert thinks his research team may already have such proof. Along Lake 
Tahoe's western shore, some of the ordinary glacial sediments wear a thin 
veneer of tsunami-style gravel deposits. "Looking at the shoreline, it appears 
that tsunami waves have beveled the topography and left these deposits behind," 
says Schweickert.

 Perhaps the same prehistoric, quake-triggered landslide that dragged rocks 
across Lake Tahoe's floor also hurled a tsunami across its shores. To test that 
hunch, Schweickert's team plans to date both the potential tsunami deposits and 
some lake-bottom sediments cut by the west Lake Tahoe fault, perhaps linking 
the disasters in time.

 Proving a prehistoric tsunami at Lake Tahoe won't be easy, cautions dePolo. In 
any situation, he says, it's tricky to show that today's sandy layer came from 
yesterday's tsunami.

"What we're looking for is a beach that's been picked up by the water, taken to 
maximum wave height, suspended, and then dumped, along with debris, just before 
the waves receded," dePolo says. "It can be difficult to make that case." 
Complicating matters, Lake Tahoe's water levels have naturally varied quite a 
bit over the years, the changes shifting sediments all the while.

 While Schweickert looks to the past, Ichinose keeps peering into the future. 
He's hoping to refine the Lake Tahoe tsunami models to learn exactly which 
streets in the area would be flooded under different scenarios.

"Even if the probability of a future quake is low," Ichinose says, "it would be 
nice to let people know who can stay home and who should evacuate."

 Kathryn Brown is a freelance science writer based in Alexandria, Va.


