Excreted Drugs: Something Looks Fishy: Science News Online, June 17, 2000

> Excreted Drugs: Something Looks Fishy

 Janet Raloff

 Doctors recommend drinking plenty of water to replenish lost fluids and wash 
away wastes. Just where do the excreted wastes go? At least a few, including 
hormones and heart drugs, end up in streams-and eventually someone else's 
drinking water, a new study finds.

 Though the amounts detected in water from a Louisiana tap were small-just a 
few parts per trillion (ppt)-they can be biologically active, another study 
finds. At these concentrations, one of the hormones measured and another found 
in birth control pills alter the apparent gender of fish and, possibly, their 
fertility.

 In a suite of yet more studies, collaborating state, federal, and university 
scientists report finding male carp and walleyes in Minnesota that were 
producing "sky-high" quantities of vitellogenin, an egg-yolk protein normally 
made only by females. Such feminization might explain the suspected inability 
of some adult male fish to make sperm. The researchers had caught the walleyes 
in the effluent of a sewage-treatment plant-a type of facility that others have 
shown can release estrogenic pollutants (SN: 3/21/98, p. 187: ).

 Researchers reported all these findings last week in Minneapolis at a meeting 
sponsored by the National Ground Water Association.

 Glen R. Boyd, a civil engineer at Tulane University in New Orleans, described 
a preliminary survey this spring of the anticholesterol drug clofibric acid, 
the pain reliever naproxen, and the hormone estrone in local waters. His team's 
sampling turned up the drugs at three sites along the Mississippi River, at 
four sites around Lake Pontchartrain, and in Tulane's tap water.

 Though the drugs weren't always detectable, assays revealed a minimum of 10 
ppt of each at least once at every site. Estrone in tap water, for instance, 
averaged 35 ppt, with a high of 80 ppt.

 Environment Canada detected similar pollutants in its 1998 nationwide survey 
of sewage-treatment effluent. At some sites, estrone reached 400 ppt and the 
hormone ethinylestradiol from birth control pills reached 14 ppt, notes Chris 
D. Metcalfe of Trent University in Peterborough, Ontario. He's now exposed eggs 
of a laboratory fish, the Japanese medaka ( Oryzias latipes), for 100 days to 
concentrations typical of the survey.

 At exposures of 0.1 ppt ethinylestradiol or 10 ppt estrone, some males became 
intersex, exhibiting both male and female reproductive tissues. Exposures to 
1,000 ppt of either of these estrogens transformed all males into females. The 
findings are slated to appear in Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry.

 Though not a North American fish, the medaka models the reproductive responses 
of native fish well, Metcalfe says. In fact, his fieldwork around the Great 
Lakes has uncovered signs of intersex white perch. That's worrisome, he 
observes, since intersex fish "usually aren't interested in sex-in spawning."

 Moreover, in early March, Ira Adelman of the University of Minnesota in St. 
Paul caught male walleyes in local waters. He was able to extract sperm from 
all of them except those swimming in a channel that received effluent from a 
sewage-treatment plant.

 The channel's unusual warmth may have triggered these males to release their 
sperm early, he said. However, he noted, it's also possible that those 
estrogenic pollutants that fostered males to produce egg-yolk protein also 
"arrested the fish in an early state of sexual development." His team is now 
looking for testicular abnormalities in the fish.

 Local carp, which normally spawn later, made sperm. But Adelman reported 
preliminary data indicating that sperm from males in the sewage-treatment-plant 
channel show somewhat slowed motility.

 None of the new data are strong enough to indict pharmaceutical pollution for 
harming wildlife, much less people, notes Leroy C. Folmar of the Environmental 
Protection Agency in Gulf Breeze, Fla. However, he adds, the studies by 
Metcalfe and Adelman hint that estrogens in water may be capable of inducing 
"functional sterility" in exposed fish.

 Christian G. Daughton of the EPA's National Exposure Research Laboratory in 
Las Vegas says that Boyd's tap water data will be "disturbing" if they're 
confirmed. "If [drugs] are in drinking water now," he warns, "you can be 
guaranteed they've been there as long as the drugs have been in use."


