The Power of Partitions: Science News Online, June 17, 2000

> The Power of Partitions

 Writing a whole number as the sum of smaller numbers springs a mathematical 
surprise

 Ivars Peterson

 Just a year before his death in 1920 at the age of 32, mathematician Srinivasa 
Ramanujan came upon a remarkable pattern in a special list of whole numbers.

 The list represented counts of how many ways a given whole number can be 
expressed as a sum of positive integers. For example, 4 can be written as 3 + 
1, 2 + 2, 2 + 1 + 1, and 1 + 1 + 1 + 1. Including 4 itself but excluding 
different arrangements of the same integers (2 + 1 + 1 is considered the same 
as 1 + 2 + 1), there are five distinct possibilities, or so-called partitions, 
of the number 4. Similarly, the integer 5 has seven partitions.

 The list that Ramanujan perused gave for each of the first 200 integers, the 
number of their partitions, which range from 1 to 3,972,999,029,388.

 Ramanujan noticed that, starting with 4, the number of partitions for every 
fifth integer is a multiple of 5. For instance, the number of partitions for 9 
is 30 and for 14 is 135.

 He discovered several more such patterns. Starting with 5, the number of 
partitions for every seventh integer is a multiple of 7, and starting with 6, 
the number of partitions for every 11th integer is a multiple of 11. Moreover, 
similar relationships occur where the interval between the chosen integers is a 
power of 5, 7, or 11 or a product of these powers. Ramanujan went on to prove 
rigorously that these patterns hold not only for the 200 partition numbers in 
his table but also for all higher numbers.

 It was a curious discovery. Nothing in the definition of partitions hinted 
that such relationships, called congruences, should exist or that the prime 
numbers 5, 7, and 11 should play a special role.

 After many decades of nearly fruitless searching that yielded just one or two 
apparently isolated examples of large numbers that fit the pattern, 
mathematicians came to believe that no other congruences exist. Those found by 
Ramanujan and the later mathematicians were thought to be little more than 
numerical flukes.

 Indeed, "it was really believed that there would probably never be any new 
major discoveries regarding partition congruences," says George E. Andrews of 
Pennsylvania State University in State College.

 In a startling turnabout, mathematician Ken Ono has now proved that infinitely 
many such relationships occur. "This was really quite unexpected," says number 
theorist Ono, who holds positions at both Penn State and the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison. He described his results in the January Annals of 
Mathematics.

"Ono's work is really spectacular," comments Bruce C. Berndt of the University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. "This certainly must rank as the most 
important work on partition congruences since the epic work of Ramanujan."

"It's an extraordinary discovery," agrees Andrew M. Granville of the University 
of Georgia in Athens.

 Moreover, Ono's partition research has intriguing, unexpected links to complex 
mathematical ideas and methods that earlier led to proofs of Fermat's last 
theorem (SN: 11/5/94, p. 295) and the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture (SN: 10/2/99, 
p. 221). It has opened up new avenues for studying some of the most important, 
but difficult, questions in number theory, Granville says.

 Hooked on math

 Born into poverty, Ramanujan grew up in southern India, and although he had 
little formal training in mathematics, he became hooked on mathematics. He 
spent the years between 1903 and 1913 cramming notebooks with page after page 
of mathematical formulas and relationships that he had uncovered (SN: 4/25/87, 
p. 266).

 Ramanujan's life as a professional mathematician began in 1914 when he 
accepted an invitation from the prominent British mathematician G.H. Hardy to 
come to Cambridge University. He spent 5 years in England, publishing many 
papers and achieving international recognition for his mathematical research.

 Though his work was cut short by a mysterious illness that brought him back to 
India for the final year of his life, Ramanujan's work has remained a subject 
of considerable interest. For the past 2 decades, Berndt has been going through 
Ramanujan's scribbled notes, systematically deciphering, writing out, and 
proving each of the numerous theorems Ramanujan had formulated.

 Two years ago, Berndt was examining an unpublished, handwritten Ramanujan 
manuscript on partitions. "It contained claims that had never been proved," 
Berndt remarks. So he recruited Ono, an expert on partitions from a modern 
perspective, to help him fill in the details and provide the necessary proofs.

"I had never read any of Ramanujan's notebooks, though I was familiar with a 
lot of what he had done through the writings of more modern mathematicians," 
Ono says. "I didn't suspect that I would learn anything from studying 
Ramanujan's notes."

 In fact, the manuscript didn't contain anything startling or new. However, 
Ramanujan had written out one mathematical expression, or identity, in a manner 
that to Ono seemed particularly awkward.

"The first time I saw it, I wrote to Berndt saying this can't be right," Ono 
recalls. Nonetheless, after Ono translated the expression into modern 
mathematical language, it made perfect sense.

 Yet the apparent awkwardness of Ramanujan's original formulation bothered Ono. 
It got him to think deeply about the many different ways in which 
mathematicians can express identities. In the course of that rethinking, he 
obtained crucial insights that led him to tackle the question of partition 
congruences-something that he would not otherwise have attempted.

"I learned a valuable lesson," Ono remarks. "It sometimes really pays to read 
the original."

 Tour de force

 In a remarkable tour de force, Ono proved that partition congruences can be 
found not only for the prime numbers 5, 7, and 11 but also for all larger 
primes. To do so, he had to exploit a previously unsuspected link between 
partition numbers and complex mathematical objects called modular forms.

"Modular forms lie at the heart of modern number theory," says Scott Ahlgren of 
Colgate University in Hamilton, N.Y.

 They are special types of mathematical relationships that involve so-called 
complex numbers, which have a real and an imaginary component. In effect, the 
relationships represent particular types of repeating patterns, roughly 
analogous to the way a trigonometric function such as sine represents a 
repeating pattern for ordinary numbers.

 Mathematicians have identified many different types of modular forms. The 
connection between certain modular forms and elliptic curves helped Andrew 
Wiles of Princeton University prove Fermat's last theorem in 1993.

 Applying modular-form theory, as developed by other mathematicians, Ono 
uncovered a connection between partition numbers and specific modular forms. He 
used that relationship to establish, in effect, the existence of congruences 
involving prime-number divisors among the partition numbers.

 Unlike many previous advances in partition theory, Ono's research involved no 
computation and relied heavily on theory. "What I find particularly appealing 
about this approach is that it uses the most powerful tools in modern number 
theory to attack a classical problem," Ahlgren says.

 Interestingly, although Ono proved the existence of these congruences, he 
provided only one explicit example. In this new congruence, the starting number 
is 111,247, with each successive step to the next integer going up by 594 x 13. 
The corresponding partitions are then multiples of the prime number 13.

 Ono, however, didn't have an effective recipe, or algorithm, for generating 
examples. But Rhiannon L. Weaver, an undergraduate at Penn State, found a 
simple criterion for identifying the start of a progression. She then developed 
an algorithm, working with primes from 13 to 31, to obtain more than 70,000 new 
congruences.

"This wasn't a trivial exercise," Ono says. "It was a great piece of work." 
Applying Weaver's method, a researcher can now readily write a computer program 
to find thousands of additional examples, he explains.

 The newfound congruences also show why mathematicians had failed to come up 
with many additional examples by trial and error. "The numbers involved are 
very big," Granville remarks. Moreover, "even now that we know where to look, I 
don't think we would have spotted them from raw computation."

 In another recent development, Ahlgren has extended Ono's results to establish 
the existence of congruences that work with multiples of composite numbers, 
which consist of primes multiplied together, as long as the numbers aren't 
divisible by 2 or 3.

 Ahlgren reported his results in May at the Millennial Conference on Number 
Theory held at Illinois.

"It is now apparent that Ramanujan-type congruences are plentiful," Ono says. 
"However, it is typical that such congruences are monstrous."

 New role

 Ono's results have already sparked a considerable amount of research activity. 
"It's amazing how much more we know now than we did just last year," Ahlgren 
says.

 Despite these advances, however, mathematicians still don't know whether there 
are congruences that involve multiples of 2 or 3. Ono's methods don't work for 
these particular cases, and researchers must develop new tools to hunt for such 
relationships.

 At the same time, Ono has given partition numbers an exciting, new role in 
mathematics. "Partitions are much more than just counts of how to add up 
numbers," Ono says. "They are a vehicle for testing some of the most important 
conjectures about [mathematical] objects that we can barely get a handle on 
otherwise."

 Indeed, studying partitions could lead to new insights into the theory of 
modular forms and illuminate its connections with important, unsolved questions 
in number theory, such as the so-called Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. The Clay 
Mathematics Institute in Cambridge, Mass., recently listed this problem as one 
of the top seven questions in mathematics and offered a $1 million prize for 
its solution. The conjecture concerns a criterion for deciding whether certain 
equations have whole-number solutions.

 The study of partitions has long been one of the mainstays of number theory 
and rivals the study of primes for intrinsic mathematical appeal, Andrews says.

"Primes form the basis for multiplication, and the study of partitions is 
grounded in the addition of integers," he notes. "What is intriguing is the 
fact that such an elementary idea can have theorems as subtle as those of Ono."


