Light pulses flout sacrosanct speed limit: Science News Online, June 10, 2000

> Light pulses flout sacrosanct speed limit

 Peter Weiss

 Five years ago, a wave of discontent swept away the 55-mile-per-hour U.S. 
speed limit. Nowadays, some physicists are taking a hard look at the 
670-million-miles-per-hour speed limit of light in a vacuum, or c.

 Albert Einstein posted this limit in his 1905 theory of special relativity. 
Although popular lore and some physics textbooks still contend that nothing 
races faster than c, experiments going back decades have repeatedly shown that 
light can beat that speed under certain conditions.

 A few scientists argue that those experiments hint that Einstein was wrong. 
Two new experiments reveal dramatic additional evidence of superluminal 
velocity but make no clear case for repealing Einstein's law, scientists say.

 In one study, conducted in Italy, scientists propagated superluminal 
microwaves through air by bouncing them off a mirror. In the other, led by a 
New Jersey researcher, a laser pulse approaching a gas-filled cell's entry 
window materialized at the cell's exit glass before even reaching the cell.

 Although superluminal phenomena might someday help speed up computers-an 
avenue being explored by Raymond Y. Chiao of the University of California, 
Berkeley-the main excitement around these experiments stems from basic physics 
implications.

 At stake is the idea that a cause must precede an effect. If experimenters 
found that information can go somewhere faster than c, "you would get into 
nonsensical types of predictions, like going back in time and shooting your 
grandmother," explains Peter W. Milonni of Los Alamos (N.M.) National 
Laboratory.

 Gunter Nimtz of the University of Cologne in Germany contends that information 
can indeed travel faster than c, casting doubts on both causality and special 
relativity. In 1995, for example, his research team encoded Mozart's 40th 
symphony in a microwave beam traveling at 4.7 times c to a receiver.

 However, Aephraim M. Steinberg of the University of Toronto argues that aside 
from Nimtz and a few other "vocal dissenters," mainstream physicists agree that 
such experiments "do not support any idea of causality violation." One 
challenge, however, is to exactly define information, or a signal.

 Experiments dating back to the early 1990s by Nimtz, Steinberg, Chiao, and 
others have shown superluminal tunneling of optical photons through mirrors 
(SN: 7/2/94, p. 6) and of microwaves through so-called forbidden zones of 
waveguides.

 The Italian scientists, led by Anedio Ranfagni of the Italian National 
Research Council in Florence, devised their experiment so that reflected 
microwaves in open air overlap and interfere as the waves speed away from the 
mirror. Constructive interference creates a moving pulse along the axis of the 
apparatus whose speed varies according to the configuration of the experiment. 
The researchers report in the May 22 Physical Review Letters that within 1.4 
meters of the mirror, they clocked such pulses at up to 125 percent of c. 
Beyond that distance, the effect dies out.

 Because electromagnetic waves radiate through air much as they do in a vacuum, 
Chiao says, the "spectacular work" by the Italians demonstrates that even in a 
vacuum, light could outpace c.

 In the laser experiment by Lijun Wang of NEC Research Institute in Princeton, 
N.J., and his colleagues, the superluminal pulse, which was preceded by a 
"pump" pulse to excite the amplifier, has a negative velocity. That means that 
it "arrives at a distant point 'earlier' than it even arrives at the input," 
explains Steinberg, who is acquainted with the unpublished study but is not a 
coauthor.

 This isn't magic, he says. Rather, amplifiers, like the cell in the 
experiment, respond to certain frequencies by building a replica of the 
incoming pulse at the output. In this case, the time a pulse with speed c would 
take to cross the cell, multiplied by 300, is the head start the outgoing pulse 
gains over the incoming one.

 What's more, any rounded pulse contains a central peak and tapering wings 
extending far out behind and ahead. The wings contain all the information 
needed to reconstruct the peak, so as soon as the forward wing of the incoming 
laser pulse arrives, the cell spits out a full-scale version of the peak.

 Although Wang declined to discuss the study, which was submitted to Nature, 
some of its results were described May 30 in The New York Times.


