Magnifier May Crack Crimes, Crashes: Science News Online, July 8, 2000

 Magnifier May Crack Crimes, Crashes

 P. Weiss

 Presidencies have teetered because of information captured on audiotapes. 
Tape-recorded evidence of Richard Nixon's Watergate misdeeds led to his 1974 
resignation. More recently, information gathered secretly on tapes in the 
Monica Lewinsky scandal almost unseated President Clinton.

 A device under development by government scientists in Colorado may soon help 
investigators both judge the authenticity of magnetically recorded evidence and 
glean information from magnetic media that have been damaged-intentionally or 
otherwise.

 David P. Pappas of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
in Boulder and his colleagues have come up with a microscope that can reveal 
the landscape of magnetic bumps and dips found on recorded audiotapes, floppy 
disks, and other sorts of magnetic media. The instrument, a type of so-called 
magnetoresistive microscope, slowly and repeatedly passes a sample piece of 
tape or other medium under a tiny read-write head from a computer hard drive. 
As the sample moves back and forth, the head detects the strength and direction 
of the magnetic field at millions of points. A computer then can make a 
topographic image from the data or interpret the data directly-into sound, for 
instance.

 Physicists at the University of California, San Diego invented the first 
scanning magnetoresistive microscope in 1996, primarily as a tool for the hard 
disk industry. The Colorado researchers have adapted the device for forensic 
use in collaboration with the FBI and the National Transportation Safety Board.

 Investigators of an airplane crash or explosion may want to play back "little 
scraps of tape," such as cockpit-recorder tape, says the microscope's 
codeveloper Stephen D. Voran of the Institute for Telecommunication Sciences, 
also in Boulder.

 In one proof-of-principle test, the researchers recovered a second of music 
from a fragment of abused tape. The team has also read digital data encoded in 
a tape snippet from a flight-data recorder, or black box.

 The swaths of magnetic field recorded by ordinary tape deck heads are hundreds 
of times wider than the microscope's head requires. So, even if much of a 
tape's surface is destroyed, the new instrument might still find a meandering 
path that retains the original signal, says Pappas. "Imagine a motorcycle 
driving around potholes," he suggests.

 An erase head leaves some inaudible marks on tape that may indicate tampering. 
The new device shows such telltale marks in more detail than the current 
technique, which uses magnetic fluid, the researchers say. However, a bigger 
question is whether erased data can be recovered. "Only more experiments will 
tell," Pappas says.

 So far, only NIST and the FBI have prototype instruments. "We're very excited 
about its potential," says FBI agent James Ryan, unit chief of the agency's 
Forensic Audio/Video & Image Unit in Quantico, Va.

 The FBI has eagerly sought an alternative to magnetic fluid because the fluid 
ruins digital tapes and disks. The new magnetoresistive microscope is the only 
tool that Ryan knows of that might help investigators detect certain 
manipulations of those media, he says.

 Ryan expects to attend a meeting this fall on the infamous 181/2-minute gap-an 
erased section of the Watergate tapes. The keepers of the Nixon tapes at the 
National Archives and Records Administration in College Park, Md., are 
considering whether to reexamine the tape gap with new technologies. Ryan says 
he thinks the new microscope could be among them.


