Human Genome Work Reaches Milestone: Science News Online, July 1, 2000

 Human Genome Work Reaches Milestone

 J. Travis

 It's official. Biology's hottest race has been declared an amicable tie, even 
though one competitor has a clear lead and neither has actually reached the 
finish line or knows exactly what the prize contains.

 In an accomplishment being compared to landing a man on the moon, rival groups 
of scientists from the private and public sectors announced on June 23 that 
each has read essentially all of the 3 billion or so letters that spell out the 
human genome, the genetic information encoded within the 6 feet of DNA coiled 
up in every human cell.

"Today, we celebrate the revelation of the first draft of the human book of 
life," said Francis Collins of the National Human Genome Research Institute in 
Bethesda, Md., at a White House celebration.

 The announcement, considered premature by some scientists, nevertheless drew 
praise from leading biologists and government officials worldwide. Calling the 
reading of the genome "a stunning and humbling achievement," President Clinton 
stressed its medical implications.

"With this profound new knowledge, humankind is on the verge of gaining immense 
new power to heal. Genome science will have a real impact on all of our 
lives-and even more, on the lives of our children. It will revolutionize the 
diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of most, if not all, human disease," he 
said.

 While scientists celebrated the genome announcement, some of them appealed for 
stronger federal legislation to protect people from genetic discrimination by 
their health insurance companies or employers. The unveiling of the human DNA 
sequence should offer a "wake-up call," demonstrating that we can't delay 
addressing this issue any longer, says Collins.

 The world received its initial look at deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as 
DNA, more than a century ago. In 1869, German scientist Friedrich Miescher 
isolated a novel chemical, now known to be DNA, from immune cells left in the 
pus on bloody bandages.

 It took nearly a century for scientists to recognize DNA as the hereditary 
material of plants, animals, and microbes and determine that its molecular 
shape is a double helix reminiscent of a spiral staircase. The two sides of the 
helix consist of complementary strings of so-called bases, which come in four 
forms that geneticists abbreviate A, C, T, and G. One base joins with a partner 
on the opposite strand-A with T, or G with C-to create the steps on DNA's 
staircase.

 The sequences of bases within a gene encode the information that a cell uses 
to build a protein. In the late 1980s, several scientists raised the 
provocative idea of sequencing all human genes as well as the even greater 
lengths of DNA in between-whose functions were, and still are, largely unknown.

"There were people who thought this was sheer lunacy," recalls Collins.

 This week's announcement emerged from an uneasy truce forged between Celera 
Genomics, a biotech firm in Rockville, Md., and the Human Genome Project, a 
publicly funded, international consortium of scientists now led by Collins. The 
latter group, formed in 1990, had the task of sequencing the human genome 
largely to itself until 1998. Then, geneticist J. Craig Venter brashly 
predicted that his new company, Celera, would do the same job in less time and 
for less money (SN: 5/23/98, p. 334).

 The competing camps took different approaches. The public effort, funded in 
large part by two U.S. agencies-the National Institutes of Health and the 
Department of Energy-and Wellcome Trust, a British charity, first broke the 
genome into manageable chunks of DNA. The group then mapped the order of these 
pieces, called clones, with respect to each other. Only in the past few years 
have Collins and his colleagues focused on sequencing those clones.

 In Venter's more radical strategy, previously used to read the genes of many 
bacteria and the fruit fly, Celera shattered human DNA into snippets whose ends 
were immediately sequenced. The firm then identified overlapping base sequences 
among the DNA fragments. By analyzing an amount of DNA equivalent to many 
genomes, the scientists hoped to accumulate, and put in order, enough end 
sequences to construct an entire genome.

 This method, called whole-genome shotgunning, is akin to shredding many copies 
of a book and reassembling one copy sentence by sentence, whereas the 
clone-by-clone technique is more like first breaking a book into ordered 
chapters, and then performing the shredding and assembly within those chapters, 
says Eric Lander, a geneticist at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical 
Research in Cambridge, Mass.

 Most geneticists had considered a shotgun approach to the entire human genome 
to be too difficult. Human DNA, they argued, harbored many repetitive 
sequences, which would thwart any assembly attempts.

 On June 23, Venter and his colleagues proved the skeptics wrong. That 
afternoon, after more than 500 million trillion comparisons of base sequences, 
Celera's powerful supercomputers finished their first assembly of the human 
genome. The resulting sequence, approximately 3.12 billion bases long, spans 
more than 99.9 percent of the human genome, says Venter.

 This assembled sequence sits in Celera's databases, open to companies and 
schools that pay a subscription fee. The only academic subscriber so far, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, expects to start accessing 
the data next week.

 Although universities had feared that Celera would demand rights to patents or 
discoveries their professors make with the firm's data, Vanderbilt did not 
grant the company any such options, stresses Lee E. Limbird, the center's 
associate vice-chancellor for research.

 Venter announced that Celera would make a limited version of its database 
available at no charge after the company publishes its results.

 The results of the public genome effort flow daily into a database available 
free to researchers worldwide. In fact, Celera has made use of the public data 
in its own genome assembly.

 The public version of the genome sequence represents a working draft in which 
scientists have put in order DNA fragments covering 97 percent of the genome 
and sequenced more than 85 percent of them to varying degrees of accuracy. The 
two groups plan to independently but simultaneously publish papers this fall 
that will provide additional details and perhaps set the stage for a joint 
conference in which scientists fully analyze both sets of data.

 The effort to unravel the human genome does not offer as tangible a climax as 
an astronaut stepping onto the lunar surface. Some geneticists have even called 
this week's announcement more a matter of public relations than a true finale 
to the genome effort.

"The point at which both Celera and the public project have chosen to announce 
the 'completion' of the genome is wholly arbitrary and does not correspond to 
any scientifically justifiable criterion for completion. The previously agreed 
criteria of few or no gaps, gaps of known size, and an error rate of 1 in 
10,000 bases have clearly not been met by either group," charges Philip P. 
Green of the University of Washington in Seattle.

 Indeed, the two groups did not offer any details on how many holes remain in 
the two genome sequences or claim to meet the 99.99-percent target for accuracy.

"We should not be satisfied with a book of life that has gaps and errors in 
it," concedes Collins, emphasizing that the public effort will continue to 
improve the quality of its genome information. Venter is also careful to call 
Celera's work the "first assembly" of the human genome, implying that better 
versions will come.

 Illustrating the large gaps in knowledge that remain, neither Celera nor the 
international consortium answered the question of how many genes people have. 
In the June Nature Genetics, three research teams using different methods 
offered predictions that range from 30,000 to 120,000 human genes. Several 
scientists have established a pool in which a person can record a prediction 
for a $1 wager.

 To aid their analysis of the human genome, biologists plan to sequence all the 
DNA of several more animals. Celera has already moved on to the mouse genome. 
The rat and the zebrafish genomes should follow quickly, adds Collins.

 Also, some scientists plan to map all the interactions between the many 
thousands of proteins encoded by the human genome, and others intend to 
determine the three-dimensional structure of each molecule.

 Norton Zinder, a geneticist at Rockefeller University in New York, recently 
offered an elegant analogy for how the human DNA sequence merely sets the stage 
for future research. In the June 12 New Yorker, he compared the revealing of 
the genome to the 1543 publication of the first book on human anatomy.

 Even though that book identified almost all the parts of the human body, 
physicians today still struggle to understand how many of them work and 
interact. A similarly daunting task-one that scientists say may also take 
several centuries to complete-now awaits those who seek to make sense of the 
myriad genes of the human genome.


