An Ounce of Prevention: Science News Online, July 15, 2000

 An Ounce of Prevention Fresh approaches may cut back greenhouse-gas emissions

 By S. Perkins

 An old proverb says that people who live in glass houses shouldn't throw 
stones. But if you were trapped inside a greenhouse with the temperature 
building to stifling levels-as some scientists say is happening on Earth-you'd 
certainly want to break open a window, if you could.

 One way to shatter the industrial practices that generate atmospheric 
greenhouse gases may be to implement the precepts of so-called green chemistry. 
Its supporters describe this philosophy as pollution prevention at the 
molecular level. It focuses on developing chemical products and processes that 
reduce or eliminate the production and use of substances that are hazardous to 
people or the environment.

 The principles of green chemistry often seem less like revolutionary concepts 
than simple common sense. An overarching theme is that it's better to prevent 
waste than to treat it or clean it up after it's been created. Other goals 
include developing chemical reactions that use or generate substances that have 
little or no toxicity to human health, as well as ones that start with 
renewable raw materials rather than nonrenewable resources such as petroleum 
products.

 Many of the concepts of green chemistry were formulated in the late 1980s when 
scientists began to think of industries in terms of their effect on the 
environment. Green chemistry began to take hold in earnest after Congress 
passed the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990. Today, several practical 
applications of the research are poised to break out of the lab and become part 
of the industrial recipe.

 The significant growth in the green- chemistry movement in the past decade has 
been driven by several factors, including new knowledge about which chemicals 
are harmful, the ever-increasing ability of chemists to control the substances 
that reactions generate, and the increased costs of using and disposing of 
hazardous chemicals.

 Although the guidelines of green chemistry are applicable to all types of 
pollution, greenhouse-gas emissions have been a particular target. Researchers 
have used green chemistry to develop alternatives to the use of gases, such as 
chlorofluorocarbons, that can strongly contribute to Earth's warming. They have 
also begun to develop processes that can reduce or eliminate industrial 
emissions of nitrous oxide, one of the most significant greenhouse gases. 
Manufacturers are looking with interest at and, in some cases, enthusiastically 
adopting these new practices.

 In many instances, manufacturing processes use or generate synthetic chemicals 
that, pound for pound, absorb much more of the sun's infrared radiation than 
natural greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, do. These humanmade chemicals 
include chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), and other 
perfluorinated compounds (PFCs).

 For example, CFC-12, one of the gases scheduled to be phased out of production 
because of its role in atmospheric ozone depletion, absorbs solar infrared 
wavelengths almost 16,000 times as effectively as carbon dioxide does. Sulfur 
hexafluoride, a PFC used in the production of semiconductors, electrical 
insulation, and magnesium, has a global warming potential almost 24,000 times 
that of an equal weight of carbon dioxide.

 Not only are these gases strong absorbers of greenhouse radiation, their 
chlorine and fluorine bonds make them exceptionally long-lived in the 
environment. Data show that sulfur hexafluoride may persist in the atmosphere 
for up to 3,200 years.

 Ironically, in the quest to replace some of these gases in today's industrial 
processes, researchers have turned repeatedly to carbon dioxide, the first 
greenhouse gas to be recognized. A liquid only above 31@C and 73.8 atmospheres 
of pressure, carbon dioxide is now widely used as a solvent to replace volatile 
organic chemicals in processes ranging from decaffeinating coffee (SN: 2/3/96, 
p. 71) to dry cleaning and industrial degreasing.

 Dow Chemical Co. in Midland, Mich., has developed a technique that uses pure 
carbon dioxide, instead of CFCs and HCFCs, as the propellant, or blowing agent, 
in the manufacture of polystyrene foam. Dow's Gary Welsh says that the 
company's worldwide licensing of this technology eliminates the use of about 
3.5 million pounds of CFC-12 and HCFC-22 each year. Because the carbon dioxide 
used in the process is obtained either from natural sources or as a byproduct 
of other industrial processes, there is no net increase in the global quantity 
of the greenhouse gas.

"It doesn't make economic sense to burn hydrocarbons to generate carbon 
dioxide," Welsh says. "There's enough of it out there already."

 Another company is phasing out CFCs as blowing agents in its production of 
many of its rigid polyurethane foams, which are used as insulation in products 
such as water heaters, refrigerators, and roofing materials. Stepan Co. of 
Northfield, Ill., has replaced the greenhouse gases with carbon dioxide, which 
is produced when water reacts with one of polyurethane's components, says Brad 
Beauchamp, business manager for polyurethane systems at Stepan. The product is 
known as water-blown polyurethane.

 Stepan's original process used CFC-11 as a blowing agent. That gas was phased 
out in 1992 in favor of HCFC-141b. This greenhouse gas, however, will no longer 
be produced in the United States after Jan.1, 2003, in accordance with the 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. From 85 to 90 
percent of a CFC blowing agent ends up in the bubbles, or cells, in the foam, 
but the remainder is released to the atmosphere.

 There's little difference between the performance or the production costs of 
the water-blown foams and those of the CFC-blown products, Beauchamp says. 
Although carbon dioxide has a slightly lower insulating value than the 
greenhouse gases, company researchers were able to increase the insulating 
efficiency of the product by decreasing the size of the cells in the foam.

 The water-blown polyurethane foam now makes up about 28 percent of the 
company's sales in rigid urethane foams, a figure that Beauchamp says should 
rise steadily until the phase-out of HCFC-141b.

 One of the more potent natural greenhouse gases is nitrous oxide, which 
absorbs the sun's infrared radiation more than 200 times as effectively as 
carbon dioxide does. Although the vast majority of human-generated nitrous 
oxide results from automobile exhaust, about 10 percent-400,000 metric tons 
each year-comes from the production of adipic acid, which is used to make 
artificial resins and plastics such as nylon. Manufacturers typically produce 
adipic acid by oxidizing benzene at high temperatures and pressures in a 
multistage process. The final step uses nitric acid and generates nitrous oxide 
as a byproduct.

 The sheer quantity of these nitrous oxide emissions, as well as the other 
noxious by-products of nitric acid use, have made the traditional way of 
producing adipic acid a tempting target for green chemistry. Scientists at 
Nagoya University in Japan reported in 1998 that they had developed a way to 
streamline the oxidation reaction and replace the nitric acid with highly 
concentrated hydrogen peroxide. The researchers say that the resulting process 
is cleaner, safer, and less corrosive, produces no nitrous oxide, and can 
probably be conducted at large scale with no operational problems.

 A venture-capital group recently developed a one-step oxidation process for 
adipic acid production. The new method eliminates nitric acid and instead uses 
concentrated acetic acid-in essence, industrial-strength vinegar-as a solvent. 
This technique results in higher yields of adipic acid and lower equipment 
costs, and it eliminates emissions of nitrous oxide and nitric acid 
by-products, says Mag Fouad. He's vice president of technology at Fluor Daniel 
in Sugar Land, Texas, a firm that fine-tuned the process and is demonstrating 
the technology to potential customers.

 Data obtained during 3 years of operation at a pilot plant in Poulsbo, Wash., 
showed that manufacturers could reduce their equipment costs more than 30 
percent. They could also save more than 20 percent in operating costs because 
of decreased energy requirements and the reduced need to collect and treat 
hazardous waste products, Fouad says.

 Although the processes developed by the Japanese scientists and the Fluor 
Daniel researchers are more environmentally friendly than the traditional way 
of producing adipic acid, they still use nonrenewable petroleum products as 
their raw materials. Karen M. Draths and John W. Frost, both chemistry 
professors at Michigan State University in East Lansing, have harnessed several 
techniques of green chemistry to develop an approach that overcomes this 
disadvantage.

 Draths and Frost use a genetically modified Escherichia coli bacterium to 
ferment glucose, a simple sugar, to produce a chemical called cis, cis-muconic 
acid. This chemical is then made to react with hydrogen gas to generate adipic 
acid under conditions of a moderate pressure, about 3 atmospheres, and about 
room temperature.

"The best thing about this process is that you don't start with benzene, which 
is a nonrenewable resource," Frost says. "There's only one way for [benzene's] 
price to go, and that's up."

 Frost says the modified E. coli uses genes inserted from two other bacteria to 
produce enzymes that together generate a synthesis reaction not found in 
nature. Draths and Frost first described this reaction in 1994. Since then, 
they've tailored the fermentation reaction so that chemicals toxic to the 
bacteria are produced more slowly and can be removed from the solution before 
they kill the E. coli host bacteria. After 48 hours in the fermenter, the 
solution contains about 35 grams of adipic acid per liter of fluid.

 Unpublished work conducted during the past 18 months shows that the process 
can easily be scaled up for use in 100,000-gallon fermenters, Frost says.

 For anyone fearing that genetically engineered E. coli may escape and turn 
midwestern cornfields into large pools of adipic acid, Frost reports that the 
bacteria can't live in the environment outside the fermenter. "These bacteria 
compare to a normal E. coli like a domestic poodle compares to a wolf," Frost 
says. "There's no way they can live 'in the wild.'"

 Supporters of the green-chemistry movement argue that its pollution prevention 
makes economic sense for companies as well as environmental sense for the 
community. "There is an incredible interest in green chemistry overseas," says 
Dennis L. Hjeresen, acting director of the Green Chemistry Institute, which is 
based at Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory. International chapters of the 
institute have formed in about a dozen countries, including Great Britain, 
Italy, Japan, and China.

 Green chemistry is important for the developing world, Hjeresen says. For 
example, China is already the world's number-two emitter of carbon dioxide, and 
the government there is concerned about its environmental impact, he reports. 
Chinese scientists are turning to green chemistry as a potential way to reduce 
pollution as the country's industrialization and population grow steadily. In 
May, Hjeresen traveled to Guangzhou to attend the third international symposium 
on green chemistry in China.

 In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency has developed 
software that enables scientists to design environmentally friendly reactions 
for synthesizing chemicals and to see what others have done in this field. 
Also, the American Chemical Society has put together an educational program.

 Although many of the movement's principles originally appeared to be a radical 
departure from the traditional methods of chemical engineering, green chemistry 
now seems both logical and obvious to a new generation of chemists, Hjeresen 
says.

"Kids who are going through college now have grown up in a world that's always 
celebrated an Earth Day," he explains. "You tell them about the principles of 
green chemistry, and they immediately 'get it.'"

 In the meantime...recycle

 In cases where chemists have yet to design a process that reduces the emission 
of greenhouse gases, companies must either abate the emissions as they leave 
the smokestack or capture and recycle them. Researchers at Air Liquide, located 
in Countryside, Ill., have developed a system that can collect emissions of 
sulfur hexafluoride and other perfluorinated gases from the 
semiconductor-manufacture process and recycle them back into production.

 David Li, former manager of process research for Air Liquide, described the 
system in March at the annual meeting of the American Chemical Society. The 
equipment uses a polymer membrane to capture more than 98 percent of the sulfur 
hexafluoride, perfluoromethane, and perfluoroethane from the exhaust and then 
concentrate the gases almost 5,000-fold, to more than 99 percent purity. Li 
says that this still isn't pure enough for semiconductor manufacturers, who are 
hesitant to use the recycled gases unless they are more than 99.999 percent 
pure.

 Although attaining that desired degree of purity in these recycled gases would 
be costly now, Li says the company is conducting research that aims to bring 
down that expense. In the meantime, he and his colleagues are marketing the 
current equipment to producers of magnesium castings, who also use and emit 
sulfur hexafluoride but don't demand extremely high purity of the recycled gas.

 Air Liquide's marketing targets the companies that supply these castings to 
automobile manufacturers. Li says that while the auto industry has recently 
been using the lighter magnesium components to increase gas mileage and reduce 
emissions of carbon dioxide, ironically, this change exacerbates the greenhouse 
effect by emitting significant amounts of sulfur hexafluoride during 
manufacture.

 Li says that his company's system can, in effect, decrease the cost of the 
sulfur hexafluoride by as much as 40 percent-not bad for a chemical that 
typically costs $10 to $15 per pound.

 Air Liquide is now working with a major magnesium producer to implement such a 
system, Li says. He adds that the Environmental Protection Agency has asked the 
company to showcase the technology to demonstrate its utility to the industry.

"This type of system cuts down on emissions and helps save the [castings] 
company's bottom line," Li says. "Interest in this technology will skyrocket if 
there's ever an emissions tax on these gases."


