Possible Alzheimer's vaccine seems safe: Science News Online, July 15, 2000

 Possible Alzheimer's vaccine seems safe

 J. Travis

 The first tests in people of a vaccine that may slow or prevent the 
devastation of Alzheimer's disease have so far shown that the approach is safe, 
scientists announced this week at a Washington, D.C., meeting. It's still too 
early to gauge whether the vaccine actually works, however, say the researchers.

 Newly reported animal tests added to the cautious optimism about the new 
vaccine strategy. In mice genetically engineered to develop brain lesions 
similar to those seen in Alzheimer's disease, the vaccine averted expected 
declines in certain memory and learning skills.

 Last year, Dale Schenk of Elan Pharmaceuticals in South San Francisco stunned 
neuroscientists with the news that simply injecting such mice with a protein 
fragment called beta-amyloid keeps naturally-occurring amyloid from 
accumulating in the brains of the rodents and even eliminates preexisting 
amyloid deposits known as plaques (SN: 7/10/99, p. 20).

 Many scientists believe that the abnormal buildup of amyloid brings about 
Alzheimer's disease, and Elan's vaccine offers the first possible treatment for 
this apparent root cause of the illness.

 The vaccine elicits antibodies that bind to beta-amyloid. While the antibodies 
generally circulate in the bloodstream, some apparently leak across the 
blood-brain barrier. Once in the brain, the antibodies seem to mark amyloid 
plaques for clearance by microglia, which are immune cells that patrol the 
brain.

 At this week's World Alzheimer Congress 2000, Schenk offered new evidence to 
support this theory. He and his colleagues added microglia to slices of rodent 
brain tissue riddled with amyloid plaques. The immune cells took up the 
amyloid, but only if the researchers also introduced antibodies that bind to 
beta-amyloid. The microglia then degraded the protein fragments. "The amyloid 
literally disappears," says Schenk.

 Some scientists have expressed concern that stimulating anti-amyloid responses 
will itself lead to brain damage. To address that issue, the Elan team examined 
the vaccine's safety in mice, guinea pigs, rabbits, and rhesus monkeys. "We saw 
virtually no signs of problems in the animals," says Schenk.

 These encouraging results prompted Elan to begin safety tests on people with 
mild-or-moderate Alzheimer's disease. The researchers recently completed tests 
on 24 patients in the United States, who each received a single injection of 
beta-amyloid. No obvious side effects have emerged. "There's no question the 
vaccine was well tolerated," says Schenk.

 To determine the vaccination schedule that induces the strongest antibody 
response, Elan has started a new trial in England, where about 80 people will 
receive multiple injections of beta-amyloid. If that trial confirms the safety 
of the vaccine, the company plans in 2001 to start trials designed to reveal 
whether the vaccine actually arrests, or even reverses, Alzheimer's disease.

"Our first goal is to block further progression" in Alzheimer's patients, says 
Schenk. "We don't know if they will recover."

 Other scientists at the meeting reported they had confirmed and extended 
Elan's initial mouse study. Christopher G. Janus of the University of Toronto 
and David G. Morgan of the University of South Florida in Tampa each described 
immunizing genetically engineered mice that normally develop amyloid plaques 
and lose memory and learning skills. Janus' vaccinated mice actually improved 
their performance on one maze test; Morgan's immunized rodents didn't acquire 
the same memory problems with age as his untreated animals did.

 Bill Thies, the Alzheimer's Association vice president of medical and 
scientific affairs, calls Janus' and Morgan's results "very significant" but 
also expresses caution about their relevance to people. "It's very hard to look 
at mouse behavior and compare it to Alzheimer's disease," he says.


