Ultimate Sea Weed Loose in America: Science News Online, July 15, 2000

 Ultimate Sea Weed Loose in America

 J. Raloff

 On June 12, while surveying a private lagoon in San Diego County, biologists 
ran across a strange, 14-inch-high mat of algae. Not only did it look unlike 
anything they had seen before, but it had infiltrated, squashed, and killed a 
30-by-60-foot patch of 4-foot-high eelgrass.

 Rachel Woodfield, part of the research team that made the discovery, sent a 
specimen to seaweed taxonomist Paul C. Silva of the Jepson Herbarium at the 
University of California, Berkeley. "I took one look," he recalls, "and it just 
screamed, 'I'm a weed! Get out of my way!'"

 Without question, Silva says, "this was the so-called killer alga" that has 
been progressively smothering the Mediterranean seafloor (SN: 7/4/98, p. 8).

 Last week, Woodfield, of Merkel and Associates in San Diego, with 
representatives of many state and federal agencies and an electric utility, 
confirmed Silva's conclusion: The alga is a mutant, aquarium-derived clone of 
the Mediterranean's Caulerpa taxifolia.

 Although the species is native to Florida and Caribbean waters, the lagoon's 
variant only vaguely resembles its wild brethren. Native C. taxifolia behaves 
like shy, runty pantywaists. Its aquarium-derived kin acts like a towering 
conquistador bullying coastal ecosystems. This rogue Caulerpa is undeterred by 
low light or chilly temperatures that normally kill the species.

 The lagoon's Caulerpa, whose origins probably trace to the dumped contents of 
a home aquarium, represents the rogue variant's only sighting in open waters of 
the Western Hemisphere, notes James N. Norris of the Smithsonian Institution's 
National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.

 In this rare case, eradication of the algae may prove possible since "almost 
everything is breaking our way," observes Andrew N. Cohen of the San Francisco 
Estuary Institute in Richmond, Calif., and a member of the newly formed 
Southern California Caulerpa Action Team. The 10 known patches of algae are 
small and reside in a part of the mile-long lagoon farthest from the ocean. 
Also, state officials have shut down recreational water traffic to keep the 
algae from breaking up and spreading.

 Woodfield is currently testing chemical algaecides on buckets of the seaweed. 
She says that within a few weeks, full-scale eradication efforts may begin. 
They would probably involve covering Caulerpa patches with tarps and then 
pumping in chemical poisons.

 Elliott A. Norse, president of the Marine Conservation Biology Institute in 
Redmond, Wash., says he hopes the eradication efforts succeed, because "this is 
unquestionably a worrisome alien invasion-really scary." The alga's ability to 
survive warm temperate waters, he says, suggests that if it reaches the ocean, 
it might overtake coastal ecosystems from Northern California down to Peru.

 Moreover, in hospitable waters, its expansion can be rapid. Alexandre Meinesz 
of the University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis in France, who has been mapping this 
alien's spread in the Mediterranean, notes that in just 2 years, its coverage 
appears to have increased by some 50 percent. It now carpets more than 6,000 
hectares in a lush shag monoculture of elegant fronds.

 Twenty-one months ago, marine scientists petitioned for a U.S. ban on the 
aquarium variant of C. taxifolia (SN: 11/21/98, p. 332). Prompted by the 
severity of the threat, federal regulators added this clone to the federal 
noxious weed list in a record 3 months. The move makes importation or 
interstate transport of the rogue alga illegal.

 A governmental Aquatic Nuisance Species Task Force also commissioned a plan to 
educate state officials and the public about the clone's risks and to close any 
loopholes in rules guiding searches for and quarantining of suspect algae. Too 
late to help here, a draft of the plan was posted on the Internet one day after 
the alga's lagoon sighting was announced.


