Lakes reveal low phosphate concentrations, Crashes: Science News Online, July 
8, 2000

 Lakes reveal low phosphate concentrations

 J. Gorman

 Like any other critters, organisms at the bottom of food chains need certain 
nutrients to thrive. One of those nutrients is phosphorus. Its availability, in 
the form of phosphate, in most lakes limits the growth of microorganisms 
including bacteria and phytoplankton.

 Now, studies using a new technique indicate that common methods of measuring 
phosphate concentrations that scientists have used for decades have been 
routinely off by factors of 100 to 1,000. The latest analyses find phosphate at 
surprisingly low concentrations in 56 undisturbed lakes sampled throughout 
Canada.

"It's one of the most important nutrients, particularly in lakes, because [a 
low concentration] restricts microorganisms," says Jeff J. Hudson of the Dorset 
Environmental Sciences Centre and Trent University in Ontario. "It then 
restricts production of the rest of the food web." Hudson and his colleagues 
publish their work in the July 6 Nature.

 Too many nutrients-sometimes from fertilizer or urban runoff-can promote 
overgrowth of algae, which can block sunlight and deprive fish of oxygen. 
Microorganisms in the lakes that the team studied, however, appear to obtain 
most of their phosphate from recycling processes in the food web, says Hudson.

"This is an incredible report, if it's true," comments David M. Karl of the 
University of Hawaii in Honolulu. The indication, he says, is that "organisms 
can assimilate phosphorus while growing rapidly," even at the dramatically 
lower phosphate concentrations the new studies indicate, he says.

 The work holds global consequences as well, says Karl. Researchers 
increasingly are identifying phosphorus' importance in oceans, he says. "We 
probably don't fully understand the dynamics of something even as fundamental 
as nutrients in these aquatic systems," says Karl.

 Most scientists have recognized that previous methods, which try to directly 
measure phosphate concentration, overestimate it. So, Hudson and his colleagues 
tried a new, indirect measurement based on their findings that the rates at 
which the food web absorbs and releases phosphate appear to be the same in the 
lakes they sampled.

 Since the researchers can measure the release rate, they can use an equation 
that relates the organisms' phosphate uptake rate to the phosphate 
concentration in water. In their new analysis, the team determined how much 
phosphate the plankton released back to water by following the movement of 
trace amounts of radioactive phosphate through lake samples.

 When Hudson's group compared their results with other measurements of the same 
lakes, they found that the concentrations of phosphate revealed by the new 
technique were 0.1 percent of those determined with a common chemical test. 
They were 1 percent of those made with a more complicated method called the 
Rigler radiobioassay.

"This is a sobering report," says Karl. "It means that a hundred years of 
research may be in jeopardy because we've built models on what we thought the 
concentrations were."


