Study of stimulant therapy raises concerns: Science News Online, July 29, 2000

 Study of stimulant therapy raises concerns

 B. Bower

 The first long-term effort to track stimulant therapy in a large population of 
children has generated disturbing results. In particular, the North 
Carolina-based study finds that most 9-to-16-year-olds receiving Ritalin or 
other stimulants don't exhibit attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 
the only condition for which such drugs are approved.

 More encouraging, about 3 of 4 kids who were diagnosed with ADHD on the basis 
of parents' behavioral reports received stimulants, says a team led by 
psychiatric epidemiologist Adrian Angold of Duke University Medical Center in 
Durham, N.C. Youngsters with ADHD often benefit from these medications, 
especially if also given behavioral training (SN: 12/18&25/99, p. 388). Still, 
more than half of all stimulant users in the study fell short of even a relaxed 
definition of ADHD.

 Children prescribed a stimulant typically took it for more than 3 years, 
regardless of their psychiatric status, the researchers note. Stimulant 
treatment helped kids with ADHD but had no effect on parent-reported symptoms 
of inattention or hyperactivity that didn't qualify as ADHD. However, children 
taking these drugs proved more likely than the others to exhibit muscle tics, a 
side effect of prolonged stimulant use.

 The prevalence of stimulant treatment among all the children doubled over 4 
years to nearly 10 percent, supporting other evidence from medical databases of 
rises in numbers of stimulant prescriptions. "Our findings [also] suggest that 
current treatment practice in the community is far from optimal," the 
researchers contend in the August Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry.

"The system for the treatment of ADHD among children and adolescents is 
broken," comments psychiatrist Kelly Kelleher of the University of Pittsburgh.

 Angold's team recruited 1,422 children, ages 9 to 13, from public schools in 
largely rural parts of western North Carolina's Great Smoky Mountains. Annual 
psychiatric interviews with children and collection of data from parents 
occurred from 1992 to 1996. By then, data were available for participants up to 
age 16.

 Ninety-two of the children displayed ADHD, the scientists say. Another 63 kids 
met criteria for a less severe version of the disorder. Of the 168 children 
receiving stimulants during the study, one-third had full-blown ADHD and fewer 
than one-tenth exhibited the milder form.

 That leaves more than half of the stimulant-treated kids as never having had 
ADHD. Many children not treated with stimulants had as many or more ADHD 
symptoms as those who took the medication but didn't have ADHD.

 Among those with ADHD, a much larger proportion of boys and 9- to 12-year-old 
children received stimulants than did girls and older children. The latter two 
groups may get too little stimulant treatment, the researchers suggest.

 Stimulant treatment of children without ADHD occurred half as often among 
children living in poor households as among those in families above the federal 
poverty line.

 In the same journal, Peter S. Jensen, a psychiatrist at Columbia University, 
calls the new study "a masterful achievement." Nonetheless, by relying only on 
parent reports and not teacher ratings, Angold's group probably underestimated 
ADHD rates, Jensen holds. He's concerned that many children with ADHD get 
either no or inadequate stimulant treatment (SN: 8/7/99, p. 90).

 Evidence of extensive stimulant treatment among children who don't have ADHD 
is "surprising and perplexing," remarks psychiatrist Benedetto Vitiello of the 
National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md. Researchers should do 
larger studies of kids in different communities to probe this issue, he says.


