Telescope finds tiny moon of Jupiter: Science News Online, July 29, 2000

 Telescope finds tiny moon of Jupiter

 R. Cowen

 Jan. 7, 1610, was a red-letter day for astronomy. That evening, as Jupiter 
rose above the domes of Padua's majestic San Antonio Basilica, Galileo Galilei 
took his usual window seat on the top floor of his house. Peering through a 
small, handcrafted telescope, Galileo discovered three small objects hovering 
near the planet. A week later, he reported a fourth body "wandering around 
Jupiter, as do Venus and Mercury around the sun." Galileo was the first to 
recognize moons orbiting Jupiter.

 Those four moons-the only ones big enough for Galileo to see-have 1,000 times 
the girth of the latest Jovian find. Astronomers last week reported Jupiter's 
17th known moon, an object some 5 kilometers wide. If confirmed, it would rank 
as the tiniest satellite identified for any planet, as well as the first Jovian 
moon discovered in 25 years.

 The astronomers made their find with a 79-year-old telescope, just 36 inches 
in diameter, atop Kitt Peak in Arizona. Known as Spacewatch, the telescope 
scans the solar system for asteroids and comets. Spacewatch researcher James V. 
Scotti of the University of Arizona in Tucson arranged for the telescope to 
examine a region of sky near Jupiter for several nights last October. Scotti 
knew Jupiter was near its closest approach to Earth, making the time ideal for 
finding any undiscovered moons.

 Yet he and his colleagues didn't notice that one of the newly observed 
objects, which appeared to be in the main asteroid belt between the orbits of 
Mars and Jupiter, was moving too slowly to be an asteroid. Scotti followed the 
standard procedure of forwarding the data to the International Astronomical 
Union's (IAU) Minor Planet Center at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 
in Cambridge, Mass. Researchers there designated the object an asteroid, 1999 
UX18.

 On July 18, an astronomer at the center, Tim Spahr, used the 1999 Spacewatch 
measurements to test a new computer program designed to identify slow-moving 
objects. It revealed 1999 UX18 in additional Spacewatch images over a 16-day 
span last fall.

 When Spahr tried to construct an orbit around the sun for 1999 UX18, he 
couldn't get a satisfactory fit. He wondered if the body might instead be 
circling Jupiter.

 Calculations by the center's director, Brian G. Marsden, and associate 
director, Gareth V. Williams, revealed that a Jovian orbit fit all the 
Spacewatch observations. Williams' analysis showed that the object isn't one of 
Jupiter's 16 previously known moons. He calculates that the moon belongs to a 
group of moons that lies some 24 million km from Jupiter, takes about 2 years 
to orbit the planet, and moves in a direction opposite to the other Jovian 
satellites.

 Researchers at Spacewatch and the center announced their findings in a July 20 
circular of the IAU. Even with this moon, Jupiter's retinue would still lag 
behind that of Saturn, with 18 known moons, and Uranus, which has 20.

 With Jupiter now rising in the morning sky, large telescopes can now observe 
the 17th moon, in the morning sky. The Galileo spacecraft, which has toured 
Jupiter since 1995, may attempt to view the object and obtain spectra next 
February, when it comes within 12 million km of the satellite.


