Ebola protein explains deadly mystery: Science News Online, Aug. 5, 2000

 Ebola protein explains deadly mystery

 J. Travis

 A gruesomely detailed account of a 1989 Ebola virus outbreak in a monkey house 
in Reston, Va., terrified millions of readers of Richard Preston's The Hot Zone 
(1994, Random House). Ebola, normally found in Africa, kills people with 
chilling efficiency most of the time. Yet the strain that surfaced in Reston 
spared workers who became infected even as it slew monkeys.

 A research team based at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., 
may now have uncovered the key mechanism by which Ebola destroys cells in blood 
vessels and elsewhere, bringing about massive bleeding and other symptoms. The 
scientists may also have unraveled why Ebola didn't prove fatal to people in 
the Reston facility.

"This definitely puts a potential explanation on the table," says Gary J. 
Nabel, whose team at NIH describes its findings in the August Nature Medicine.

 Two years ago, Nabel, Zhi-yong Yang, and their NIH colleagues reported their 
initial studies of Ebola's glycoprotein. The virus produces this sugar-laden 
molecule in a secreted form and in a larger version that becomes part of the 
surface of the virus' new copies. The secreted form appears to suppress immune 
cells, whereas the surface glycoprotein binds to so-called endothelial cells, 
which make up the lining of blood vessels (SN: 2/14/98, p. 102).

 Nabel and his colleagues found that the surface glycoprotein does more than 
help Ebola home in on endothelial cells. When the scientists added the gene 
encoding the protein to laboratory-grown human cells, they observed that the 
cells assumed a rounder form over the next 24 hours. The cells also separated 
from one another and, 2 to 3 days later, died.

 These observations indicate that it's not Ebola's binding to a cell that 
triggers its death but the later synthesis of viral glycoprotein inside the 
cell that proves fatal. Nabel suggests the Ebola protein must build up to a 
certain threshold before it kills. This would give the virus enough time to 
force an infected cell to make new copies of the virus. The cell's death then 
would spread those viruses.

 In addition to the simple cell experiments, Nabel's team worked with intact 
blood vessels taken from people and animals. The researchers infected those 
cells with a cold virus they had engineered to carry the Ebola glycoprotein 
gene. Within 48 hours, massive numbers of endothelial cells began to die and 
the blood vessels became leaky. Such effects could lead to the internal and 
external bleeding caused by Ebola.

"I think this accounts for some aspects of the hemorrhaging. It's likely this 
is a starting point of a cascade of events," says Nabel. "This creates havoc in 
the sense that it causes a lot of cell death that then triggers clotting 
abnormalities and other problems."

 The use of human blood vessels in the experiments makes Nabel's conclusions 
particularly compelling, says Robert A. Lamb, who studies viral glycoproteins 
at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.

 By mutating the glycoprotein gene to produce variants that don't kill cells, 
the investigators also identified a region on the viral molecule that's 
necessary for its destructive behavior. Previous research has shown, says 
Nabel, that the Reston strain of Ebola differs in this region when compared 
with the killer strain from Zaire that his group investigates.

 Indeed, when the NIH scientists repeated their experiments with the 
glycoprotein from the Reston strain, the molecule killed cells and destroyed 
blood vessels of nonhuman primates but didn't harm human cells.

 The next major task for Nabel's group, says Lamb, is to ascertain how Ebola 
glycoprotein kills human cells. Scientists suspect that it binds to a protein 
inside the cells, and Nabel speculates that drugs thwarting this interaction 
would limit Ebola's spread in the body and give the immune system time to clear 
an infection.


