Detoxifying Desert's Manna: Science News Online, July 29, 2000

 Detoxifying Desert's Manna Farmers need no longer fear the sweet pea's dryland 
cousin

 By J. Raloff

 For thousands of years, people dwelling in parched regions of the world, from 
northwest China to Ethiopia's highlands, have been cultivating a lovely 
flowering legume. The entire plant-stems and all-nourishes a host of 
domesticated animals. People roast the seeds for snacks, cook them into a 
protein-rich porridge or gravy, and grind them for baking into a hearty bread.

 To families farming some of the poorest soils on Earth, this grass pea ( 
Lathyrus sativus) would appear to be nothing less than "manna from heaven," 
observes Peter S. Spencer of the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland. 
It thrives when and where other crops won't. Poor soil? No problem. Range lands 
undergoing a protracted drought? No problem. Torrential monsoon flooding? No 
problem.

 Well, there is one problem, and it's serious, the neurotoxicologist points 
out. The grass pea produces an amino acid that can destroy a person's nerves.

 During prolonged droughts, when alternative crops shrivel, people often make 
the grass pea a dietary staple. Yet when consumed in large quantities for just 
2 or 3 months, the untreated seeds can trigger a disabling spasticity known as 
lathyrism. Unless affected people find other sources of food quickly, their 
condition could worsen, and they could eventually lose all use of their legs.

 In the rural villages where lathyrism tends to occur, wheelchairs aren't 
available and they wouldn't easily traverse the terrain. In the worst cases, 
the victims can get around only by crawling. Moreover, Spencer points out, 
because men 18 to 40 years old have proved most vulnerable to lathyrism, 
affected communities tend to lose their breadwinners to this crippling, 
incurable nerve degeneration.

 It was against this backdrop last month that Adel El-Beltagy announced that 
the International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) in 
Aleppo, Syria, had succeeded in breeding virtually toxinfree cultivars of L. 
sativus. The accomplishment, which took some 15 years and cost more than $1 
million, has produced strains offering the yield, taste, and environmental 
ruggedness of the original plant.

 Says El-Beltagy, the institute's director general, ICARDA's breeders 
transformed poor farmers' potentially devastating "option of last resort" into 
a safe alternative.

 And none too soon, lathyrism epidemiologists contend. In Gojam, Ethiopia, for 
instance, "the [cumulative] prevalence of spastic paraparesis [lathyrism] is 
7.5 per 1,000 individuals-which is unbelievable for a neurodegenerative 
disease," Spencer notes.

 Fernand Lambein of the University of Ghent in Belgium and his colleagues 
described a new lathyrism epidemic in northwestern Ethiopia's Wello area in the 
July 24, 1999 Lancet. Crippling at least 2,000 people, it was triggered by the 
drought of 1995 and 1996, which wiped out nearly all local crops other than the 
grass pea. This episode proved so serious that nearly one in five affected 
individuals was left "a crawler," the researchers noted-meaning the victim lost 
all ability to walk. That's at least four times the proportion of such severely 
affected cases that normally occur.

 Droughts in Bangladesh during the early 1970s triggered an even more dramatic 
plague of lathyrism that disabled up to 70,000 of its victims, according to 
neurologist Anisul Haque of the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University in 
Dhaka. The outbreak, which he notes left some of these individuals 
quadriplegic, hit a few regions unusually hard, permanently disabling 20 out of 
every 1,000 inhabitants.

 Among people eating the same amount of toxic grass-pea seeds, only a few 
typically develop the disease, Lambein has found. His data hint that dietary 
factors, such as deficiencies in trace minerals, might foster human 
vulnerability to the pea's toxin. Livestock rarely show poisoning symptoms.

 Haque notes that recent public health campaigns have been trying to hammer 
home the importance of trying to detoxify the seeds before cooking them. 
However, he told Science News, "we still find new cases in young adults." 
Though his periodic visits to heavily affected regions suggest that "the 
incidence is not as high as in the early 1970s," it's not clear how much the 
rate has fallen.

 E. Ann Butler, a legume specialist with the Paleoethnobotany Institute of 
Archaeology at University College London, has been studying the role of L. 
sativus in the traditional Ethiopian diet. Her field investigations show that 
villagers continue to eat the grass pea despite being "very aware" that it can 
cause debilitating disease. Among local women, she finds, the traditional 
wisdom handed down is that these legumes should be detoxified before cooking.

 She therefore contends that people fall victim to lathyrism not because of 
ignorance so much as climate and economics.

 During dry spells, people can lose access to the extra water required to leach 
out the seed's poison, which is water soluble. Heating also degrades this amino 
acid, which is why boiling is the preferred way to detoxify the seed, notes 
Clayton G. Campbell, a retired Lathyrus breeder at Agriculture Canada's 
research station in Morden, Manitoba. He notes that during droughts, however, 
villagers are as likely to lack fuel as water.

 Even where water and firewood are available, Butler finds, pretreating "is not 
always sufficient to render [grass peas] safe."

 In Ethiopian villages, Butler recently collected small portions of grass-pea 
cuisine that had been prepared from peas pretreated with 10 minutes of soaking 
in hot water. She then had the samples tested by chemists at Kings College, 
London.

 The results, which she reported earlier this month at the International 
Workshop on African Archaeobotany in Frankfurt, Germany, show that "levels 
of...the lathyrism-causing toxin are not appreciably reduced by the 
detoxification methods used." More extensive pretreatments, including boiling 
the peas, are thought to remove more-but still not all-of the poison.

 Over the past few decades, several research centers have been investigating 
the activity of grass-pea toxin. The unusual amino acid bears the unwieldy name 
beta- N-oxalyl-L-alpha-beta-diaminopropionic acid, which is abbreviated as 
ODAP. Scientists speculate that in the grass pea, this toxin probably confers 
resistance to pests or climatic extremes.

 More important from a human perspective, Spencer notes, the amino acid seems 
to masquerade as a signal molecule, called glutamate, that's found in animals. 
This natural compound is similar to the flavor-enhancing commercial food 
additive monosodium glutamate (MSG). Spencer's team and others have been 
teasing out why ODAP, acting as a glutamate mimic, proves so toxic.

 ODAP seems to kill nerves through overstimulation.

 Individual nerve cells carry electrical impulses over long distances, such as 
from the brain to the lower spinal cord. To transmit signals across the gaps 
separating adjacent cells, the ends of neurons produce chemical clarions. 
Glutamate is one such chemical messenger. When it docks with its receptor on 
the target nerve cell, it helps excite that neuron to generate its own 
electrical impulse.

 Glutamate receptors come in several flavors, Spencer says. One type, called 
AMPA, triggers the fast excitatory signals running through the brain and 
nervous system. It's these glutamate receptors that ODAP turns on, Spencer's 
research shows.

 In fact, he notes, ODAP can so overstimulate the AMPA receptors that nerve 
cells can "experience exhaustion and, ultimately, death." The most vulnerable 
neurons, Spencer found, are those that regulate leg movement.

 Damage to them explains the strange scissored gait of many lathyrism victims. 
In the disease's early stages, legs develop a muscle rigidity and spasticity, 
forcing people to walk by crossing one limb in front of the other. Weakness and 
intense aching may also plague the affected muscles. In advanced cases, Spencer 
says, the victim's lower limbs "become useless-locked in a cross-legged, fixed 
position."

 ODAP concentrations tend to naturally hover between 1 and 2 percent by weight 
in most grass peas, notes Campbell, now with Kade Research in Morden. Eating 
small quantities of legumes harboring these concentrations is harmless. Only 
when a person's grass-pea consumption reaches about 30 percent of daily 
calories and persists for several months will lathyrism typically develop.

 Because of the seriousness of lathyrism and the popularity of grass peas in 
drought-prone regions, ICARDA launched a research effort about 15 years ago to 
develop low-ODAP strains.

 A similar program had already been under way at Agriculture Canada's Morden 
lab for a couple years. Starting with an Indian line of grass peas, this 
federal project bred nine different low-toxin strains. "Our first variety," 
Campbell recalls, "came out with just 0.06 percent ODAP." Eventually, his team 
created a line that reliably produced just 0.01 percent ODAP.

 As natives of India, however, many of these strains didn't offer high yields 
under conditions encountered elsewhere. Moreover, the new seeds often looked 
different from those cultivated in Nepal, Ethiopia, or Afghanistan. In one 
case, Campbell says, villagers objected to the seeds as being too large.

"In commercial production, such things wouldn't much matter," he says. "But if 
Mama is going to be cooking this material, it had better have the same look, 
taste, and color as what she's used to, or she won't accept it."

 So Campbell's team distributed its new strains to breeders throughout research 
centers in Africa and Asia for hybridization with locally adapted, popular 
lines of the species. Unfortunately, he notes, 10 years later, these hybrids 
have yet to make it into farmers' hands.

 During that decade, ICARDA's breeders were busy crossing strains of L. sativus 
with a low-neurotoxin Middle Eastern relative, Lathyrus ciliolatus, notes 
William Erskine, the institute's director of germ plasm research. Additional 
strains were developed by growing cells from various Ethiopian grass peas in 
tissue culture. As these cells multiplied, chromosomes were sometimes lost or 
pieces moved about, producing natural variants of the parent. ICARDA let the 
variants mature and then measured ODAP in thousands of them.

 The best performers from these two ICARDA programs produce only about 0.04 
percent ODAP but taste like the original plant.

 A few farmers scattered throughout lathyrism-prone areas are already 
field-testing these new grass peas, notes John H. Dodds, the Washington, 
D.C.-based assistant director general of ICARDA. However, as a research center, 
his institute isn't in the business of producing and distributing large 
quantities of seed. That must be managed by others.

 It also poses an unusual challenge, Dodds says.

 Though growers around the world cultivate some 1.5 million hectares of 
conventional grass peas each year, most of their plots "are no more than 3 
hectares [around 7.5 acres], and probably less than 1," he notes. Largely a 
subsistence crop, its growers don't tend to buy their seed but produce it 
themselves or receive it in barter with neighbors. No central distribution 
point disseminates new plants, and no institution is available to educate the 
million or so potential planters about varieties' advantages.

 To cope with the problem, ICARDA has recently hired sociologists, 
anthropologists, economists, and other social scientists. Their mission is to 
work with officials in developing countries on establishing customized networks 
for the quick distribution of seed within the barter economies of small 
landholders.

 However, Campbell hopes ICARDA won't stop there.

 His own studies and those of legume researchers in many other developed 
countries indicate that planting grass peas may offer even relatively wealthy 
ranchers and prairie farmers a commercially attractive alternative to cereals, 
especially as a proteinaceous livestock feed or forage.

 The protein content of grass peas runs about 28 percent, by weight-twice that 
of wheat. In his part of the northern Great Plains, Campbell can achieve 
grass-pea yields of 5,000 pounds per acre. That's comparable to field peas and 
three times the productivity of soybeans.

 Moreover, when drought hits, nothing beats it, he says. "One year, we still 
got more than 1,000 lbs per acre despite just 2.5 inches of rainfall." By 
contrast, Campbell notes, "wheat came up just 4 inches high, then shriveled and 
died."

 Even with what he perceives as the grass pea's great prospects for western 
rangelands, he concedes that convincing North American growers to try it will 
probably prove a tough sell. "Everybody is so hung up on this ODAP," he 
laments. "When we point out we got concentrations down to 0.01 percent, they 
ask why not zero."

 Meanwhile, he notes, plenty of other commonly cultivated crops, such as 
broccoli, carry their own toxins, which similarly prove harmless when consumed 
in small amounts.

 Indeed, Lambein told Science News that he has found that the root of Korean 
ginseng ( Panax ginseng) contains the same toxicant-ODAP-as L. sativus, "and at 
almost the same [natural] concentrations." Yet he hardly expects the finding to 
deter natural-products aficionados from downing Korean ginseng, which is 
prescribed by Chinese herbalists to overcome fatigue, weakness, premature 
aging, and stress.

"We live in a water-challenged world, one that is becoming more so each year as 
80 million additional people stake their claims to the Earth's water 
resources," notes Lester R. Brown, an agricultural economist and chairman of 
the Worldwatch Institute in Washington, D.C. Each year, he notes, communities 
pump another 160 billion tons of water from underground aquifers for drinking, 
hygiene, industry, and food production.

 Yet in the increasingly intense competition for water between these various 
sectors of the economy, irrigation for agriculture "almost always loses," he 
observes. Countries tend to offset the resulting loss in their food-production 
capacity by simply importing more grain from rain-fed croplands or areas with 
more-plentiful water resources.

 Last year, he notes, the water required to produce the grain and foods 
imported into Ethiopia and other portions of parched North Africa "was roughly 
equal to the annual flow of the Nile River." However, if low-toxin L. sativus 
strains permit the expansion of grass peas throughout lands too dry to support 
grains, he says, they might offer a way to safely increase dryland food 
production.

 Alternatively, he notes, the new, less-toxic grass peas might enable some 
farmers to plant a second, soil-nitrogen-replenishing crop during an otherwise 
dry, fallow season.

 Still, Brown maintains, expanding the grass pea's range would only buy a 
little extra time. Ultimately, he argues, restoring the balance between water 
use and supplies will require reining in population growth, eliminating water 
waste, and shifting to more water-efficient technologies.


