Mathematician on Ice: Science News Online, Aug. 5, 2000

 Mathematician on Ice Adventurous voyages to Antarctica test mathematical 
models of sea ice

 By I. Peterson

 A winter expedition into frigid Antarctic waters is no pleasure cruise. 
Screaming winds, bone-chilling temperatures, high seas, driving snow, and 
crunching ice create conditions that try the hardiest of souls.

 It's an unlikely place to find a mathematician.

 Last year's 8-week voyage of the ice-breaking research vessel Aurora Australis 
from Tasmania wasn't Kenneth M. Golden's first venture into the Antarctic ice 
pack. An applied mathematician at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, he 
had also studied sea ice on three previous Antarctic outings.

 Foul weather never kept Golden from relishing an Antarctic voyage. "I loved 
watching the waves," he says. When the sun squeaked through storm clouds during 
the few hours of daylight, he could also enjoy spectacular views of giant 
icebergs, crumpled ice sheets, and penguins waddling across snow or skimming 
the water.

 About four dozen researchers were aboard the icebreaker on its 1999 voyage. 
Their destination was a sizable region, called a polynya, of open water and 
thin ice that had appeared in the ice-bound waters near the toe of the Mertz 
Glacier off the Antarctic coast.

 The sea-ice pack insulates the ocean from the atmosphere. A hole in this lid 
permits a significant amount of heat to escape from the water to the much 
chillier air. At the same time, surface waters cool, become denser, and sink, 
contributing to ocean circulation (SN: 7/15/00, p. 42). New ice begins to form, 
filling in the hole.

 As the boundary layer between ocean and atmosphere in polar regions, sea ice 
has a significant impact on global climate, Golden notes. Polynyas play a 
crucial role in energy exchange and ice formation, so the occurrence of one 
inevitably draws the attention of researchers.

 On a broader front, sea ice "is most important in the context of climate 
variability and change, both as an indicator and an agent of climate change," 
says geophysicist Hajo Eicken of the University of Alaska in Fairbanks.

 The need to understand better the physical properties of sea ice, track its 
movements, and remotely monitor its thickness, temperature, and roughness has 
prompted a number of recent studies of its structure.

 In May at a Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics meeting in 
Philadelphia on mathematical aspects of materials science, Golden described how 
new mathematical models have provided insights into the way brine seeps through 
ice, carrying heat and nutrients.

 Other models have also helped researchers refine methods for reconstructing 
the physical characteristics of polar ice-its age, thickness, roughness, brine 
content, and porosity-from satellite or airplane measurements of microwaves 
bounced off the surface.

 Mathematical and computer models-both simple and complex-help researchers 
design field experiments and provide insights that can guide the development of 
accurate, large-scale climate models, Eicken says.

 It was during Golden's 1994 trip to the Antarctic-his second expedition-that 
he witnessed a remarkable scene that was to motivate much of his subsequent 
mathematical research on sea-ice structure.

 Buffeted by winds reaching 60 miles per hour during a fierce snowstorm, he was 
out on the ice in the middle of the night. "It was snowing like crazy, but it 
was warm," Golden recalls.

 What caught his eye was a massive upwelling of liquid, percolating up through 
the ice to flood the surface beneath the newly fallen snow, forming a slushy 
boil. Though he had heard about this phenomenon and had even proved theorems 
about percolation models, he had never before seen it or realized how striking 
the phenomenon is.

"That was very important for guiding my theoretical research and suggesting new 
questions to investigate," Golden remarks.

 To understand percolation, he had to dig into sea-ice formation. As seawater 
freezes, it can't incorporate salt into its crystal structure. The salt that it 
rejects concentrates in brine pockets between crystals. So, sea ice is a porous 
material made up of pure ice laced with brine-filled cavities and air bubbles.

 Unlike other porous materials, such as sandstone or bone, sea ice's 
microstructure and bulk properties can change dramatically over a small 
temperature range. Sea ice becomes permeable and brine can travel through the 
solid when temperatures rise above about -5@C, if the brine-volume fraction is 
5 percent and the salt content is 5 parts per thousand. At lower temperatures, 
sea ice is effectively impermeable, locking in place any liquid that happens to 
be present.

 In polar regions, a snowstorm can elevate the ice temperature and push down on 
the surface. Brine cavities grow larger and connect, so the ice becomes 
permeable. Sea water percolates up through the ice to flood the surface and 
form the boils observed by Golden.

 Interest in assessing brine movement through ice has escalated in recent years 
as researchers have come to recognize the vital role of percolation in polar 
ecosystems. It supplies nutrients to algal communities and bacteria living in 
the ice, transports contaminants, and heats the atmosphere.

 To develop a mathematical model of brine transport, Golden turned to 
percolation theory. In the simplest form of a percolation model, one considers 
an array of points arranged in a square lattice or a cubic network. The idea is 
to introduce links between randomly chosen pairs of neighboring points until 
it's possible to travel from one side of the grid to the other along an 
unbroken chain.

 In two dimensions, such a pathway appears when roughly half of all possible 
links are in place; in three dimensions, about one-quarter of the links must be 
present. If ice is regarded as a random mix of brine pockets and ice particles 
of equal size, the simple percolation model says sea ice should be at least 25 
percent brine before salty water can percolate through it. The actual figure 
for sea ice is 5 percent, however.

 Golden solved this puzzle by turning to a more sophisticated percolation 
model, first used in the 1960s to study the electrical behavior of metal 
particles mixed with a nonconducting polymer. Engineers had found that by 
compressing powders made up of large polymer particles and much smaller metal 
particles, they could obtain a flexible, composite material that permitted 
electricity to flow despite a relatively low metal content.

 The microstructure of such a compressed powder is remarkably similar to the 
cellular microstructure of the columnar form of sea ice, Golden remarks. The 
most important parameter for the powder model is the ratio of the radius of the 
large particles to that of the smaller ones.

 Applying the compressed-powder-conductivity model to typical sizes of ice 
crystals and brine cavities in columnar sea ice yielded a critical brine volume 
of about 5 percent.

 The model, however, serves only as a rough approximation of both brine 
percolation and ice structure. In reality, the situation is much more 
complicated. For instance, once percolation begins, brine pockets quickly 
connect with each other to create large-diameter brine channels along which 
most of the fluid transport takes place.

 During the 1999 voyage to Antarctica, Golden, Victoria I. Lytle of the 
Antarctic Cooperative Research Centre in Hobart, Australia, and their coworkers 
ventured out onto the ice to examine brine channels in the field. They used 
chain saws to cut out slabs of ice 15 to 26 inches thick. Beet juice scrounged 
from the ship's galley revealed the intricate brine pathways threading through 
the ice.

"As beet juice seeps into a slab, you see layers of different types of ice 
crystals, and you get a feel for how brine moves through the ice," Golden says. 
The researchers are now trying to determine precisely how these brine channels 
form.

 Laboratory measurements and field studies by Eicken and his coworkers have 
revealed other aspects of sea-ice behavior. Even at low temperatures, some 
liquid can slowly seep through the solid, Eicken notes. "It will be interesting 
to have a closer look at some of the processes that help maintain connected 
pore space even at low temperatures."

 Another important issue is how the microphysics of sea-ice structure 
determines the extent and quality of microbial activity in the ice. Researchers 
need such information to assess the role of sea-ice organisms in taking up 
carbon in the Arctic and Antarctic.

 Structural details can be important. "Given the microscopic size of the 
organisms, even a few connected pores, which do not affect the macrophysics of 
the system measurably, can decide the fate of a group of organisms," Eicken 
remarks.

 Don Perovich of the U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Development Center in 
Hanover, N.H., says, "Here, we have a frozen environment that is home for a 
rich and diverse food web. Understanding life in this extreme environment may 
provide insights in the search for extraterrestrial life."

 In late August during the 1999 expedition, Golden and five colleagues got a 
vivid demonstration of sea-ice dynamics on a larger scale.

 The researchers had just descended to the ice to collect samples, when a small 
crack appeared, then quickly widened. Four people crowded back into the small 
cage that had brought them down, and the ship's crane hoisted them back on 
board, leaving Golden and researcher Robert A. Massom of the Antarctic 
Cooperative Research Centre on the ice to await the cage's return.

 Meanwhile, the crack closed, and a slab of ice started riding up over the slab 
on which Golden and Massom were standing, pushing it down so that sea water 
began flooding its surface. After what seemed like an interminable wait, the 
crane finally dropped the cage for the second pickup. Two minutes later, the 
ice sheet had broken up completely.

"It's plate tectonics on a very fast timescale," Golden observes.

 Experiments and measurements on the ice surface provide important data for 
calibrating mathematical models and interpreting remote-sensing signals. The 
extent of the connections among brine cavities, for instance, affects how sea 
ice interacts with electromagnetic radiation, and surface flooding and 
subsequent freezing influence how a surface scatters microwaves.

 In remote sensing, it's often difficult to distinguish between slush and open 
water. A better understanding of slush formation would allow researchers to 
refine remote-sensing methods to distinguish different types of ice and open 
water more reliably.

 Hence, knowledge of how brine flows is important for accurate satellite 
measurements, Golden says. Such data, in turn, would provide information on the 
extent and thickness of polar ice, a parameter useful in tracking global 
climate change.

 The mathematics behind techniques for interpreting reflected microwave signals 
is interesting, Golden says. "We now have a lot of new results, which can also 
be applied to other types of scattering."

 Traveling to the Antarctic ice pack to collect data also has dangers unrelated 
to the ice.

 On its 1998 voyage, after sailing for a week, the Aurora Australis finally 
reached the ice edge, 100 miles off the Antarctic coast. Late that night, a 
serious engine-room fire triggered alarms throughout the ship, bringing 
everyone on deck.

 Awoken soon after he had gone to sleep, a groggy Golden showed up wearing just 
a light jacket and jeans. Luckily, although lifeboats were lowered, the ship 
didn't have to be abandoned. A few hours in a lifeboat at temperatures nearing 
-65@C would have made the folly of Golden's choice of apparel painfully clear.

"I should have known better," he admits.

 Eventually, crew members managed to control the fire, though it ended up 
gutting the main engine room. Engineers jury-rigged a control system for a 
backup engine, and the ship slowly limped 3,000 kilometers back to port.

 Unfazed by his chilling experience and still in pursuit of all things ice, 
Golden was back on board in 1999 for a return trip to Antarctic waters.


