Device Sees More inside Live Cells: Science News Online, July 22, 2000

 Device Sees More inside Live Cells

 P. Weiss

 The delicate touch of visible light allows scientists to peer into living 
cells without disrupting them. However, to discern the subtlest details, 
optical microscopes have long been considered too crude a tool. Instead, 
researchers have developed techniques such as electron microscopy to make out 
the finest features, but only in dead specimens.

 Enter the stimulated emission depletion microscope. This novel optical device 
harmlessly resolves fluorescently labeled bits of living cells that are smaller 
than the so-called diffraction limit, say its developers at the Max Planck 
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in Gottingen, Germany. Because light bends, 
or diffracts, around the edges of objects, ordinary optical microscopes can 
discern features no closer than a half-wavelength apart, a distance of 200 
nanometers (nm) or so.

 Beating the diffraction limit, the new prototype instrument can resolve depth 
to one-sixth of what the best conventional optical microscopes can achieve. Its 
horizontal resolution comes in under one-half the other instruments' limit, 
report Thomas A. Klar and his colleagues in the July 18 Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences.

 Considering all three dimensions, the device can distinguish structures only 
one-eighteenth the minimum volume discernable by diffraction-limited equipment, 
the researchers say.

"The work by [the Gottingen team] has the potential to transform the 
fluorescence microscopy 'Renaissance' we are currently experiencing into an 
'Enlightenment Millennium,'" says Shimon Weiss of Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) 
National Laboratory in a commentary in the same journal issue.

 While the immediate focus is biology, "this beautiful story is not going to 
end here," he adds, predicting possible applications in lithography, 
electro-optics, magneto-optics, and other areas.

 Like other so-called confocal microscopes, the novel instrument works by 
focusing a laser inside cells tagged with nontoxic fluorescent molecules. By 
scanning the light across horizontal levels in the cell and then assembling the 
slices in a computer, researchers can generate a three-dimensional fluorescent 
image of the cell's interior.

 Typically, an oblong laser spot created by a confocal microscope has a 
diffraction-limited size of about 600 nm in depth and 200 nm in girth, says 
team leader Stefan W. Hell. What enables the new microscope to both beat the 
diffraction limit and reduce distortion from its oblong spot, he explains, is a 
one-two combination of laser pulses.

 The device generates a 0.2-picosecond pulse of green light, which creates the 
typical oblong illumination. Immediately afterward, it fires an oddly shaped 
and much longer-lasting red pulse into the area excited by the green pulse. The 
red squelches fluorescence from the green light anywhere the pulses overlap.

 Because the second pulse is doughnut-shaped, with blobs of light above and 
below its doughnut hole, the red light confines fluorescence to a roughly 
spherical spot 100 nm across. Comparing the green oblong to an American 
football, Hell says that the final truncated spot resembles a tennis ball. 
Thanks to that smaller spot size, he adds, the microscope can scan with a finer 
point and discern unprecedentedly small features.


