Edible vaccine spawns antibodies to virus: Science News Online, July 22, 2000

 Edible vaccine spawns antibodies to virus

 N. Seppa

 Scientists have genetically engineered potatoes for the first time to deliver 
an edible vaccine against a common virus.

 The researchers added to spuds the capsid protein that forms the shell around 
diarrhea-causing Norwalk virus. When eaten, the product stimulated volunteers' 
immune systems to create a flood of antibodies. The response prevented Norwalk 
virus from latching onto cells lining the intestines, which causes disease.

 Twenty volunteers ate two or three portions of raw, diced, genetically 
modified potatoes over 3 weeks. Four other volunteers consumed unaltered 
potatoes. Blood samples taken over the next 2 months revealed that 19 of 20 
people getting the edible vaccine had elevated concentrations of antibodies 
against Norwalk virus, although the rise varied between individuals.

 The researchers also detected antibodies in the feces of six of the people who 
had received the edible vaccine. That indicates that the immune agents were so 
plentiful in the gut that some were being excreted, and that's a good sign, 
says study coauthor Charles J. Arntzen of the Boyce Thompson Institute for 
Plant Research at Cornell University.

 Antibody concentrations remained unchanged in the volunteers receiving the 
untreated potatoes, Arntzen and his colleagues report in the July Journal of 
Infectious Diseases.

"It's a great study, very forward thinking," says Dennis R. Lang of the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in Bethesda, Md.

 The intestinal virus is named for Norwalk, Ohio, where researchers first 
identified it in 1968. Norwalk or a related virus infects more than 23 million 
people in the United States every year, causing diarrhea, nausea, and stomach 
cramps, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

 Scientists consider Norwalk virus no more than a nuisance in the United 
States. It's distressing but survivable. Natural antibodies form during a bout 
with the virus, and some of these linger indefinitely. "We've never seen a 
volunteer without any," Arntzen says. Unfortunately, the antibodies decline to 
useless concentrations over a few years, leaving a person susceptible again.

 In developing countries around the world, Norwalk's occurrence can be more 
deadly, especially if children getting it become dehydrated, Arntzen says.

 In those countries, injectable vaccines are costly to deliver and needles can 
transmit diseases, says Arthur O. Anderson of the U.S. Army Medical Research 
Institute of Infectious Diseases in Frederick, Md. An edible vaccine, 
therefore, might present a better approach to battling Norwalk virus outbreaks 
in developing countries, he says.

 The scientists designed this initial experiment to gauge the safety of the 
edible vaccine. They won't be able to measure its effectiveness until they give 
it to people who are then exposed to the actual virus. NIAID, which funded 
Arntzen's study, is currently working out guidelines for such a test, Lang says.

 Meanwhile, Arntzen and his colleagues plan to trade in potatoes for tomatoes 
as their vaccine carrier-possibly dried for better storage. They may eventually 
try to develop banana-based vaccines. They're also targeting papilloma virus, 
which can lead to cervical cancer, as well as hepatitis B virus. A reliable 
injectable vaccine already exists for hepatitis B, but a less expensive, edible 
vaccine would be better, particularly for use in the developing world, Arntzen 
says.


