Crystal Reveals Unexpected Beginnings: Science News Online, Aug. 5, 2000

 Crystal Reveals Unexpected Beginnings

 J. Gorman

 Birth is a tough process, particularly for crystals. Before a crystalline 
structure forms, atoms or molecules mingle in a solution, making and breaking 
attachments. After enough particles gather in a cluster, and surpass a critical 
size, crystal growth speeds along.

 The initial clumping, called nucleation, helps determine a crystal's size, 
composition, and other properties. Scientists have developed theories about 
nucleation for decades, but they hadn't actually witnessed nuclei forming in 
solution.

 At last, researchers report they've directly observed this early step in 
protein crystallization, and they were surprised at what they saw. The nucleus 
doesn't have the form that they expected, they report in the Aug. 3 Nature.

 Peter G. Vekilov and Siu-Tung Yau at the University of Alabama in Huntsville 
used an atomic force microscope to view the protein apoferritin as it 
crystallizes. Previous efforts at direct observation of nucleation in solution 
were thwarted because the crucial process can take place anywhere in the liquid 
and it happens very quickly.

 To overcome these challenges, Vekilov and Yau waited for apoferritin clusters 
to approach the bottom of a glass cell where the researchers already had placed 
an apoferritin crystal as a docking point. When a cluster stuck, the team could 
study it at a resolution high enough for discerning individual molecules and 
for determining whether the cluster had the characteristics of a nucleus.

"The whole design of the experiment is very clever," comments David W. Oxtoby 
of the University of Chicago. "You're actually seeing the crucial step of 
something when it is first deciding, 'Okay, yes, I will become a crystal.'"

 At the critical moment, a nucleus can gain or lose a molecule with equal 
probability. Vekilov and Yau observed clusters immediately before and after 
this point. "We have some aggregates which are smaller than the nuclei and some 
which are larger," says Vekilov.

 They found that all of these clusters had roughly the same shape-a flat layer 
of apoferritin molecules with a few more molecules on top. Each such cluster 
looked like a raft containing some 20 to 50 molecules.

"Since they all have this raftlike shape, we interpolate that the nucleus is 
also raftlike," says Vekilov.

 Nucleation theory has assumed that atoms and round molecules form spherical 
nuclei. Since apoferritin is roughly spherical, it therefore ought to form 
spherical nuclei as well. "Obviously, this is not the case," says Vekilov.

"Everyone has always assumed that these would be little round balls, and 
therefore all of the theoretical predictions of when you would see 
crystallization were based on these models," says Oxtoby.

"Now, you have to doubt everything," agrees Vekilov. Researchers can't just 
assume they know the structure of the nucleus of any crystallizing material, he 
says. And, he adds, more experiments are needed to verify or modify models of 
how solids form.

"There are many, many technological and health-related issues in which you want 
to control the rate of nucleation," says Vekilov. Protein crystallization plays 
a key role in diseases such as sickle cell anemia and cataracts, and 
researchers use crystallization when developing drugs. Scientists also grow 
crystals to determine a protein's structure through X-ray crystallography.

 What's more, understanding crystallization could help engineers improve the 
strength of materials such as metals. "If you can control nucleation, you can 
control the properties of the metal," says Vekilov. And that, he adds, could 
lead to many technological improvements, such as stronger turbine components 
for jet engines.


