Inside Violent Worlds: Science News Online, Aug. 5, 2000

 Inside Violent Worlds Political conflict and terror look different up close 
and local

 By B. Bower

 On the porch of a small house in war-ravaged Sri Lanka, a weary-looking woman 
known as Saktirani listens to a man's anguished plea. His son has not been 
heard from for the nearly 3 years, since he and 158 other people were arrested 
by government soldiers at a nearby Tamil refugee camp. Tamil families in this 
part of Sri Lanka are caught in the cross-fire of a brutal struggle between 
Tamil rebels fighting to establish a separate state and government forces 
representing the Sinhalese majority population.

 The fate of the man's son remains unknown, like that of other so-called 
disappeared persons in the war zone. The distressed father asked the government 
for answers but received a letter from the Ministry of Defense saying there was 
no record of his son's arrest or imprisonment.

 That's when the father did what increasing numbers of his countrymen have been 
doing to cope with their pain-he turned to Saktirani, an oracle. She wields 
immense spiritual power by virtue of her widely accepted status as a 
flesh-and-blood conduit to the locally revered Hindu goddess Kali. Will 
Saktirani tell this man what happened to his son?

 Not at first. For 15 minutes, she vividly enacts what may have been the son's 
experience of torture and saturates herself in the pain that he may have 
endured. Saktirani writhes on the ground, calls out incoherently, sometimes 
says the word burning, and vomits. She gets up, abruptly bends over as if 
absorbing the blows of a blunt instrument, and vomits again. She complains of 
pain throughout her body and crawls into her shrine room.

 A few moments later, Saktirani returns to the porch where she tells the 
man-much to his surprise-that his son survived imprisonment and was released. 
She says the boy now lives in southern Sri Lanka and has changed his identity 
by becoming a Muslim. Tears streaming down his face, the father wonders aloud, 
"How am I going to find him there?"

 In 4 years of fieldwork in eastern Sri Lanka during the 1990s, anthropologist 
Patricia Lawrence of the University of Colorado at Boulder has been studying 
the growing tendency of local folk caught in the war zone to seek out oracles 
such as Saktirani. Amid the constant terror wreaked by rebels and government 
soldiers alike, oracles represent a rare source of benevolent power. They 
express searing emotions that often go unspoken and encourage family and 
community healing in a region stripped of medical care, public transportation, 
and other basic amenities.

"It has become [the oracles'] work to address agonizing doubts about lost 
family connections, memory which cannot be erased, and wounds which cannot 
heal," Lawrence says.

 It has become the work of researchers such as Lawrence-a small corps of 
anthropologists, sociologists, political scientists, and others-to explore how 
deadly conflicts play out at the level of states, local communities, and 
individuals. Since the end of the Cold War, their work has assumed greater 
urgency because violence has spread in many parts of the world.

"Studies of violence and its consequences must go beyond the analysis of 
specific psychiatric symptoms to account for a range of social and political 
forces," says Arthur Kleinman, a psychiatrist and anthropologist at Harvard 
University. "The time has come to develop a new international mental health 
research agenda."

 Kleinman acknowledges there's no groundswell of scientific interest in 
formulating that agenda. Psychiatrists and other behavioral researchers mainly 
study the emotional carnage wrought by war on individuals. For instance, 
they've documented elevated rates of posttraumatic stress disorder and major 
depression among war survivors and refugees. Brain processes associated with 
violent crime also draw researchers' scrutiny and media focus.

 That might be valuable information, but community- and society-wide violence 
transcends psychiatric diagnoses and miswired brains, the Harvard researcher 
asserts. In the past decade, more than 100 violent conflicts have occurred, 
from the Balkans to Indonesia, Rwanda, and Colombia. These wars killed at least 
5 million people and created tens of millions of refugees and orphans.

 A devoted cadre of ethnographers has garnered what Kleinman considers unique 
insights into social violence and its psychological aftermath. Ethnography is 
the anthropological practice of living in and simultaneously studying a local 
world, such as a village, neighborhood, or hospital. Some anthropologists 
regard this approach as unscientific and prey to the personal biases of 
ethnographer. However, ethnographic research challenges conventional wisdom 
about the causes of social violence and raises new possibilities for prevention 
and healing, Kleinman asserts.

 Much of this work appears in a trio of books he has coedited with 
anthropologist Veena Das of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and several 
others: Social Suffering (1997, Univ. of Calif. Press), Violence and 
Subjectivity (2000, Univ. of Calif. Press), and Remaking the World, slated for 
publication next year.

 An underlying theme of these volumes is that violent conflicts don't 
spontaneously ignite out of the dry tinder of ancient ethnic or national 
hatreds. Instead, wars and riots often arise out of the policy failures of 
modern political and economic institutions. Moreover, everyday forms of 
violence that vary from one locality to another also influence outbreaks of 
fighting and bloodshed.

 In affluent Western areas, a subtler kind of violence acts like a "soft 
knife," whittling away at well-being, Kleinman holds. Constant time pressures, 
too little sleep, feelings of anxiety and stress, and estrangement from family 
and community result from the burden of making a living and striving to get 
ahead in the modern world.

 Everyday violence cuts deeper among the estimated 20 percent of the world's 
population that lives in extreme poverty. Inadequate shelter, diet, and 
security hack away both at the physical and emotional health of these people.

 Anthropologist Nancy Scheper-Hughes of the University of California, Berkeley 
watched close up as dire poverty unraveled family ties in a Brazilian slum. In 
her book Death without Weeping (1992, Univ. of Calif. Press), she described the 
dangers of living in a place where hope for escape or a better life vanished 
long ago.

 For instance, the scarcity of food in this blighted urban neighborhood forced 
many mothers-who typically raised families on their own-to designate certain of 
their newborns as weak and unlikely to survive. Although they experienced much 
emotional conflict about such decisions, the women starved and otherwise 
neglected these infants, thus hastening their deaths.

 In many countries, the poor also face bodily threats created by modern 
technology and medical advances, Scheper-Hughes suggests. She and a team of 
ethnographers have uncovered preliminary evidence of a flourishing illegal 
trade in transplantable human organs in Brazil, India, and South Africa. Rumors 
about organ stealing that have spread through poor communities in many nations 
reflect widespread fear about thefts of body parts, the Berkeley researcher 
says.

 Aside from wading into the violent undercurrents of everyday life, 
ethnographic research challenges common assumptions about civil conflicts, 
according to Kleinman. Explanations for why neighbors end up killing neighbors 
in ethnic and religious disputes often cite an irrational tendency of crowds to 
become murderous and a sudden expression of violent instincts in people groomed 
to hate all members of certain ethnic groups.

 Such assertions certainly have been applied to the bloody conflicts within the 
former Yugoslavia during the early 1990s. However, Croatian ethnographers such 
as Maja Povrzanovic and Renata Jambresic Kirin of the Institute of Ethnology 
and Folklore Research in Zagreb have found that intense ethnic hatreds in their 
country represent a consequence of regional wars not their cause. Nationalist 
and ethnic sympathies blossomed among Croatians as they witnessed the violent 
destruction of their local communities by Serbian forces, assert the 
researchers.

 The war in Croatia also flourished in the many disorganized communities trying 
to recover shared values and a sense of trust after the demise of communism, 
Povrzanovic says in the April Current Anthropology. Experiences of the war vary 
greatly in Croatia, and many people grimly survive without harboring hatred for 
all Serbs, she adds.

 Political scientist Susan L. Woodward of the University of London makes 
similar points in a historical analysis of the Balkans conflict. Woodward 
traces the outbreak of violence in the former Yugoslav republics to the 
crumbling of the communist state. At that time, the different groups "in a land 
of minorities" clamored for power and scarce resources, she says. Foreign 
nations and institutions imposed economic austerity measures on the region's 
tottering federal government that gravely weakened it. Violent extremist groups 
rushed in to fill the power vacuum and solidified their claims on contested 
national borders, Woodward argues.

"There is no need for any history of ethnic animosity or civil war to [cause] 
growing uncertainty, social chaos, and potential violence under such 
circumstances," she says.

 When violence erupts, it only looks spontaneous and undisciplined from a safe 
distance, maintains Das. Local feuds and networks of friendships exert much 
influence over who is attacked and who escapes unscathed.

 For example, Das concluded that Hindu thugs supported by certain politicians 
had gone into selected Sikh neighborhoods in Delhi, India, and provoked the 
violence after Indira Gandhi's 1984 assassination. Sikhs who had managed to 
befriend Hindu neighbors often avoided assaults on themselves and their 
property, whereas Sikhs who had long-running feuds with nearby Hindus incurred 
severe casualties. Das based her conclusions on her interviews with residents 
of about 500 houses in Delhi.

 A similar pattern characterized rioting from December 1992 to January 1993 
between Hindus and Muslims inhabiting a huge Bombay slum. Apart from the larger 
religious conflict, violent acts were strongly influenced by neighborhood gang 
rivalries, family feuds, and other social coalitions and rivalries, contend 
Deepak Mehta and Roma Chatterji, both sociologists at the University of Delhi. 
In 1994 and 1995, they conducted fieldwork in four parts of the slum, which 
houses about 600,000 people.

 Such findings underscore the need for research on the mental health needs of 
people who survive political violence and repressive political regimes, asserts 
Kleinman. The dearth of such work "is a major failure of the social and 
behavioral sciences," he argues. Investigators need to focus on local and 
cultural concerns rather than simply diagnosing mental disorders and importing 
Western types of drug treatment and psychotherapy, he adds.

 In postapartheid South Africa, for one, broken families and disjointed 
communities have created a crisis of manhood for many African boys, according 
to physician and anthropologist Mamphela Ramphele of the World Bank in 
Washington, D.C. These boys no longer participate in traditional rituals 
marking the entry into adulthood, Ramphele says. In another break from 
tradition, they also go without advice and support from male mentors who have 
long set the tone for responsible adult behavior, Ramphele says.

 The result has been increased amounts of violence. The apartheid government 
cordoned black South Africans into ghettos, where white police encouraged power 
struggles among black male warlords. Young African boys then formed opposition 
groups that fought against the authority of warlords and their older male 
followers. The boys also tried to punish and publicly shame men who abused or 
neglected their families. Many of these boys spent long stretches in prison and 
never knew or lived with their own fathers.

 Ramphele, who has conducted fieldwork in a black township in Cape Town, says 
that residents of these areas must develop new initiation rituals into manhood 
and recruit older males as "apprentice masters" for boys in desperate need of 
direction.

 In contrast, emotional recovery for terrorized survivors of Sri Lanka's 
turmoil hinges primarily on local religious beliefs and rituals, says 
anthropologist Sasanka Perera of the World Bank in Colombo. In his fieldwork, 
Perera has noted that stories of spirit possession and avenging ghosts have 
spread throughout Sri Lanka communities as a means of remembering and coping 
with wartime horrors.

 In one Sinhalese Buddhist village, for example, residents began to complain of 
nightly screams and supernatural activity emanating from a government-owned 
building that rebel soldiers had commandeered as a place to torture and kill 
people. Soon, no one wanted to enter the abandoned structure. At that point, 
the villagers held a purification ceremony for the haunted building. Afterward, 
they resumed community activities there.

"Such traditional methods of coping and compensation may be the only hope in a 
society where the secular legal system is unlikely to deliver justice, where 
the state has failed to protect its citizens, and where the normal methods of 
mourning have been subverted," Perera says.

 Victims in such situations often experience a prolonged type of anguish and 
bitterness, he notes. Once blatant hostilities end, they must live among many 
of their former tormenters, who return to their daily lives as if nothing had 
happened.

 Saktirani, the oracle who tends to the emotional and spiritual needs of Tamil 
families, sees the toll exacted by such experiences. Although oracles have a 
long history in eastern Sri Lanka, the war's destruction of civil society has 
exposed them to unprecedented demands. Tamil families believe that oracles can 
use divine authority to protect homes from military attacks, to compel children 
who have fled to other countries to write letters home, to choose the best way 
to handle extortion attempts by soldiers, and to pressure authorities to 
release imprisoned relatives.

 Even the most respected and resourceful oracles, however, at times fail to 
deliver accurate predictions or useful advice. Gossip quickly circulates about 
both the successes and failures of particular oracles. In Saktirani's case, 
positive word-of-mouth has attracted a steady stream of supplicants to her door.

"The violence has gotten worse in eastern Sri Lanka over the past few months," 
says Lawrence. "I wonder how Saktirani is doing."


