Computation Takes a Quantum Leap: Science News Online, Aug. 26, 2000

 Computation Takes a Quantum Leap

 I. Peterson

 Custom-assemble five fluorine atoms with a few other atoms, and the product is 
a molecule. It's also a computer. The problem that it's solved is a simple one, 
but the exercise provides experimental evidence that a quantum computer can 
handle certain mathematical problems more efficiently than can a conventional 
computer.

 Though a practical quantum computer still may be decades away, "this result 
gives us a great deal of confidence in understanding how quantum computing can 
evolve into a future technology," says Isaac L. Chuang of the IBM Almaden 
Research Center in San Jose, Calif.

 He and his collaborators announced the feat last week at the Hot Chips 2000 
conference at Stanford University.

 A quantum computer exploits the quantum mechanical nature of tiny particles, 
such as electrons or atomic nuclei, to encode information as quantum bits, or 
qubits. Whereas an ordinary bit has at any time a value of either 0 or 1, a 
qubit can also take on both values at once. Because a quantum computer can act 
on these multiple states simultaneously, it's potentially many times as 
powerful as a conventional computer (SN: 1/14/95, p. 30).

 For their quantum computer, Chuang's team designed a molecule in which the 
nuclei of five fluorine atoms interact with each other to produce a five-qubit 
system (SN: 1/18/97, p. 37). The researchers report that they used radio pulses 
to "program" the nuclei into specific quantum states. Nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) instruments could then detect the results.

 The investigators tackled a permutation problem. Roughly speaking, computing 
the order of a permutation is akin to finding the shortest path through a 
hidden maze of rooms, each with precisely one exit and one entrance, connected 
by one-way passages. The goal is to get back to the starting point most quickly.

 Last year, Richard Cleve of the University of Calgary in Alberta showed 
theoretically how a quantum computer could solve a particular version of this 
problem in fewer steps than a conventional computer.

 Chuang and his coworkers tackled a four-room version of the permutation 
problem. They used radio pulses to program the molecules, which were dissolved 
in a liquid, so that two qubits encoded the starting room, and three qubits 
represented, in effect, the eight possible systems of one-way passageways.

 Then, the researchers obtained the molecules' NMR spectrum, and its pattern of 
lines gave the correct answer in each test. In essence, the result emerged in 
one computational step, whereas a conventional computer would have required 
more steps.

"We anticipate more-complex algorithms, involving a few extra qubits, may be 
possible using our current approach," comments team member Lieven M.K. 
Vandersypen of Stanford.

 However, "such implementations do not provide sufficient information about 
critical issues for the future of quantum computation, such as how much control 
we actually can achieve over a quantum computer," says Emanuel Knill of the Los 
Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory.

 Earlier this year, Knill and his coworkers put together a seven-qubit quantum 
computer made up of six hydrogen and four carbon atoms. Although the 
researchers didn't perform a complete computation at that time, they 
demonstrated a reliable, efficient procedure for setting up qubits for a 
computation.


