Cars' ammonia may sabotage tailpipe gains: Science News Online, Aug. 26, 2000

 Cars' ammonia may sabotage tailpipe gains

 J. Raloff

 Most people-even pollution experts-cite livestock waste as the leading source 
of urban, airborne ammonia. While that may have been true even a few years ago, 
a California study now indicates that cars have usurped this notorious 
distinction.

 If confirmed nationally, the findings would show that vehicles make an 
unexpectedly large contribution to visibility-robbing haze. The good news, 
according to this study, is that only 10 percent of cars emit 66 percent of the 
ammonia. Identifying and correcting whatever distinguishes these heavy 
polluters could yield big gains, concludes the study's leader, Marc M. Baum of 
the Oak Crest Institute of Science in Baldwin Park, Calif.

 Ammonia fosters a chemical transformation of acidic combustion gases, such as 
nitric acid, into dust-size airborne particles, such as ammonium nitrate. Less 
than a micrometer in diameter, such particles can be inhaled deeply and 
aggravate lung and heart disease (SN: 1/31/98, p. 68). Moreover, because these 
small particles pick up water, they can create a smoglike haze, explains 
Michael R. Hoffmann of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

 Ammonia's propensity to spawn such airborne particulates led governments to 
require factories to control ammonia emissions. Many use the alkaline chemical 
to neutralize acidic gases in smokestacks. No comparable regulations limit 
ammonia emissions from vehicles, however. In fact, Baum notes, since the advent 
of tailpipe catalytic converters, pollution scientists have written off cars as 
ammonia sources.

 Until 2 years ago. That's when Glen R. Cass, then at Caltech, measured copious 
ammonia coming from vehicles passing through a Los Angeles tunnel. His data 
indicated that the metropolitan area's traffic spewed more than 25 tons of 
ammonia per day-about the same amount as area livestock did. The finding that 
vehicles were emitting some 61 milligrams of ammonia per kilometer of travel 
surprised pollution analysts.

 A study by Robert A. Harley of the University of California, Berkeley and his 
team now confirms the Cass result. These researchers sampled air in a different 
local tunnel as some 60,000 cars passed through. They found an average ammonia 
emission by the vehicles of 49 mg/km, or 1 teaspoon per 100 miles traveled. 
These data will be published soon in Environmental Science & Technology.

 Baum worries, however, that the latest tunnel measurements may underestimate 
the problem. At the American Chemical Society meeting in Washington, D.C., this 
week, he reported results from 4,500 vehicles cruising up a freeway ramp. 
Unlike the tunnel studies, his research used remote sensing to analyze exhaust 
from individual vehicles. This allowed him to show that a few cars emit much 
ammonia, others almost none.

 Overall, Baum found, vehicles on average spewed 138 mg/km-about twice the 
amount of ammonia that Cass had measured 7 years ago. The finding confirms what 
his team observed in a pilot study of just 20 cars, reported in the July 1 
Environmental Science & Technology. In that small study, catalytic converters 
quashed nitrogen oxides, as intended, in two-thirds of the cars. However, half 
of these cars emitted ammonia, which is integral to making particulate 
pollutants.

 Concludes Baum, "The catalyst seems the key to the [ammonia] problem."

 Cass, now at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, agrees: "It's 
clear that not all catalyst systems are performing as they are supposed to." 
With three large studies indicating cars as a significant source of urban 
ammonia, he demands, "what, if anything, will be done about it?"


