Comet LINEAR: Breaking up isn't hard to do: Science News Online, Aug. 12, 2000

 Comet LINEAR: Breaking up isn't hard to do

 R. Cowen

 It took some 4 billion years for Comet LINEAR-S4 to leave its icy home far 
beyond Pluto and journey to the inner solar system. Alas, that trip, likely the 
comet's maiden voyage, appears to have become its last.

 Astronomers had high hopes for the comet, discovered in September 1999 by the 
Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research program in Socorro, N.M. At that time, the 
comet resided near the orbit of Jupiter and its brightness suggested that it 
would rank as a naked-eye spectacle when it made its closest approach to Earth 
late last month. The comet never became that bright. Moreover, Hubble Space 
Telescope images taken Aug. 5 reveal that it has broken into at least 10 pieces.

 This is the first time that astronomers have viewed a cometary breakup in such 
detail, notes Harold A. Weaver of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

 A comet is a fragile amalgam of ice, dust, and rock. When it passes near the 
sun, radiation explosively vaporizes some of the ices. For LINEAR, that 
activity had dire consequences, says Weaver.

 The comet's saga began heating up on July 5 when Hubble images caught the body 
in a sudden outburst, growing 1.5 times brighter in just 4 hours. The outburst 
blew off a piece of the comet's icy crust, like a cork popping off a champagne 
bottle. Hubble pictures recorded 2 days later show at least one house-sized 
fragment trailing the comet's nucleus. In capturing such images, "we lucked out 
completely," says Weaver.

 In retrospect, he says, the outburst marked the beginning of LINEAR's end.

 As telescopes around the world tracked the comet, astronomer Mark Kidger of 
the Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias in the Canary Islands, Spain, first 
noticed that LINEAR had dimmed and its showy tail had all but disappeared. On 
July 25, while observing the comet with the Jacobus Kapteyn Telescope in the 
Canary Islands, he found that the inner shroud of dust was no longer 
teardrop-shaped. Instead, it resembled a fat cigar.

 A day later, the comet was even more elongated. Because no discernible 
fragments were visible, Kidger began to suspect that the fading comet had 
explosively disintegrated. He reported his observations in a July 27 circular 
of the International Astronomical Union (IAU).

 Intrigued, Weaver reprogrammed Hubble to take a second look. Had the comet 
vented all its ice, leaving nothing but a pile of dust? Hubble's sharp eye 
revealed that the comet indeed had broken apart into an armada of frozen 
fragments. Images taken Aug. 6 with the European Southern Observatory's Very 
Large Telescope in Cerro Paranal, Chile, have confirmed the finding.

 LINEAR's fragility may be evidence that it is small, no more than 1 kilometer 
across, Weaver says. Venting gases shatter small comets more easily than large 
ones.

 In a July 30 IAU circular, Zdenek Sekanina of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
in Pasadena, Calif., suggests another reason why LINEAR broke apart so easily. 
It may be a fragment of a much larger comet, and such fragments tend to 
suddenly disintegrate.

 Astronomers continue to monitor the comet's fate. At press time, new Hubble 
observations were set for Aug. 10.


