Skin cells reveal they have hairy origins: Science News Online, Aug. 19, 2000

 Skin cells reveal they have hairy origins

 J. Travis

 About every 2 weeks, people literally shed their skin. That's how long it 
takes for the outer layers, also known as the epidermis, to turn over. Dead 
cells on top slough off, exposing younger cells below.

 The ultimate source of fresh skin may not be the skin itself. According to one 
group of biologists, hair follicles are the natural birthplaces of skin cells.

"There may be a very slow and very steady trafficking of cells, in the normal 
adult, from hair follicles to the epidermis," contends Robert M. Lavker of the 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia. In the Aug. 18 
Cell, a team led by Lavker and his longtime collaborator Tung-Tien Sun of the 
New York University School of Medicine offers evidence supporting this 
hypothesis.

 The two investigators specialize in teasing out the origins of tissues. In the 
past, they identified the eye's reservoir of unspecialized cells, so-called 
stem cells, that replenish corneal tissue. A decade ago, Lavker and Sun 
proposed that a small bulge about halfway up the side of hair follicles harbors 
stem cells that could give rise to the specialized cells of both the hair 
follicle and the surrounding epidermis.

 That cells from hair follicles can produce skin under extreme circumstances is 
well known. In people with third-degree burns, for example, any regenerating 
skin appears as a growing island with a hair follicle at its center.

 In their recent work, Lavker and Sun labeled cells in mouse hair follicles so 
they could follow the fate of those cells. When they marked bulge cells in the 
hair follicles of newborn mice, the investigators found that some offspring of 
these cells migrated downward to form the lower part of the follicles.

 In an attempt to see where skin arises in newborn mice, the scientists tagged 
progeny of bulge cells that had moved into the upper portion of follicles and 
followed their fate. "All of a sudden we found [these labeled] cells appearing 
in the epidermis. They couldn't have come from anywhere other than migration up 
the follicle," says Lavker.

 To discern where new skin comes from during wound repair, the scientists 
created a small wound on the backs of mice and injected the animals with the 
markers that label cells in the upper follicles. Over time, the number of 
labeled cells in the injured epidermal areas rose, while the tally of such 
cells in the upper follicles fell. This implies that follicular cells play a 
crucial role in normal skin repair, says Lavker.

 It'll be tricky to prove bulge cells are the key to the skin's natural ability 
to turn over in the adults. Epidermal cells proliferate so readily that 
normally there may not be a need for a large flow of stem cells up from the 
bulge to the skin, Lavker notes.

 Some researchers point out that several areas of skin, such as the palms, 
contain no hair follicles at all. That leads them to suspect that there's a 
population of skin stem cells residing in a lower layer of the epidermis.

"That the hair follicles serve as a source of epidermal cells does not rule out 
the possibility that there is a resident stem cell in the epidermis as well. 
Both camps are probably correct," says Kurt Stenn, director of skin biology at 
the R.W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute in Skillman, N.J.

 Lavker and Sun plan to continue studying hair follicle cells, in part to 
explain why laboratory-induced skin tumors in mice usually seem to originate in 
the upper follicle but not the bulge itself.


