Infectious Notion: Science News Online, Aug. 19, 2000

 Infectious Notion Lessons from gene therapy promote viruses as cancer fighters

 By R. Bennett

 Poisons. Radiation. Scalpels. Cancer treatments can sound as dangerous as the 
disease itself. Standard therapies tend to swipe at cells almost 
indiscriminately, damaging healthy tissue while killing tumors. The lack of 
specificity can mean even more misery to an already suffering patient.

 As candidates for the anticancer toolkit, viruses may seem to belong to the 
same therapeutic category as poison and radiation. Researchers, however, have 
new strategies to make viruses into a more compliant instrument.

 Whereas traditional cancer treatments blast the disease with a swath of 
killing power, viruses can provide a fine, deadly beam-potentially no wider 
than a gene-and perhaps a substantial improvement in care.

 The idea of using viruses as anticancer agents isn't new. The story reaches 
back nearly a century to doctors who noticed tumor regressions in cancer 
patients after they contracted viral diseases such as pneumonia. Until 
recently, however, technical limitations made research into viral treatments 
sporadic at best.

 In one 1956 study, for example, doctors introduced adenovirus into 30 patients 
with cervical carcinoma. The virus, responsible for the common cold, had been 
isolated 3 years earlier and was known to kill epithelial cell types that are 
the first manifestation of most tumors. The experiment succeeded in initially 
shrinking many tumors, says Steven Linke, a molecular biologist at the National 
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. However, the tumors returned, and the 
patients died within less than 3 months.

 With the ascendancy of chemotherapy in the 1960s, anticancer viral research 
retreated. Now, however, as scientists are unlocking the mechanisms that 
regulate cell division and unraveling the puzzles of infection and immunity, 
interest in viral treatments for cancer is reemerging.

 The latest direction of research has grown out of gene therapy techniques, 
which use viruses to deliver genes to living cells, says Edmund C. Lattime, a 
researcher at the Cancer Institute of New Jersey in New Brunswick. In gene 
therapy, scientists typically modify viruses so they can't replicate in the 
patient's body and cause infection.

 Early clinical trials of gene therapy to combat genetic disorders weren't 
particularly impressive, he says. "A lot of us were naive when we started this 
a number of years ago, thinking we were just going to take viruses...and that 
they were automatically going to do what we wanted them to do," says Lattime.

 After struggling with the problems of how to insert genes into huge quantities 
of cells, and, especially, how to evade immune problems when repeated 
injections of cells were required, success appeared to be at hand in early 
1999. That year, for example, scientists used a modified adenovirus to deliver 
normal versions of a gene called p53 to the lung tumors of 25 people. In many 
cases of cancer, mutations in p53 stop malignant cells from going into a 
natural cell-death phase called apoptosis. In 18 of the patients, the 
injections either reduced or arrested tumor growth (SN: 5/15/99, p. 310).

 Scientists have also had success with a related technique called suicide gene 
therapy. The strategy is to introduce to a tumor site a gene encoding a toxin 
that can kill cancer cells. The technique also can deliver genes to block the 
formation of blood vessels feeding the tumor or to activate chemotherapy 
agents, says Antonio Chiocca, a neurosurgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital 
in Boston.

 However, gene therapy has also had its much-publicized pitfalls.

 In 1999, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old volunteer with a non-life-threatening 
disease that prevented proper processing of nitrogen, received gene therapy at 
the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. The goal was to introduce the 
gene for an enzyme that would control his condition. Instead, he died within 15 
days of receiving a high dose of the adenovirus carrying the gene. His death 
sparked congressional hearings, and the Food and Drug Administration 
temporarily halted similar gene-therapy trials at other research sites.

 Sparked by the limitations of gene therapy, some cancer researchers are now 
attempting to capitalize on what viruses do best: replicate.

 In both traditional and suicide gene therapy techniques, the virus is an inert 
vehicle that delivers its payload to a tumor. In contrast, cancer researchers 
are now developing therapies in which injected viruses reproduce and spread 
throughout the body.

 As risky as traditional gene therapy can be, introducing a replicating virus 
into a patient is fraught with even more danger. Cancer specialists must strike 
a delicate balance. For safety, the virus must be purified, weakened, and 
modified. Ideally, it should be nonlethal in its original form, just in case 
any safeguard fails. It must be innocuous enough to slip past a patient's 
immune system, but infectious enough to reach all the tumor sites.

 What lures the researchers is the possibility of finding or creating a 
replicating virus that confines its activities to the boundaries of its target 
tumor and doesn't infect healthy tissue.

 Chemotherapy drugs have traditionally had a therapeutic index of no better 
than 6 to 1, meaning that they destroy up to 6 cancer cells for every healthy 
cell that dies. In contrast, one adenovirus currently being developed to fight 
prostate cancer by Calydon Pharmaceuticals in Sunnyvale, Calif., has 
demonstrated in animal experiments a therapeutic index of 10,000 to 1.

 Work with replicating viruses has had a twofold goal: making agents that boost 
a patient's immune system and others that directly attack the tumor. Often, the 
same modified viral genome can be the staging ground for both efforts.

 In one immune strategy, researchers use a traditional vaccine approach. Tumors 
themselves elicit an immune response from the body, but often it's not strong 
enough to overcome the malignant growth. Viruses manipulated to carry the gene 
for a tumor protein can boost the immune response. Researchers hope that such 
strategies will not only destroy an existing tumor but also trigger an 
immune-system memory that can ward off cancer recurrence.

 In other instances, researchers load a virus with genes for proteins called 
cytokines, chemicals that normally activate elements of the immune system. Once 
inside the malignant cells, the genes turn the tumor into a cytokine-production 
mill and make it the agent of its own destruction.

 Some of the latest work to exploit the relationship between viruses and the 
immune system offers the possibility of sidestepping a traditional problem in 
cancer therapies: getting the viral vehicle to all the sites of malignancy.

 In a November 1999 paper in Human Gene Therapy, a team led by Robert L. 
Martuza at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington, D.C., reported 
that cancer-ridden mice injected with a strain of herpesvirus experienced tumor 
regression both at the injection site and in remote growths. Further, they 
found, remote tumors regressed even at sites that the herpesvirus hadn't 
reached. The virus appeared to act like a red cape waved before a bull: It 
directed the immune system's attention to cancer cells, even distant ones, 
previously ignored.

 Other strategies focus on finding viruses that will infect and kill cancer 
cells while leaving healthy cells alone. At least two families of viruses, 
parvovirus and reovirus, appear to naturally have such selectivity. Scientists 
also can engineer the property into other viruses, such as poliovirus, 
herpesvirus, adenovirus, and a candidate currently being tested, a lentivirus 
derived from HIV.

 One way that researchers change viruses into cancer fighters is by taking out 
the genes that encode enzymes needed for replication. The virus will then grow 
and kill only in actively dividing cancer cells and others that have a rich 
supply of those enzymes. Slowly dividing healthy cells are a poor source of 
enzymes and so aren't affected by the virus.

 Some researchers suspect that certain viruses are naturally attracted to cells 
in which a specific molecular pathway has gone awry. This so-called ras 
signaling pathway, which controls cell proliferation, differentiation, and 
death, is abnormally active in most cancer cells, reports Patrick Lee, a 
virologist at the University of Calgary in Alberta.

"We found that the correlation is amazing," says Lee. "We believe that 80 
percent, maybe even more, of all [cancerous] cell lines have an activated ras 
signaling pathway."

 In a paper scheduled for publication in the Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, Lee and his colleagues give evidence that some 
laboratory-modified herpesviruses infect only cells with ras activation. Though 
the natural herpesvirus can cause meningitis and encephalitis, researchers are 
able to delete the genes that make the virus dangerous.

 James M. Markert, a neurosurgeon at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
works with the HSV-1 strain of herpesvirus. He tries to exploit the virus' 
natural affinity for the central nervous system by pitting it against neural 
gliomas. Inaccessible, inoperable, and protected against chemotherapy agents by 
the blood-brain barrier, these cancers are nearly always fatal. With currently 
available treatments, half the patients die within a year of diagnosis, and the 
5-year survival rate is less than 5.5 percent, says Markert.

 An advantage to herpesvirus, says Markert, is that it possesses a large 
genome, into which researchers can pack more foreign material than other 
viruses will accommodate. Thus, researchers can try a double-whammy strategy, 
modifying a single glioma-seeking herpesvirus to carry genes that encode both 
immune-enhancing cytokines and that deliver suicide instructions to the tumor.

 Markert and his colleagues have tried this herpes-plus-immunotherapy technique 
against gliomas in mice. In a study described in the Feb. 29 Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, they demonstrated that treated mice survive more 
than twice as long as untreated animals.

 In the May Gene Therapy, researchers working with two strains of defanged, 
modified herpesvirus in the United States and in Scotland reported reassuring 
results of the first human safety trials in patients with malignant brain 
tumors. David H. Kirn of the Viral and Genetic Therapy Programme at Hammersmith 
Hospital in London, hails the safety results as "remarkable" in an editorial 
accompanying the report.

 Researchers weren't studying efficacy in these trials, but their reports of 
"anecdotal cases of tumor shrinkage or prolonged progression-free intervals 
were encouraging," says Kirn.

 Although Lee helped discover that the herpesvirus targets the ras pathway, 
it's not the virus he champions as an anticancer weapon. Lee's enthusiasm is 
reserved for the reovirus, which targets the ras pathway even without 
modification.

 The reo part of the name is an acronym for respiratory enteric orphan. The 
orphan designation, says Lee, means that the virus hasn't been linked to any 
known human disease, very unlike herpesvirus. Lee favors the reovirus because, 
also unlike herpesvirus, it is extremely easy to grow in large quantities. 
"What's the advantage of reovirus over herpes?" Lee asks, rhetorically. "Given 
a choice, which would you pick?"

 The choice, however, isn't limited to the herpes and reovirus families. In 
fact, the workhorse of the field so far, says Lattime, is adenovirus, the same 
pathogen that yielded such dismal results in the 1950s and the tragedy last 
year.

 The adenovirus has been studied the most and development of treatments that 
use it are furthest along, Lattime says. Its mechanism for seeking cancer cells 
is known. A research team led by Frank McCormick, a molecular biologist at the 
University of California, San Francisco, reported in 1996 that adenovirus 
targets cancer by identifying cells in which p53 can no longer prevent 
indiscriminate growth.

 The efficacy of adenovirus, particularly when used in conjunction with more 
traditional chemotherapy, is impressive. In the August Nature Medicine, a team 
headed by Fadlo R. Khuri of the Texas Medical Center in Houston reports that 25 
of 30 patients with advanced head and neck cancer responded favorably to a 
combination of chemotherapy and an adenovirus called ONYX-015. The tumors in 
eight patients disappeared entirely.

 Even with the progress being made with adenovirus, it's likely that several 
viruses will emerge as cancer therapies, each with its own strengths and 
weaknesses. Reovirus isn't the disease threat that herpesvirus is, but 
researchers can't modify reovirus to evade the immune response, as they have 
herpesvirus, Chiocca says. In fact, Lattime expresses doubt that cancer 
patients, scheduled to receive reovirus in the first safety trials this year, 
will be able to receive multiple injections without developing an immune 
response against the treatment.

 Immunity and the other broad challenges that the scientists face with all 
viral families can be overcome, Chiocca predicts. Immunosuppressive drugs, 
carefully administered, may become necessary elements of viral therapy.

 The researchers agree that the trend in their field is to try to find the 
perfect niche for each virus. "I think, based on past experience, that there 
really isn't any magic bullet for all cancers," says Linke.

 Instead, the scientists want to appreciate the idiosyncrasies of each viral 
strain and each cancer type and find matches between disease and therapy. In 
the future, Chiocca predicts, "there will be a variety of different viruses 
with engineered mutations...so that each virus will be like a different drug."

 Still, one team of geneticists at the University of Alabama at Birmingham 
cautions in the July Nature Biotechnology, "Claims of selective magic bullets 
need to be modest, though, because much remains to be known about the 
regulation of viral replication and how to harness it."


