Nanotechnologists get a squirt gun, almost: Science News Online, Aug. 19, 2000

 Nanotechnologists get a squirt gun, almost

 P. Weiss

 It's anything but a Super Soaker.

 According to computer simulations by physicists at the Georgia Institute of 
Technology in Atlanta, a fantastically tiny squirt gun that can spit liquids a 
few hundred nanometers ought to work-if it can be built.

 Michael F. Moseler and Uzi Landman developed the model of the miniature device 
to investigate a possible new technology and to confront a challenge facing 
scientists at the forefront of the much-anticipated nanotechnology revolution 
(SN: 3/1/97, p. S14). In the nanoworld, different forces prevail, compared with 
our everyday, macroscopic domain. Not only do intuitions of scientists and 
engineers fail at the nanometer scale, so do their equations.

 Computer models of molecular behavior offer a research alternative. On 
computers, researchers depict thousands to millions of individual molecules 
programmed to interact according to physics rules. By putting those tiny 
players through their paces in these so-called molecular-dynamics simulations, 
scientists can predict nanometer-scale phenomena that are often 
counterintuitive.

 Researchers welcome the simulations, but they also need equations, which are 
simpler and apply more generally, to describe submicroscopic happenings.

 Moseler and Landman have done more than just simulate the movements of 
molecules in nanojets-liquids forced to spurt through nozzles with orifices 
smaller than viruses. They also created a so-called continuum description of 
the jets, which ignores the molecular details. They derived this description by 
adding the effects of random, thermal fluctuations to existing hydrodynamic 
equations. This modification of equations that were developed to describe 
macroscopic flows yielded results in line with the molecular simulations. The 
theorists report their findings in the Aug. 18 Science.

 The newfound agreement of the two approaches means "that the powerful 
mathematical tools developed to solve the hydrodynamic equations can be put to 
use in the nanoworld," comments Jens Eggers of the University of Essen, Germany.

 On the practical side, Moseler and Landman predict that nanojets may make 
possible tiny fuel injectors whose smaller, more uniform droplets would burn 
cleaner in engines. Other minuscule machines might use nanojets to insert genes 
into cells or to lay down wires only a few nanometers wide in electronic 
circuits. "The major technological challenge will be to actually build nozzles 
of the required size," Eggers remarks.

 The new study shows that nanojets ought to behave differently from macroscopic 
ones. For instance, because thermal fluctuations add instability to the 
nanojets, the tiny spurts break into droplets after going only about half as 
far as large-scale jets would go under corresponding conditions, Moseler says. 
That's why water nanojets are unlikely to become the nanoworld's answer to 
Super Soaker squirt guns.

 In another example of peculiar nanoscale effects, the spurting liquid becomes 
a plug. When the researchers simulated liquid propane gushing from a gold 
nanonozzle, they found that the fuel tended to stick to the outside of the 
nozzle, shutting off further flow.

 By simulating heating of the nozzle or the presence of a slick exterior 
coating, the researchers fixed that problem. Still, the unexpected effect 
highlights the unfamiliar territory of the nanoworld, Landman says. There, 
surface forces, such as the attractive tug between the gold atoms and the 
propane molecules, become much more important than they are in the macroscopic 
world.

 Next to come in the nanojet investigations are water, molten metals, silicon, 
and polymers, and liquid biomolecules. No one yet knows how those materials 
might behave, Landman notes.


