Ibuprofen cuts Alzheimer protein build-up: Science News Online, Aug. 12, 2000

 Ibuprofen cuts Alzheimer protein build-up

 J. Travis

 To stop Alzheimer's disease, a leading theory proposes reducing in-brain 
buildup of a protein fragment known as beta-amyloid. Scientists struggling to 
achieve this goal are, for example, testing a vaccine that prompts the immune 
system to clear this amyloid from the brain.

 The solution may be even simpler. A study in mice suggests that ibuprofen, the 
common nonprescription drug, may lessen abnormal accumulation of beta-amyloid.

 While this finding supports previous data indicating that ibuprofen and other 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) slow or prevent the onset of 
Alzheimer's disease, researchers say it also opens up a new way to think about 
how ibuprofen protects the brain.

"We've shown that a drug that's available, that's been in use for 30 to 40 
years, and [for which] we know the side-effect profiles...can reduce both the 
inflammatory response to amyloid and the amyloid" itself, says study leader 
Gregory M. Cole of the University of California in Los Angeles.

 About 20 studies have revealed that people who took NSAIDs for various reasons 
had a smaller risk-60 percent less in one study-of developing Alzheimer's 
disease than people who didn't take the drugs. Yet NSAIDs can cause serious 
stomach problems, including bleeding. Investigators therefore hesitate to 
recommend widespread use of the drugs until they can develop safer versions and 
confirm that the drugs do check the progression of Alzheimer's disease.

 At the same time, neuroscientists continue to look for the mechanisms by which 
NSAIDs defend the brain. There's plenty of evidence that inflammation within 
the brain, prompted by amyloid deposits, activates immune cells and elicits 
harmful substances that destroy nerve cells. That led to the conjecture that 
NSAIDs interrupt this dangerous sequence.

 Cole and his colleagues confirmed this idea in their mouse studies. They 
tested mice deliberately modified to carry a mutated gene that causes 
early-onset Alzheimer's disease in people. These mice develop amyloid deposits, 
or plaques, as well as features of brain inflammation that show up in people 
with the disease.

 Mice receiving ibuprofen in their daily meals, however, experienced much less 
inflammation, says Cole. For example, the investigators observed fewer active 
microglia, which are the brain's immune cells, near amyloid plaques.

 Compared to untreated mice, those receiving ibuprofen also had about half the 
number of plaques and half of the total amount of brain amyloid, the 
investigators report in the Aug. 1 Journal of Neuroscience. That finding 
surprised Cole because studies of brain tissue from deceased elderly people who 
had remained mentally coherent have not shown less amyloid among NSAID users 
than among the others. A similar study, reported 2 months ago, that examined 
the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease offered the same conclusion.

"I'm not doubting [the mouse] data, but it's not entirely logical as to why 
they got that result," says Ian R.A. MacKenzie of the University of British 
Columbia in Vancouver, who conducted one of the studies of human brains. The 
research on people, he concedes, has its own limitations that leave open the 
question of whether ibuprofen lessens the amyloid burden in the brain.

 Cole offers two theories of how the drug could act. It might alter the 
production of inflammatory chemicals that control microglia, prompting them to 
do a better job of clearing amyloid. Or it might decrease concentrations of 
inflammatory agents that trigger amyloid creation.

 Whatever the mechanism, Cole suspects that ibuprofen may do better at 
preventing Alzheimer's disease than at treating people already afflicted. He's 
now arranging trials to evaluate the drug's protective powers.


