Seeking the Mother of all Matter: Science News Online, Aug. 26, 2000

 Seeking the Mother of all Matter World's mightiest particle collider may 
transform less-than-nothing into a primordial something

 By P. Weiss

"Oh, I got plenty o' nuthin', an' nuthin's plenty for me ".

 Bright opposing beams of gold ions finally were playing chicken within the 
tunnels of a vast new particle collider on Long Island. The scientists in the 
control room were delighted to have their machine up and running after 9 years 
of construction, but they also felt let down. They had expected to observe 
brilliant splats from head-on collisions between ions. During the 2 hours 
allotted for their run, they had seen zilch.

 It was 8:30 p.m. on Monday, June 12, and even the die-hards were starting to 
grow weary. Should they pull the plug on this run? Not yet, argued one 
contingent, which somehow sensed that the hulking particle accelerator-the 
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, or RHIC-was quietly doing better than it 
seemed.

 If that were the case, however, the detector was somehow missing the show, 
perhaps because it had been set to see less than a thousand charged particles 
spew from collisions rather than more. The scientists reset the detector.

 In minutes, a fabulous starburst of particle tracks splashed across the large 
screen on the wall. The room filled with applause. "We were exuberant when we 
saw the first collision," recalls John W. Harris of Yale University, head of 
the team that created the huge detector called STAR. Other bursts immediately 
followed. "All of our frustrations just melted away," says Harris.

 With the new accelerator, which is located at Brookhaven National Laboratory 
in Upton, N.Y., physicists are launching what they hope will be the decisive 
stage of an audacious quest that began in the 1980s (SN: 3/28/87, p. 202). The 
aim is nothing short of creating a primordial state of matter called the 
quark-gluon plasma.

 In that extraordinary plasma, elementary particles, called quarks and gluons, 
roam freely like particles in a gas instead of being shackled together into 
protons and neutrons, as they usually are. Theorists say that quark-gluon 
plasma filled the infant universe during its first 10 or so microseconds and 
then cooled into matter.

 To make the plasma, scientists say, they intend to melt a tiny chunk of empty 
space. That idea may seem bizarre, but to physicists, empty space is not really 
empty. In fact, they see it as the most complex and inscrutable entity in the 
universe. So, from this vacuum, they say, they should be able to conjure up 
something else remarkable, such as the quark-gluon plasma.

 As that plasma recondenses into ordinary matter, researchers expect it to 
provide a new and telling window on the microcosms of quarks and gluons that 
make up each proton and neutron in the universe. The structure of those 
microcosms is almost as difficult to understand as the vacuum itself, 
physicists say.

"If we find out when we heat up the vacuum that the properties change 
dramatically in some way-like water changing into steam when we boil it-then 
that would be very interesting," says theorist Mark G. Alford of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 Some answers to cosmological secrets may emerge from RHIC, too. After all, the 
cooling off of each collision roughly replays, in miniature, the instant when 
the plasma in the early universe rapidly coalesced into the constituents of 
ordinary matter. If those collisions reveal any irregularities in this 
plasma-to-matter transition, they may shed new light on the formation of the 
first magnetic fields, the first elements, and, possibly, a type of undetected 
dark matter known as strange matter.

 Each proton or neutron incorporates three quarks. A continual exchange of 
gluons, which are the carriers of what physicists call the strong force, binds 
those quarks together as they bob on a sea of so-called virtual quarks that 
wink in and out of existence. Like a rubber band connecting two balls, the 
strong force holds quarks together, becoming stronger as the quarks stray apart 
and weaker as they come together.

 Scientists have been frustrated in their efforts to explore the insides of 
nucleons-a term for protons and neutrons-in their native states. The huge 
energies required for these experiments excite the quarks and gluons too much.

 One of the attractions of RHIC, says Brookhaven theorist Larry McLerran, is 
that although the total energy of a typical collision is high, the energy is 
distributed among many thousands of quarks. That means the energy per quark in 
the resulting plasma is close to that inside the intact proton or neutron. So, 
the collider may provide an exceptionally revealing way to peer inside the 
stuff of which everything is made.

 To create the plasma, the new collider first strips gold atoms of all 
electrons, splits them into two beams circling in opposite directions, and 
accelerates both beams to more than 99.99 percent the speed of light. At six 
points around a 3.8-kilometer tunnel, the beams intersect. There, the ions, 
which are flattened into pancakes by relativistic effects, slam together with 
gargantuan force and then pass through one another.

 This collision of two ions, each of which contains 197 protons and neutrons, 
is like "two swarms of angry bees hitting each other," says Brookhaven's Thomas 
W. Ludlam. "They hit each other, have a fight, and then move on."

 That buzz of colliding nucleons is as dense in energy as 100 nuclei packed 
into the space of one. Its temperature is expected to soar to 100,000 times 
that of the sun's core. Under those extreme conditions, the strong binding that 
holds a nucleon together should relax enough for a moment for quarks and gluons 
to roam freely, theorists predict.

 Not that this will be easy to detect. Scientists have come up with many 
possible signatures of the quark-gluon plasma, but none of these alone can be 
considered unambiguous proof of the plasma's presence. One clue would be a 
sudden outpouring of thousands of hadrons, which are particles made up of 
quarks and anti-quarks. Others would be specific patterns in the abundances of 
the different hadron types.

 At a seminar at Brookhaven on July 19, Wit Busza of MIT and his colleagues 
working at one of the collider's detectors, PHOBOS, reported the first 
scientific results from RHIC. From their measurements, the group calculates 
that RHIC's most energetic collisions so far have been ejecting between 6,000 
and 7,000 particles apiece. Previously, the most energetic heavy ion collisions 
had taken place in Geneva at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics, or 
CERN. Those collisions generated about 2,500 particles, Busza says.

 To give as complete a picture of the collisions as possible, each of RHIC's 
four detectors measures the debris from gold-gold collisions in a different 
way. "Although we have pretty good models, no one knows exactly what to 
expect," Ludlam says.

 Even as scientists at RHIC strive toward sightings of the quark-gluon plasma, 
they may be retracing steps already taken by CERN physicists. Early this year, 
research teams at the European lab announced that they may already have caught 
a glimpse of the plasma. (SN: 2/19/00, p. 117). Still, many physicists are 
counting on the immensely powerful RHIC to bring the plasma into full view.

 RHIC was at only about one-fourth of its full energy when its first collisions 
took place in June, but it already was outdoing its most powerful predecessor, 
a machine at CERN, by a factor of three. As of early August, the new collider 
was up to 130 billion electron volts (GeV) per nucleon pair, or some two-thirds 
of its intended top energy. To calculate the total energy of a full-energy 
collision, physicists multiply the top energy, 200 GeV, by 197, the number of 
nucleon pairs in each gold-gold collision. The product: a whopping 39.4 
trillion electron volts.

 Despite the hopes that scientists pin on RHIC's brawn, "maybe they will not 
see the quark-gluon plasma where we expect to see it," speculates cosmologist 
Angela V. Olinto of the University of Chicago. "That would be really 
interesting, too."

 Although collisions of gold nuclei create the fireworks in RHIC, that 
spectacle is just a sideshow to what is expected to happen in a surrounding 
speck of vacuum, researchers say. "What's important is that we put a lot of 
energy into a small volume" of space, says theorist Edward Shuryak of the State 
University of New York at Stony Brook. Scientists will have their eyes on a 
patch of nothing the size of a nucleus. They hope the tiny vacuum will suck up 
enough energy from the ion collision to break down into another kind of 
nothingness.

 Physicists suspect there are many possible types of nothingness. "We're 
thinking of the vacuum as a substance that has different phases," Alford 
explains. However, only one vacuum actually permeates the universe today, he 
says. Physicists refer to it as the zero-temperature vacuum because space 
hovers near absolute zero. Although theorists can't yet calculate the 
properties of this vacuum, they suspect that it's rich in odd characteristics.

 For one thing, it's full of ghostly activity. As a consequence of Heisenberg's 
uncertainty principle and the equivalence of matter and energy (according to 
Einstein's famous equation), pairs of so-called virtual particles of all 
types-always one of matter and the other of antimatter-continually pop into 
existence. Then the particles annihilate each other.

 Sharing the vacuum with those short-lived visitors is an also-ghostly but 
enduring structure that permeates space, scientists propose. This structure, 
called a chiral condensate, consists of quark-antiquark pairs, but only certain 
types of quarks pair up with certain types of antiquarks. "There are so many of 
the pairs that they all lock together" to form an invisible "background," 
Alford explains.

 Within that tight-knit structure, these pairs also arrange themselves in a way 
analogous to the lining up of the minuscule magnetic fields of the atoms in 
certain magnetic materials. Because of this quark-antiquark framework, 
physicists say, the vacuum exerts a strong influence on matter and energy.

 RHIC collisions are expected to pump enough energy into a tiny volume of that 
vacuum to destroy its structure. In effect, the collider is an "oven that can 
turn the temperature up incredibly high, but only over a very small region," 
Alford says. "The basic idea is to see if something melts."

 When the zero-temperature vacuum is excited, physicists say, particles of 
ordinary matter-that is, configurations of confined quarks and gluons-appear. 
However, when a superheated vacuum is further excited, it produces quarks and 
gluons that roam freely through the plasma.

 Although the strong force still operates in this plasma, "there are so many 
quarks around that they get in each other's way," Alford explains. The quarks 
"get distracted: 'Am I supposed to be feeling attraction to this quark here or 
that one there?'"

 Whereas the zero-temperature vacuum contains plenty of ghostly order, the 
quark-gluon plasma contains a vast amount of energy and minimal order, 
physicists say. By measuring properties of the relatively simple quark-gluon 
plasma, researchers expect to better understand not only it but also the 
complicated zero-temperature vacuum and that vacuum's effects.

 Theorists propose, for example, that a kind of pressure exerted by the 
zero-temperature vacuum keeps quarks and gluons cooped up as protons and 
neutrons. But the scientists have only a rough idea of how it works.

 They predict that inside nucleons, gluons form tubelike structures that bind 
the quarks together. "Why is the glue living in tubes? The vacuum is forcing it 
to," Alford says, "just like it's forcing the quarks to be heavy at low 
temperatures."

 Physicists suspect that quarks are intrinsically lightweight particles, having 
no more than about 10 times the tiny mass of the electron. However, 
interactions between the quarks in nucleons and the zero-temperature vacuum add 
a large amount of mass to the nucleons' quarks-making them about 60 times their 
intrinsic mass.

 Because the zero-temperature vacuum brings about the largest share by far of 
the mass of every nucleus, scientists consider its effect the overriding factor 
in explaining why all matter in the universe has the mass that it does, Shuryak 
says.

 Even as RHIC experiments probe the tiniest volumes of space, they also may 
help scientists make more sense of the biggest thing there is-the universe.

 As a quark-gluon plasma cools, it condenses into hadrons. This occurs because 
the inwardly directed pressure of the zero-temperature vacuum has taken over, 
forcing the plasma's constituents back into protons and neutrons. Physicists 
regard that condensation as a phase transition, like steam becoming water or 
water freezing into ice.

 It's common during phase transitions, like water's familiar ones, for bubbles 
of unchanged matter to linger and then suddenly and violently burst in a 
belated transformation into the new phase. The creation of bubbles in 
plasma-to-hadron transitions would result in density fluctuations, which are 
"something RHIC can look at very carefully, " says Berndt Mueller of Duke 
University in Durham, N.C.

 In RHIC collisions, the primary evidence of a choppy transition would be an 
uneven distribution of matter and energy thrown off from the collisions as they 
cool down. If RHIC experimenters find signs of bubbles, some physicists say, 
that evidence may help crack a cosmological mystery: the origin of the first 
cosmic magnetic fields.

 Magnetic fields often are associated with parity violation-a phenomenon in 
which the laws of physics yield a different answer if everything in an 
experiment is reversed, as in a mirror (SN: 2/20/99, p. 118). In the universe's 
first instants, bubbles in which parity violation occurs may have formed in the 
cooling quark-gluon plasma, Dmitri E. Kharzeev of Brookhaven and his colleagues 
have proposed. They hope to test their ideas using data from RHIC.

 The notion of cosmic phase transitions generating these original magnetic 
fields dates back to 1983, Olinto says. However, evidence from past heavy-ion 
experiments, as well as theoretical arguments, suggest that violent bubbling 
doesn't occur as the quark-gluon plasma turns into hadrons, notes MIT's Krishna 
Rajagopal. Nor is there cosmological evidence for such a bubbly transition, he 
adds.

 Besides magnetic fields, RHIC scientists have set their sights on other cosmic 
targets. Craig J. Hogan of the University of Washington in Seattle points out 
that theories of how the first, light elements in the universe formed predict 
quite accurately the observed cosmic abundances of hydrogen, helium, and 
heavier elements. However, RHIC experiments can help determine if that process 
really started with a uniform cloud of protons and neutrons that froze out of 
the quark-gluon plasma, he notes.

 Without dismissing the potential value of conclusions about the universe that 
may be drawn from RHIC, Hogan and other cosmologists sound a note of caution. 
"It's important to realize that RHIC does not really reproduce the 
circumstances of the early universe," Hogan warns.

 For instance, besides being vast compared with an RHIC plasma, the primordial 
quark-gluon plasma is thought to have endured about a million trillion times as 
long.

 Even amidst such caveats, theorists including Olinto have come up with another 
exotic possibility. The experiments might yield the first evidence of one 
proposed type of dark matter, the unseen substances that astronomers suspect 
make up almost all of the universe.

"This is a long shot," Olinto admits. However, if bubbles in the cooling 
quark-gluon plasma are large enough, and if they chill in just the right way, 
some of the plasma might condense into hypothetical blobs dubbed strange matter 
because they contain many so-called strange quarks (SN: 3/4/89, p. 138).

 Scientists have theorized that this strange matter is capable of transforming 
anything it touches into strange matter as well. That possibility, plus the 
chance that RHIC could precipitate other bizarre phenomena, such as certain 
unwelcome changes in the vacuum, prompted a backlash of fear against the 
collider last year (SN: 10/23/99, p. 271).

 To investigate doomsday predictions circulating about the machine, Brookhaven 
lab officials convened a panel of scientists. The committee examined and 
refuted each proposed catastrophe scenario.

 The fact that RHIC is now running "doesn't prove it's safe," notes Robert 
Jaffe of MIT, who chaired the safety-review panel. "The best argument that 
nothing bad is going to happen is that good physics tells us nothing bad is 
going to happen."

 The panel's analysis noted, for example, that cosmic rays regularly cause 
heavy-ion collisions of vastly higher energies than RHIC can muster. Yet those 
events have not wrecked the universe.

 Although RHIC may already be producing the quark-gluon plasma, it's too soon 
to tell for sure, scientists say. To make that judgment, teams are now studying 
the data. In the meanwhile, they say, the most obvious sign is 
encouraging-that's the thousands of particle tracks that, time after time, 
splash across the control-room screens.


