New Concerns about Phthalates: Science News Online, Sept. 2, 2000

 New Concerns about Phthalates Ingredients of common plastics, may harm boys as 
they develop

 By Janet Raloff

 Phthalates. Difficult to spell and harder to sound out, this class of 
compounds would be forgettable if the name didn't keep popping up in debates 
over the safety of intravenous-blood bags, food packaging, and children's toys.

 Phthalates have become ubiquitous in modern society. Some of these oily 
substances find use as solvents, but most serve as softeners that make rigid 
materials turn flexible. Worldwide, manufacturers produce an estimated billion 
pounds of phthalates annually.

 Despite a half century of apparently safe use, several environmental and 
health groups and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission in late 1998 
called for the manufacturers of toys, baby pacifiers, and medical supplies to 
remove the most toxic of these chemicals from their products. At that time, 
scientists had linked cancer in adults to heavy exposure to some phthalates, 
animal studies had indicated that phthalates can cause organ damage, and 
chemists had demonstrated that phthalates could leak from plastics during use.

 At least a few phthalates also have the potential to disrupt boys' 
reproductive development. Or so a federally appointed "panel of experts" has 
just concluded after 15 months of deliberation and a review of some 1,000 
studies.

 The new phthalate review was commissioned by the National Toxicology Program's 
Center for the Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction (CERHR). It was the 
first project of this 2-year-old center, which is part of the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C.

 The review focused exclusively on the compounds' potential for causing birth 
defects or reproductive abnormalities. Over the past 3 years, animal 
experiments have indicated that low exposures can grossly alter the organs that 
in adults produce and deliver sperm.

 The evaluators noted, however, that low phthalate concentrations show damage 
to animals only when the exposure takes place during some precise window of 
vulnerability. This period in test animals approximately corresponds to the end 
of a woman's first trimester of pregnancy, a time when many women don't yet 
realize they're carrying a child.

 Several health and environmental advocacy groups have trumpeted the panel's 
assessments, renewing their call for a phaseout of targeted products containing 
certain phthalates. The CERHR panel itself didn't go that far. In fact, the 
group argued that panic is unwarranted.

 Except for data on the most widely used phthalate, di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate 
(DEHP), much of the human-exposure and reproductive-toxicity data now available 
are rather preliminary or sketchy, the panel observed. Moreover, it could 
identify only a few, relatively small populations that might encounter 
significant exposures during periods when vulnerable tissues are developing. 
And, in at least some cases, it concluded, any risks from phthalate exposure 
might be outweighed by the benefits such products offer.

 Still, notes panel chairman Robert J. Kavlock, who directs reproductive 
toxicology at the Environmental Protection Agency in Research Triangle Park, "I 
don't think we gave a clean bill of health to any [phthalates]. We didn't say 
there was no risk."

 Though his panel slogged through nearly 600 studies on DEHP and almost as many 
for another six phthalates, it didn't find answers to many pressing questions 
about developmental toxicity. Lingering doubts about the phthalate's toxicity, 
after so many studies, "seems to speak to the fact that somehow the right 
studies weren't being conducted," observes CERHR director Michael D. Shelby.

 One reason, Kavlock notes, is that researchers had designed most phthalate 
studies to evaluate risk of cancer or infertility in adults exposed to the 
chemicals in the workplace.

"Most of those data were also 20 years old or more," adds panelist Paul M.D. 
Foster, a reproductive toxicologist at the Chemical Industry Institute of 
Toxicology (CIIT) in Research Triangle Park. Only about 5 years ago did 
scientists first suspect that phthalates might affect babies in ways that could 
eventually impair their reproduction (SN: 7/15/95, p. 47), and that suspicion 
was confirmed even more recently.

 In its report, due out in October, the panel will recommend research to fill 
the data gaps it found. Independently within the next month, the results of 
several long-awaited studies are expected to fill in a few major gaps in the 
phthalate story, Kavlock notes.

 One of those studies should offer the best measurement yet of phthalate 
exposures in the general population. Analytical chemist John Brock started 
contemplating that issue 7 years ago, as a result of tests he conducted shortly 
after joining the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. While 
using gas chromatography to scout for pesticides and related pollutants in 
human blood, he found a handful of seemingly unbelievable readings.

 A gas chromatograph portrays chemicals within a sample as a series of peaks 
rising from a horizontal line. The height of each peak denotes a constituent's 
quantity. However, the peaks of two very different compounds occasionally fall 
in the same position.

 Brock suspected this must explain a few of the loftier peaks from the blood 
samples. A spike at the address ordinarily marking lindane, a toxic pesticide, 
for instance, was hundreds of times higher than the value typically found in 
people.

 Turning to mass spectrometry, which determines the size of the molecules 
contributing to each peak, he confirmed that the spike at lindane's address 
actually traced to di-ethyl phthalate. Several other chemical Himalayas on 
Brock's printout also turned out to be phthalates.

 When he showed his data to a colleague, he learned that phthalates had been 
showing up in environmental samples for 20 years. Researchers had assumed, says 
Brock, that the chemicals were contaminants entering their samples after they 
had been collected-probably coming from labware, flooring, paint, or 
labworkers' cosmetics.

 However, Brock wondered, what if that assumption was wrong? As he recalled 
last June at a workshop in Bar Harbor, Maine, Brock worried that the lofty 
peaks he had detected 7 years ago truly reflected phthalate concentrations "in 
most people at the parts-per-million level." That would be far higher than ever 
anticipated.

 For the past 5 years, Brock has been developing a marker of phthalates in the 
body that can't be confused with contamination. The test homes in on phthalate 
fragments created by enzymes and shed in urine. Brock's upcoming report will 
reveal the test's measurements of phthalate in U.S. adults.

 Talk at the CERHR panel's final meeting on phthalates in mid-July hinted that 
Brock has found phthalate exposures in some of the population greatly exceeding 
earlier estimates.

 L. Earl Gray Jr., a phthalate toxicologist with EPA in Research Triangle Park, 
has also heard the reports. He notes that the exposures needed to induce male 
reproductive-system birth defects in his own animal studies (SN: 4/3/99, p. 
213) "probably won't turn out to be any higher than those in some of the people 
Brock is talking about."

 While Brock will neither confirm nor deny speculation about his findings on 
human urine, Gray willingly discusses his new research on rats. In a report 
scheduled for publication Toxicology Sciences, Gray finds that the 
demasculinizing toxicity of phthalates depends on their molecular shape.

 The EPA researcher gave pregnant rats one of six phthalates, in daily doses of 
750 milligrams per kilogram of body weight, throughout the period when their 
pups' sexual organs were developing. DEHP triggered defects in male 
reproductive tissue. So did BBP (benzyl butyl phthalate), a compound that goes 
into floor tiles, adhesives, and artificial leather. DINP (di-isononyl 
phthalate), used in polyvinyl-chloride products from garden hoses to toys, 
proved less potent, but relatively large quantities could elicit such birth 
defects, Gray notes.

 New EPA data from other researchers find that DEHP, BBP, and DINP can all 
lower fetal concentrations of testosterone, the primary male sex hormone, 
during this developmental period. Gray's data link such a short-circuiting of 
the male pups' testosterone production to structural similarities in the 
toxicants.

 Phthalates are ring-shaped molecules adorned with two side chains, known as 
esters. Those phthalates that disrupt early testosterone production tend to 
carry relatively short esters that dangle off the same side of the ring, he 
finds. Move one of the esters to the opposite side of the ring, he notes, and 
the compound loses its developmental toxicity.

 Last year, Foster's team reported that di(n-butyl) phthalate, or DBP, can also 
ratchet down the activity of enzymes vital to making testosterone in fetal 
testes (SN: 4/3/99, p. 213). Affected animals are born with a variety of 
malformations. Manufacturers use DBP in plastics, adhesives, cosmetics, dyes, 
and food wraps (SN: 7/15/95, p. 47).

 These findings, Gray maintains, argue that it would be a mistake to blame all 
phthalates for the demasculinizing toxicity that may trace to just a few. 
However, those that inhibit testosterone probably should be considered 
collectively, he says, since their effects "would almost certainly be additive."

 Both the CIIT and EPA groups are now trying to discover which genes fail to 
turn on when a young male's testosterone production remains low. The targets 
for the missing componets also remain unknown. Gray says that he hopes they 
won't turn out to be Sertoli cells. In adults, these specialized residents of 
the testes nurture a developing sperm's every need (SN: 1/22/94, p. 57). If 
phthalates indirectly harm immature Sertoli cells, he worries, "it's possible 
the testes could remain susceptible 'til puberty."

 In addition to considering DEHP, BBP, DINP, and DBP, the 15-member panel 
reviewed data on di-isodecyl, di-n-hexyl, and di-n-octyl. The panel, primarily 
made up of federal and university scientists, asked three questions for each 
compound: Do the available animal data indicate developmental or reproductive 
toxicity? Which human populations would be most vulnerable? and, would such 
populations likely encounter toxic concentrations?

 After much deliberation, the panel concluded that five of the seven compounds 
appear to pose "low, minimal, or negligible concern" to the general population, 
including pregnant women and toddlers who tend to mouth plastic objects. 
However, the panel found "too few data ... to reach any conclusions" about 
di-n-hexyl phthalate. This compound goes into auto parts, tool handles, 
flooring, flea collars, and dishwasher baskets.

 In prevalence and toxicity, DEHP left the panel with the greatest concerns. A 
loosely bound ingredient in the plastics used for toys, food packaging, and 
household products, DEHP taints the air, water, and many foods.

 Normal, ambient exposure to this phthalate might be sufficient to threaten 
male reproductive organs developing in a healthy fetus, infant, or toddler, the 
panel concluded. It expressed "serious concern" that critically ill babies 
might be harmed. U.S. hospitals today dispense blood and liquid foods from 
DEHP-softened vinyl bags and tubing. What's more, some respiratory-care 
supplies are made from or packaged in DEHP-softened plastics.

 Ordinarily, regulatory agencies impose a safety margin when setting guidelines 
for exposures to toxic substances. For instance, if adverse effects are found 
at a given concentration, safety rules usually limit exposures to 
one-thousandth that concentration or less. However, the panel said that 
exposure estimates indicate some hospitalized children might encounter heavy, 
prolonged DEHP exposure-equivalent to the amounts that induced male 
reproductive impairments in animals. As such, the panel concluded, "there may 
be no margin of safety."

 Notwithstanding, the scientists acknowledged that the benefits of medical care 
employing DEHP-laced plastics might still outweigh such risks.

 After a 60-day public-comment period on the panel's findings, the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences will sum up the assessments and pass 
them along to various agencies. These will include the Food and Drug 
Administration, which is completing its own evaluation of DEHP's toxicity. Last 
year, citing concern over developmental risks, a citizens' group-lthe 
Minneapolis-based Health Care Without Harm-petitioned the agency for mandatory 
labeling of blood-storage bags and other products containing DEHP.

 California's Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment-better known as 
the Proposition 65 office-has also been following the expert panel's review 
carefully. It too plans to decide soon whether DEHP's developmental and 
reproductive risks warrant mandatory product-warning labels. Such labeling 
might spur U.S. industries to seek substitutes more aggressively, especially 
for consumer and health-care products, observes Colleen Heck, chief counsel for 
the state's Proposition 65 office in Sacramento.

 Such changes could have an impact nationally. California accounts for up to 20 
percent of U.S. sales for many products, Heck observes. A manufacturer who 
wants to do business in California, therefore, tends to deal with affected 
products-by either slapping warning labels on each package or changing the 
product as if all of it would be sold in the state.

 Indeed, she says, "we have been told, anecdotally, of millions of dollars 
being spent to reformulate products so that manufacturers can avoid labeling 
them as containing something that causes cancer or birth defects." Then again, 
she adds, that's what the Proposition 65 office was designed to do: offer 
information so that consumers have the option of "driving changes in the 
marketplace."

 However, getting rid of DEHP in medical goods would initially require more 
than switching to some other plastic. At an FDA workshop in October 1999, 
participants noted that DEHP has offered some initially unanticipated 
dividends. For reasons that aren't completely understood, they noted, this 
softener also subtly changes any blood stored in plastics containing it, 
extending the blood's shelf life and improving its functional quality.

 So "we cannot immediately remove DEHP" and replace it with just any 
plasticizer, argued James AuBuchon, director of blood bank and transfusion 
services at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, in Lebanon, N.H.

 Indeed, a few firms have already, at great cost and after lengthy testing, 
developed alternative plastics for blood storage-only to find no buyers.


