Nausea drug may aid alcoholism treatment: Science News Online, Aug. 26, 2000

 Nausea drug may aid alcoholism treatment

 B. Bower

 A drug that lowers the activity of serotonin and other chemical messengers in 
the brain may boost the effectiveness of psychological treatments for a severe 
form of alcoholism, at least over a short time period, a new study finds.

 Ondansetron, a medication currently prescribed to quell nausea and vomiting in 
chemotherapy patients, helps to reduce drinking and foster abstinence among 
adults who developed alcoholism before age 25, report psychiatrist Bankole A. 
Johnson of the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio and his 
colleagues.

"We think we're dealing with a biological trait that creates a predisposition 
to early-onset alcoholism and perhaps other addictions," Johnson says.

 The researchers recruited volunteers seeking alcoholism treatment at either of 
two substance-abuse centers in Texas between 1995 and 1999. A total of 271 
participants-many of them middle-age, white men-were assigned at random to 
receive one of three daily dosages of ondansetron or a placebo pill for 11 
weeks. All volunteers also attended weekly group-psychotherapy sessions aimed 
at teaching them strategies to avoid alcohol use.

 About 60 percent of people in each treatment group completed the trial. During 
the study, alcohol consumption was established through self-reports and 
chemical analyses of blood and urine. All groups exhibited noticeable drops in 
alcohol intake by the end of treatment and a greater tendancy to abstain from 
drinking.

 Among the 161 patients with early-onset alcoholism, those who received 
ondansetron consumed less alcohol and spent more time abstinent than did those 
who got the placebo, Johnson's team reports in the Aug. 23/30 Journal of the 
American Medical Association.

 For example, volunteers taking the middle dose of ondansetron spent 70 percent 
of study days abstinent and imbibed an average of 1 1/2 drinks daily; those in 
the placebo group were abstinent 50 percent of the days and averaged nearly 3 
1/2 drinks daily.

 Participants with alcoholism that began later in life exhibited no greater 
improvement on ondansetron than on the placebo.

 Ondansetron blocks the activity of serotonin directly, which leads to 
reductions in other neurotransmitters, including dopamine. However, the 
physiological mechanism that creates a disposition to early-onset alcoholism 
remains unknown.

 Henry R. Kranzler, a psychiatrist at the University of Connecticut School of 
Medicine in Farmington, says the new results herald rapid progress in finding 
medications that help specific sets of patients with alcoholism.

 John S. Searles, a psychologist at the University of Vermont School of 
Medicine in Burlington, disagrees. He regards ondansetron's effects on alcohol 
use as "pretty small and inconclusive" compared with those elicited by group 
psychotherapy alone. Further research should track patients with early-onset 
alcoholism who get ondansetron without group psychotherapy, Searles says.

 The drug naltrexone, previously reported as promising for treating alcoholism 
(SN: 11/21/92, p. 341), has yet to make inroads among clinicians.


