Transplanted Hopes: Science News Online, Sept. 2, 2000

 Transplanted Hopes Islet-cell success may bring a diabetes cure closer

 By Damaris Christensen

 A compelling description of untreated diabetes comes from Aretaeus of 
Cappadocia. Writing in the second century A.D., he called the disease "a 
melting down of the flesh and limbs to urine."

 Despite such an early recognition of the symptoms and severity of diabetes, 
effective treatment proved elusive. In the late 1800s, researchers localized 
the problem to the pancreas, a 100-gram digestive-system organ located just 
behind the stomach, and they figured out that people with the disease don't 
process sugar effectively.

 In 1921, Canadian researchers isolated insulin from dog pancreases and 
discovered that the hormone is essential to controlling blood sugar. Given by 
injection, insulin reversed wasting in diabetic children and extended their 
lives.

 Dramatic as its effects are, however, insulin isn't a cure for diabetes. 
People with the disorder must monitor their blood sugar closely and take 
insulin injections to reduce the risk of nerve damage and heart, kidney, and 
eye disease. In a small percentage of these people, insulin injections fail to 
keep blood-sugar concentrations from fluctuating wildly.

 Scientists and patients agree that the ideal diabetes treatment would control 
patients' blood-sugar concentrations without requiring them to take insulin. 
One long-sought option is transplantation of pancreatic cell clusters, called 
islets, that make insulin. Though the approach is simple, it has succeeded in 
only a small fraction of the attempts.

 This year, however, a Canadian team announced 11 consecutive successes-islet 
transplants that permitted the recipients to stop taking insulin. Although 
there are still questions about the long-term safety and efficacy of this 
treatment, there's a sense of excitement among researchers. In Toronto at the 
June meeting of the Endocrine Society, David M. Harlan of the National 
Institutes of Health in Bethesda noted, "Islet-cell transplantation, which has 
long been promising, appears poised to fulfill its promise."

 Affecting 1 million people in the United States, type I diabetes arises when a 
patient's immune system attacks the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. 
While a pancreas transplant effectively cures the diabetes in most cases, the 
procedure is difficult and expensive and few donor pancreases are available.

 Physicians can transplant just the insulin-producing cells in a less taxing 
process that doesn't require major surgery. For the past 25 years, they've 
tested procedures in which they inject the cells into the major blood vessel 
flowing to the liver. The cells can take up residence there. After the 
procedure, patients must take immunosuppressive drugs. Overall, just 8 percent 
of people given islet-cell transplants have improved their ability to control 
blood-sugar concentration enough to stop taking insulin.

 In the recent work, all 11 patients receiving islet cells had had poorly 
controlled type I diabetes. "We convert the entire pancreas into something that 
is less than the size of a teaspoon," says, A.M. James Shapiro who headed the 
study at the University of Edmonton in Alberta. "It is the easiest transplant 
in the world."

 Shapiro's team injected about 12,000 islets per kilogram of a person's body 
weight. The islets were isolated from two to three donor pancreases. The 
scientists followed the patients for as long as 15 months. Since being treated 
in the Edmonton experiment, no patient has needed to take insulin shots, says 
Shapiro.

 He and his colleagues suspected that widely used immune-suppressing drugs, 
such as glucocorticoids, damage islets, so they replaced them with newer drugs 
that they thought wouldn't damage the islets. These include sirolimus, 
tacrolimus, and daclizumab.

 The researchers also reduced the time it takes to isolate and purify the 
insulin-producing cells from the donor pancreases and begin the transplantation 
surgery.

 Since the transplants, the patients' blood-sugar concentrations have been in 
the normal range, although some patients have shown slight difficulties in 
controlling high concentrations of blood sugar, Shapiro says.

 The team reported on their first seven patients in the July 27 New England 
Journal of Medicine and updated their results at the American Diabetes 
Association meeting in San Antonio in June.

"This is a very important initial step," says Aldo A. Rossini of the University 
of Massachusetts Medical School in Worcester. "They are demonstrating for the 
very first time that if we are able to provide enough islet cells, we are able 
to quote-unquote cure the disease. "

 The Juvenile Diabetes Foundation International in New York and NIH have joined 
forces to sponsor more clinical trials of the Edmonton transplant procedures. 
Worldwide, about 40 adults with diabetes will receive islet transplants over 
the next 18 months, says Richard W. Furlanetto of the foundation.

 In the long run, if the transplants work for people with type I diabetes, 
researchers may also try them as a way of controlling type II diabetes, says 
Paul Robertson of the Pacific Northwest Research Institute in Seattle. Type II 
diabetes, which affects 15 million people in the United States, is caused by an 
inability to respond to insulin. Many people with type II diabetes become 
dependent on insulin injections.

"Advances in islet-cell transplantation have been a long time in coming, so it 
is easy to get excited," cautions Chris Saudek of Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine in Baltimore and vice president of the American Diabetes 
Association. The Edmonton study "is a large step, really the first time that 
someone has shown [islet transplants] can work reliably," he says. "But for 
patients to draw the conclusion that they will be transplanted in the very near 
future is another very large step."

"There are still breakthroughs that need to be made" before islet transplants 
become widespread, Saudek says.

 Several major questions face the researchers. The first is, How long will the 
transplanted cells survive and provide adequate insulin?

 There's a good chance that islet transplants will function over the long term, 
says Robertson. He's followed six people who had their own islet cells 
implanted in their livers after surgeons removed the patients' pancreases for 
reasons unrelated to islet function. Without such an implant, its pancreas 
removal leads to diabetes.

 At the American Diabetes Association meeting, Robertson reported that over the 
10 to 13 years that he's periodically examined the patients, none have 
developed diabetes. So, the transplanted islet cells must continue to function.

 Even if islet transplants don't last for a person's lifetime, he says, their 
failure isn't a death sentence. People can always go back on insulin injections.

 A second question is whether people who receive transplants must stay on 
immunosuppressive drugs for the rest of their lives. Such drugs make people 
prone to serious infections and can increase their chances of developing cancer.

 Researchers are looking for treatments that prevent attacks on the 
transplanted cells without suppressing the entire immune system. Until 
recently, the most promising experimental therapy was an antibody against 
CD-40, one of the proteins expressed on the surface of some immune cells, says 
Furlanetto. Norma Kenyon of the University of Miami School of Medicine has 
shown that in mice, and sometimes in rhesus monkeys, this antibody can prevent 
rejection of islet transplants.

 Last year, however, the company making the antibody pulled it out of clinical 
trials in which researchers were testing its effects as a treatment for 
autoimmune diseases, Kenyon says. Participants receiving the antibody were more 
likely to develop blood clots in their limbs, hearts, or brains than were those 
receiving a placebo. The company that makes the antibody reports being 
"cautiously optimistic" that scientists can tweak the drug's structure to 
reduce side effects, Rossini says.

 Another approach for inducing the immune system to tolerate foreign tissue is 
to give a patient a transplant of bone marrow cells along with the islet cells. 
This difficult and expensive procedure, which requires destruction of the 
patient's own bone marrow, has already shown some success in transplants of 
liver and heart (SN: 5/22/99, p. 331). However, Rossini says, "I don't feel we 
can justify bone marrow transplants for diabetes," a disease that is not 
immediately fatal and can be treated by other means.

 If researchers solve the critical issue of immune suppression, they'll need to 
increase the supply of islet cells. Only about 3,000 healthy pancreases become 
available to transplant each year in the United States. The pancreas quickly 
suffers damage after death, as its digestive juices eat away the organ.

 An intact human pancreas contains about a million islets, each made of four 
cell types. In the Edmonton experiments, each adult pancreas yielded between 
400,000 and 600,000 islets, not enough for a successful transplant. About 80 
percent of the cells in these islets are the beta cells, which produce insulin.

 Theoretically, many fewer beta cells than are currently transplanted will 
produce enough insulin to regulate blood-sugar concentrations, Shapiro says. 
Researchers don't know why many of the islet cells don't thrive after the 
transplant.

 Instead of isolating human islet cells, some researchers have suggested 
transplanting pig cells (SN: 11/4/95, p. 298). Pig islets-which produce insulin 
that's almost identical to human insulin-can be genetically engineered to 
express human proteins. To further reduce the risk of a person's immune system 
rejecting the islets as foreign, physicians might transplant pig islets 
enclosed in a capsule that permits insulin to seep out but blocks immune cells 
from attacking the foreign tissue.

"Although pig islets work beautifully in rodents, there are many hurdles before 
they can be used safely in humans," notes Susan Bonner-Weir of Harvard 
University's Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston.

 Other researchers are attempting to produce large quantities of 
insulin-producing cells in the laboratory. Normal human beta cells can grow in 
test tubes, but not indefinitely. Cultures of beta cells that have been 
manipulated to keep growing usually don't produce insulin. To get a steady 
supply of cells suitable for transplant, Fred Levine of the University of 
California, San Diego Cancer Center added genes that encourage unlimited cell 
growth and others that permit insulin production.

 Diabetic mice given the cells have survived without extra insulin, Levine 
reported at the June diabetes meeting.

 Before such cells can be transplanted into people, Levine and his colleagues 
will need to perform a complicated step to remove the genes that enable the 
beta cells to grow rapidly in culture. Even if the genes were turned off when 
transplanted, there's concern that they would later become activated and cause 
cancer.

"Unless you can get the gene [that enables unrestricted cell growth] out of 
absolutely every cell," warns Furlanetto, "there's a possibility of developing 
insulinoma," a nonmalignant islet tumor that can cause dangerously low blood 
sugar.

 Laboratory production of isolated beta cells raises another question: Are 
these cells as effective as entire islets in controlling diabetes and limiting 
its side effects? The nonbeta cells in human islets also produce proteins-such 
as glucogon or C-reactive protein-that may play some role in preventing 
diabetes-related complications, says Bonner-Weir.

 Therefore, she and her colleagues are trying to culture whole islets. The 
Boston researchers retrieve duct cells from human pancreatic tissue usually 
discarded after scientists have extracted islets for transplantation. They've 
coaxed these cells to become less specialized and then develop into isletlike 
structures that churn out insulin.

 Over the course of a month, these clusters increased their insulin production 
by 10 to 15 fold, Bonner-Weir and her colleagues report in the July 5 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. They estimate that the 
procedure would have generated only about 32,000 new islet cells if they had 
cultured all the duct cells from a pancreas, still far too few for an islet 
transplant for a single patient.

"The initial experiments are very promising," says Furlanetto, "but we need a 
significantly better yield to make it a viable method" of obtaining islets.

 Researchers haven't yet demonstrated the effectiveness of laboratory-grown 
cells at maintaining a patient's blood sugar concentration. It's crucial that 
these cells produce more insulin when exposed to higher concentrations of sugar 
in the blood, as normal islet cells do.

 Bonner-Weir says that the islets she and her team have grown produce more 
insulin in response to higher concentrations of glucose and very little or none 
at the concentrations of blood sugar found in the blood of a person who hasn't 
eaten recently.

 For the present, the risks and limitations of islet-transplant procedures 
require that the vast majority of patients will have to be satisfied with 
taking insulin, Furlanetto cautions.

 The success of the Canadian procedure gives researchers a benchmark to use in 
measuring the effectiveness of lab-grown islets. It also opens the way for 
testing different regimens for inducing a person's immune system to tolerate 
the transplanted islets.

"We could, in the next 5 years, see some really dramatic changes in what we do 
for diabetic patients," especially those who are most severely ill, Furlanetto 
says. "Islet transplantation is a fact. It can be done. Now, you just need to 
perfect it," he says. "That's what the excitement is. This is not a 
pie-in-the-sky idea any longer."


