Brain-Cell Loss Found in Narcolepsy: Science News Online, Sept. 2, 2000

 Brain-Cell Loss Found in Narcolepsy

 John Travis

 For years, the first line in Jerome M. Siegel's research-grant applications 
simply stated that the cause of narcolepsy is unknown. Time for a new opening 
line.

 Following up on last year's discovery of gene mutations that cause forms of 
narcolepsy in dogs and mice (SN: 8/14/99, p. 100), Siegel and other 
investigators have now found that the human brand of this puzzling sleep 
disorder likely stems from the destruction of a small group of brain cells.

"I don't think this degeneration is the cause of all human narcolepsy, but I'll 
bet it [accounts for] 90 percent plus, maybe even 99 percent plus," says Siegel 
of the University of California, Los Angeles. His research team is one of two 
that identified the cell loss in the preserved brains of people who had 
narcolepsy when they were alive.

 Scientists speculate that they one day may cure narcolepsy or reduce its 
effects with drugs mimicking secretions of the missing nerve cells or even with 
brain-cell transplants. "This is really good news for human narcoleptics 
because now the pathway for therapy is clear," says Thomas Kilduff of SRI 
International in Menlo Park, Calif.

 In 1880, French physician Jean Baptiste Edouard Gelineau coined the term 
narcolepsy, from the Greek for sleep attacks, to describe an uncontrollable and 
frequent need to sleep, even at inappropriate times. Today, physicians use 
narcolepsy to describe an often mocked but serious illness whose symptoms 
include sudden bouts of muscle weakness when the person is excited. The 
disorder afflicts an estimated 200,000 people in the United States.

 The new findings on narcolepsy's origins, which appear in the September Nature 
Medicine and the September Neuron, were revealed several weeks ago at a retreat 
in Hawaii organized by Emmanuel Mignot of Stanford University. Mignot has 
managed a colony of narcoleptic dogs for many years and had promised his lab 
members a trip to Hawaii if they found the gene responsible for the disorder.

 Last year, Mignot's group reported that the dogs have a mutation in a gene 
encoding a cell-surface protein, or receptor, that allows nerve cells to 
respond to proteins called hypocretins. At the same time, scientists in Texas, 
who call the same proteins orexins, found that mice lacking the ability to make 
these neurotransmitters develop symptoms similar to narcolepsy.

 Both results triggered a search for mutations in the human genes for the 
hypocretins and their receptors. Mignot's team, led by Juliette Faraco, quickly 
studied 74 narcolpetic people. Unexpectedly, they found just one mutation and 
that was in the rare case of a boy who showed symptoms of narcolepsy as an 
infant.

 The scientists, however, had other evidence that hypocretins are the key to 
the disorder: The neurotransmitters were missing in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
most of the narcoleptics they studied.

 This suggested to Mignot and other researchers that those nerve cells that 
secrete hypocretins (found primarily in the brain's hypothalamus) were missing 
or damaged in narcolepsy. Indeed, when Mignot's colleague Christelle Peyron 
studied brain tissue from two deceased narcoleptics, he was unable to find any 
nerve cells containing the genetic instructions to build the hypocretins.

"It's almost like something came in with a scalpel and removed each of these 
cells," says Mignot, noting that brain cells that would normally be intertwined 
with the hypocretin-secreting cells were unscathed.

 At the Hawaii retreat, Siegel stunned his hosts by reporting almost the same 
findings: His group had also found a reduced number of hypocretin-making cells 
in the brains of deceased narcoleptics.

"In the 25 years I've been in science, it was the most exciting meeting I've 
ever attended," says Kilduff, a former narcolepsy investigator who was part of 
the research team that discovered the hypocretins 2 years ago.

 Siegel's findings do differ somewhat from those of Mignot's team. In the four 
narcoleptic brains his team studied, 5 to 15 percent of the 
hypocretin-containing cells remained in place. Furthermore, Siegel and his 
colleagues documented evidence of gliosis, a proliferation of brain cells 
called glia, at the site of cell loss.

 Gliosis, which is often the result of inflammation within the brain, hints at 
a possible cause of the brain-cell loss in narcolepsy, says Siegel. For more 
than 2 decades, scientists have suspected that the disorder is the result of 
the body's immune system attacking its own tissue.

 The gliosis may be the aftermath of such an autoimmune attack, says Siegel. 
Mignot and his colleagues didn't detect gliosis or other signs of inflammation 
in the two brains they studied, but he agrees that an autoimmune attack is the 
most likely cause of the brain-cell loss.

 Determining what kills the hypocretin-making cells is crucial. Drugs that 
limit inflammation could fight narcolepsy if it indeed is an autoimmune 
disorder. Brain-cell transplants might also help, but if whatever kills the 
hypocretin-secreting cells continues even after all such cells are gone, 
transplants could be a waste of time.

 The first option for treating narcolepsy, predicts Kilduff, will be drugs that 
mimic the missing hypocretins. "To go from discovery of a neurotransmitter 
system ... to understanding the neuropathology of a disease in 30 months is 
probably unprecedented," he adds. "This is certainly the most important 
discovery for narcolepsy since its original description." In fact, Kilduff 
calls the new work the biggest discovery in sleep research in more than half a 
century.


