High-Flying Science, with Strings Attached: Science News Online, Sept. 16, 2000

 High-Flying Science, with Strings Attached In the hands of scientists, a toy 
does serious data gathering

 By Sid Perkins

 Before airplanes and hot-air balloons came along, early meteorological 
research was like child's play on a windy day: Scientists flew kites. In the 
mid-18th century, researchers studied the atmosphere by attaching well-padded 
thermometers to a kite's tether and sending them aloft. A slow-burning fuse 
later released the instruments, which plummeted to Earth. The scientists' big 
challenge was to quickly find the thermometers that survived the fall before 
they warmed up.

 Conceptually, research with kites today remains unchanged-just hang some sort 
of sensor from a kite and send it up. However, modern designs and materials, 
sophisticated electronic instruments, and inexpensive, lightweight cameras 
transform a simple toy into a data-gathering system with broad applications.

 Kites are light, portable, and easy to launch, and their only power 
requirement is a steady wind. They can soar at altitudes too high or in winds 
too strong for tethered balloons, and they can be flown at levels so low that 
aircraft would be impracticable or unsafe. They also can be sent up quickly 
with little support equipment, so they can be used almost anywhere-from desert 
basins to Antarctic ice, from Peruvian rain forests to U.S. corn fields.

 Besides meteorologists, many other scientists have been employing these most 
simple aircraft for answering an ever more diverse range of questions. 
Atmospheric chemists, entomologists, agricultural scientists, geologists, and 
others now rival children in their love of kites.

 To explain complicated atmospheric phenomena such as turbulence, scientists 
need to gather data at specific altitudes for extended periods. So, when 
researchers swept into the flatlands near Wichita, Kans., last October to take 
part in the Cooperative Atmosphere-Surface Exchange Study, some brought along 
rectangular parafoil kites.

 While other researchers mounted instruments on towers to monitor conditions 10 
meters and 60 m off the ground, Ben B. Balsley and his colleagues from the 
University of Colorado at Boulder used their kites to loft sensors several 
hundred meters to measure turbulence there. The researchers worked at night to 
avoid the extra turbulence caused by solar heating. Scientists presented some 
findings of the month-long project in August at the American Meteorological 
Society's 14th Symposium on Boundary Layer and Turbulence in Aspen, Colo.

 Balsley's team measured temperature, wind speed and direction, and humidity at 
five closely spaced altitudes. They harvested data every 10 seconds during 
flights that lasted up to 16 hours. The researchers didn't have to rely on luck 
for their kites to end up in atmosphere layers of interest, such as ones with 
turbulence or wind shear, Balsley says. By monitoring the data as they were 
collected, the researchers could steer their kites directly to those heights.

 Sensors suspended below the kites detected slow, regular cycles of up-and-down 
motion in the air about 400 m off the ground, which confirmed measurements made 
by ground-based laser instruments. Each cycle of motion lasted about 4 minutes. 
During a cycle, the boundary between a lower layer of cooler, denser air and 
the warmer air above it would slowly rise and fall like a swell on the ocean.

 In less stable conditions, Balsley says, these waves in the atmosphere can 
become large enough to break, just like surf. This mixing helps transfer energy 
and materials-water vapor, other chemicals, and particulates, such as dust, 
smoke, and soot-between the two layers of air.

 More than half a world away from Kansas, scientists with the British Antarctic 
Survey have conducted similar studies of the nighttime atmosphere. There's one 
big difference. At Britain's Halley Station on the Brunt Ice Shelf, the sun 
sets on April 30 and doesn't rise again until mid-August.

 Victoria Auld, a meteorologist who spent winters at Halley Station from 1996 
through 1999, studied the area's boundary between cold and warm air layers. 
Auld says this boundary remains stable during the dark winter months because 
there are no hot spots caused by solar heating. To examine the layer, she 
suspended sensors about 10 m beneath a rokakku kite, a hexagonal Japanese 
design that flies steadily even in light winds.

 Some of her 60 kite flights over the 4 years rose to altitudes above 550 m, 
although Auld usually aimed the kite for much lower altitudes where a sodar, a 
sonic version of radar, had detected layers of turbulence and wind shear. In 
flights that typically lasted an hour or so, sensors measured altitude, 
temperature, and wind speed and direction.

 These data, currently being analyzed by the Antarctic survey researchers, will 
help Auld and others understand how turbulence affects the amount of heat 
transferred across the boundary layer. This, in turn, may provide scientists 
with a better understanding of variations in the Antarctic climate and indicate 
how those changes might link to much larger climate patterns.

 Beyond turbulence, mixing, and other physical phenomena in the atmosphere, 
Balsley says there's plenty of atmospheric chemistry that kites can help 
unravel. He's collaborated on various projects with John Birks, a chemist also 
at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and others to monitor atmospheric 
chemistry from Greenland to Peru.

 Technology is making the job ever easier. In the early 1990s, Birks and his 
colleagues sent up flasks to collect air, which was later analyzed in a lab. 
Now, sophisticated electronic instruments can directly monitor ozone, carbon 
dioxide, water vapor, and other chemicals in the atmosphere and transmit the 
data to researchers on the ground.

 Also, the scientists can now use a motorized tram that rides up and down the 
kite's tether to carry the instruments to specific altitudes, instead of 
winching the kite in and out to chase moving layers of turbulence or wind shear.

 In August 1993, for example, Balsley, Birks, and their colleagues used kites 
to examine ozone levels over Cape Sable Island, which is near the southern tip 
of Nova Scotia. Sensors showed that ozone appeared at ground level in 
concentrations of 20 to 40 parts per billion. At altitudes between 300 and 500 
m, however, the scientists measured similar concentrations during one test but 
90 to 130 ppb 2 days later.

 By checking weather patterns, Birks and his group showed that the air that 
passed over the site during the earlier period had originated over southeastern 
Canada. The scientists were able to trace the later air, with more ozone, back 
to heavily industrialized areas of the northeastern United States.

 In another project, this one in the Peruvian Amazon in 1995, Birks and others 
took measurements revealing low concentrations of ozone over sections of virgin 
rain forest (SN: 8/10/96, p. 93). They also monitored the amount of carbon 
dioxide in the air. They're now conducting similar studies over the forests of 
northern Wisconsin and the Great Plains of Kansas and Oklahoma.

 Kites provide surveillance of not only airborne chemicals but also the 
behavior of aerial creatures, such as the feeding frenzies of Mexican 
free-tailed bats. These bats, which migrate to their breeding caves in Texas 
each spring, serve as a brown, fuzzy 100-million-member Border Patrol that 
consumes about 2 million pounds of insects in a single night.

 In the summer of 1997, researchers launched parafoil kites into the nighttime 
sky. Radiomicrophones were suspended beneath the kites at three different 
locations, each separated by 300 meters. This enabled the scientists to 
simultaneously eavesdrop at different altitudes.

 Previous research with microphones suspended from free-floating balloons had 
revealed bats foraging at altitudes up to 750 meters, and ground-based radar 
had shown some bats and insects flying at heights approaching 3,000 m.

"Most people don't appreciate that insects fly that high or that bats feed on 
them there," says Gary F. McCracken, a professor of ecology at the University 
of Tennessee at Knoxville.

"The agricultural implications are pretty amazing," he adds. Beginning in early 
June each year, billions of corn earworms, tobacco budworms, and cabbage 
loopers catch prevailing winds that assist their migration from the lower Rio 
Grande Valley into south central Texas. There they and their progeny cause more 
than $1 billion in crop losses each year.

 McCracken has collected several hundred hours of bat calls, at altitudes up to 
1,200 m, as the animals navigate, search for insects, and home in their meals 
during so-called feeding buzzes.

 McCracken describes the kite-borne microphones as "spectacularly successful in 
monitoring the level of bat activity." The bats were usually much more active 
in predawn hours than they were late in the evening, he says. The microphones 
often detected hundreds of calls and dozens of feeding buzzes per minute at 
altitudes of 400 to 600 m.

 Recordings also revealed that the high-altitude calls of the bats were, in 
McCracken's words, "interestingly different" from calls recorded at lower 
altitudes. The navigational chirps were frequently more than 20 milliseconds in 
length and were typically spaced more than 350 ms apart. This interval is 
longer than that usually measured at low altitudes. McCracken says that the 
high-flying bats may change their calls because they don't have to avoid trees 
and other obstacles they encounter near the ground.

 In a ground-based, companion research project, the researchers are also 
analyzing DNA from bat guano to identify just what insects the bats are eating.

 In addition to kites' value for getting data about the atmosphere and its 
inhabitants, they also serve as platforms for looking downward. In the late 
19th and early 20th centuries, kite-based aerial photography was commonly used 
for such purposes as military reconnaissance and disaster assessment.

 Researchers gradually abandoned the kite in favor of airplanes, but they have 
recently rediscovered it as a versatile, low-cost method of acquiring images.

 Such photos can be either a supplement to satellite imagery or a source of 
low-altitude, high-resolution mapping data.

 For example, Kansas scientists recently used photos from kite borne cameras to 
show that interpreters of Landsat satellite images probably underestimated the 
amount of leaf coverage in the forests near Fort Leavenworth.

 Pictures taken from kites showed that the trees completely covered the ground 
when viewed from directly above, says Donald A. Distler, a biologist at Wichita 
State University. These images revealed that the taller trees were casting 
shadows on shorter ones. That lowered the amount of radiation reflected up to 
the imaging satellite, leading to the underestimate of foliage. This shows that 
corroboration of satellite data, using kites or other means, ought to be 
routine, Distler says.

 He and his colleagues also have used kites to help map the intricate tapestry 
of erosion channels and potholes in a group of streams at a natural history 
reservation in south central Kansas. After scanning into computers more than 40 
overlapping photos taken from kites, the researchers assembled a detailed map 
of the channel system.

 Distler says that previous attempts to map this area from the ground or from 
conventional aerial photos had been unsuccessful because the streams' geometry 
is so complex and thick, brushy vegetation covers the entire area.

 Kites can be indispensable sources of high-resolution aerial photos for all 
sorts of investigations, says James S. Aber, professor of earth science at 
Emporia State University in Emporia, Kan. Such images can be used to map 
archeological sites or to inexpensively monitor areas where erosion, 
sedimentation, deforestation, or construction are rapidly changing the 
landscape, he notes.

 For instance, Aber has traveled to Poland, where there are no high-quality 
aerial photographs of many parts of the country. Where photos are available, 
they're typically more than 10 years old.

 With a Polish colleague, Aber traveled the countryside to demonstrate that 
with a minimal investment-about $1,000 for a kite and camera gear and about 
$100 in travel costs-a two-person team could photograph a variety of sites 
within a few days. The resulting bargain imagery, which covers small areas in 
great detail, ought to complement higher altitude, more expensive satellite 
imagery that typically covers more area in less detail, Aber says.

 The ascent of kites as data-gathering tools continues as innovative scientists 
find new ways that the airborne platforms can help them acquire information. As 
more researchers discover the advantages of using these toys with a high-tech 
edge, they gladly become members of a select group who smile when their 
colleagues tell them to go fly a kite.


