Through the Looking Glass: Science News Online, Sept. 9, 2000

 Through the Looking Glass Reflections on a mirror universe

 By Ron Cowen

 There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your 
philosophy.

 Rabindra N. Mohapatra's office is spilling over with stuff. Crowding his 
narrow room at the University of Maryland in College Park are stacks of physics 
journals, books, and research papers, some of them overflowing the bookshelves 
and strewn along a metal desk.

 At least, that's the material you can see. According to an otherworldly idea 
that Mohapatra and a few other physicists now entertain, his crowded office and 
the cosmos at large are far more stuffed than they appear. These scientists 
argue that nothing less than an entire universe of shadow matter, made of 
particles nearly identical to neutrons, protons, and electrons, shares our 
space. We just can't tell it's there.

 Welcome to the mirror world, in which every particle in the known universe 
could have a counterpart. This cosmos would hold mirror planets, mirror stars, 
and even mirror life.

 The concept may sound as fantastic as the world that Lewis Carroll's Alice 
encountered through the looking glass. But proponents of the mirror world, a 
notion that dates back to the 1950s, say its existence would solve a number of 
puzzles in physics and cosmology.

 In their model of such a world, Robert Foot, Raymond R. Volkas, and Henry Lew 
of the University of Melbourne in Australia propose that particles would have 
exactly the same mass as their visible-world counterparts. In another version, 
suggested by Mohapatra and Vigdor L. Teplitz of Southern Methodist University 
in Dallas, mirror particles would dwarf their more familiar counterparts, 
weighing in as behemoths 15 to 20 times as massive.

 In either of these mirror worlds, particles would interact with each other by 
mirror forces. The same gravity operating in the visible universe would exert 
its tug in the mirror world, but nature's other three forces-the strong, the 
weak, and the electromagnetic-wouldn't be exactly the same. In their own style, 
they would govern how mirror particles interact and build chunks of mirror 
matter. Since our eyes can't see mirror photons, however, all of this would 
remain invisible.

 Because gravity straddles the boundary between the visible and mirror worlds, 
it opens a route for detecting the mirror universe. Mirror matter would betray 
its presence by exerting a gravitational attraction on the visible world.

 This testability is what elevates the idea of a mirror world from mere science 
fantasy to a bona fide scientific theory. It may also shed new light on a 
problem that scientists have been grappling with for years.

 For decades, cosmologists have admitted that visible types of matter simply 
can't explain how cosmic structure arose. They've reluctantly concluded that 
there's more to the cosmos than meets the eye.

 For one thing, ordinary matter can't clump fast enough to have produced 
gargantuan clusters of galaxies seen in the universe today (SN: 8/12/00, p. 
104). So, astronomers have envisioned that some kind of exotic invisible matter 
plays the leading role in the mystery of cosmic gravitation.

 Clumps of this so-called dark matter would then have attracted the visible 
matter that formed the universe's structure now mapped by astronomers. 
Theorists say this dark matter comprises a whopping 90 percent or more of the 
mass of the universe.

 On a much smaller scale, astronomers face another puzzle that dark matter 
could solve. In the late 1970s, astronomers began to find that beyond the 
innermost regions of spiral galaxies, the speed with which stars rotate remains 
the same. It's as if a spot on the outside of an old vinyl LP were rotating at 
the same speed as one on a groove in the middle.

 A simple explanation falls into place, astronomers came to realize, if the 
starlit galaxies we observe are but tiny jewels awash in a great ocean of dark 
material. Massive halos of dark matter, extending thousands of light-years 
beyond a galaxy's visible outlines, would envelop the galaxy's bright parts and 
drag on its outer stars.

 To populate these halos, astronomers have come up with a zoo of candidates. 
Most are as exotic as the names their inventors have given them: massive 
compact halo objects (MACHOs), weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs), 
axions, neutralinos, and wimpzillas. To date, however, no one has found 
definitive evidence for any of these particles.

 That's because scientists have been searching for answers on the wrong side of 
the looking glass, argue Mohapatra, Foot, and their various collaborators. 
Mirror matter could account for the cosmic conundrums more simply than dark 
matter can.

 For starters, mirror matter would neatly explain away dark matter's 
invisibility since the mirror world can't be seen. Moreover, calculations show 
that mirror matter could easily produce objects that weigh about half the sun's 
mass. That's the expected heft of MACHOs, says Mohapatra.

 In addition, mirror material could have built the cosmic scaffolding necessary 
for galaxies to form, Foot says. The abundance of elements forged in the Big 
Bang suggests that the mirror world would have cooled faster than the visible 
world, he explains. As a consequence, electrons and ions in the mirror world 
would combine into mirror atoms sooner than their counterparts in the visible 
world. This would provide ample time for galaxies and galaxy clusters to form.

 Over the past 6 months, the mirror-world idea has gotten another boost, 
according to Mohapatra. Theorists have uncovered a flaw in their favorite type 
of dark matter, known as cold dark matter. Computer simulations had shown that 
this hypothetical material could rapidly generate large-scale structure in the 
universe. No problem there. But the newest simulations reveal that the cores of 
some of the galaxies produced in this process ought to be denser than 
astronomers' observations of galaxies have revealed. In addition, standard cold 
dark matter in these simulations makes more small galaxies than astronomers see.

 To circumvent the mismatches, some theorists suggested that particles of cold 
dark matter interact with each other more strongly than astronomers had 
proposed. If cold dark matter were more sociable, to the point where its 
particles form a dilute gas that would slightly resist gravity, it could 
produce galaxies of lower density.

 That's an ad hoc solution, Mohapatra maintains. He suggests that a stronger 
explanation can emerge from the mirror world because mirror particles, by 
definition, interact with each other just as much as their counterparts in the 
visible world.

 Not surprisingly, dark matter aficionados are skeptical. "Mirror matter is a 
much less certain prospect and less original" than other explanations for the 
flaw in dark matter theory, says Paul J. Steinhardt of Princeton University. He 
and David N. Spergel, also at Princeton, have written several papers proposing 
that dark matter particles interact strongly. Steinhardt says that summoning 
mirror matter isn't the most promising way to solve dark matter's problems.

 Another set of cosmic riddles may provide the strongest argument for mirror 
matter, assert Foot and Volkas. These puzzles all concern neutrinos, a ghostly 
class of subatomic particles that rarely interact with matter. Most neutrinos 
pass through the Earth unimpeded and escape detection.

 Neutrinos come in three types: electron, muon, and tau. What's more, recent 
evidence that neutrinos have a small amount of mass leads to the likelihood 
that the different neutrino types transform from one to another (SN: 1/30/99, 
p. 76).

 Consider the electron neutrino. Nuclear reactions deep in the sun create a 
steady supply of them, which astronomers have detected since the 1960s. 
However, solar physicists have faced a long-standing problem. The number of 
electron neutrinos detected is about half the predicted quantity.

 Part of the deficit may arise because some of the electron neutrinos have 
transformed into mirror electron neutrinos, suggest Foot and Mohapatra. So long 
as they remain mirror neutrinos, they can't be detected.

 Muon neutrinos pose a similar puzzle. These particles rain down on Earth when 
ultrahigh-energy protons and other cosmic rays smash into atoms in the upper 
atmosphere. Several experiments suggest there's a shortfall of muon neutrinos 
compared with the number predicted by theory. To account for the shortfall, 
Foot conjectures that some muon neutrinos may transform into tau neutrinos-as 
many scientists already expect. But some muon neutrinos may also have 
transformed into mirror muon neutrinos, he suggests.

 The same scenario suggests a way to search for mirror stars, Foot adds. 
Suppose a mirror star explodes to become a supernova. Just as a supernova in 
the visible world emits a burst of neutrinos, a mirror supernova would emit a 
burst of mirror neutrinos. If neutrinos can oscillate between the mirror world 
and the visible world, then some of the mirror neutrinos will emerge from their 
looking glass world into ours. The mirror supernova itself couldn't be seen, 
but a mysterious burst of neutrinos, far from any visible star, could signify 
the explosion of a mirror star.

 Researchers are devising a new experiment to search for signs of mirror 
matter. The test hinges on the true nature of positronium. This union of two 
elementary particles resembles a hydrogen atom-with a crucial difference. 
Instead of an electron orbiting a proton, an electron orbits a positron, its 
antimatter counterpart. Antimatter, first detected in the 1930s, has the same 
mass as but the opposite charge of ordinary matter.

 If the spin of the positron and the spin of the electron point in the same 
direction, the material is known as orthopositronium. Unlike a stable hydrogen 
atom, orthopositronium lasts only for about 140 nanoseconds, before its 
components annihilate each other in a burst of pure energy.

 In 1986, Nobel laureate Sheldon L. Glashow of Harvard University suggested 
that orthopositronium could provide a sensitive way to search for the mirror 
universe. According to Glashow, ordinary photons may actually interact ever so 
slightly with mirror photons. And because electrons so readily interact with 
photons as well, small amounts of laboratory-made orthopositronium might 
transform into its looking glass counterpart, mirror orthopositronium. By the 
same token, the mirror form would sometimes convert into the ordinary version.

 In 1990, researchers at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor measured the 
lifetime of orthopositronium and found that it was slightly shorter than 
predicted by theory. In the May 14 Physics Letters B, Foot and Sergei N. 
Gninenko of CERN, a particle- physics laboratory in Geneva, suggest that mirror 
orthopositronium could explain the discrepancy. If orthopositronium decays 
while in its mirror form, it would go undetected, and that could account for 
the shorter lifetime measurements.

 Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof. Previous experiments weren't 
sensitive enough to confirm or refute the mirror-matter explanation, Foot and 
Gninenko say.

 To test the claim, Gninenko has proposed a new experiment at CERN. He and his 
colleagues would confine orthopositronium to a sensitive heat-measuring device, 
called a calorimeter. The device would be under a strict vacuum to isolate its 
contents from collisions with other matter, which could confound the findings. 
Under ordinary conditions, the orthopositronium constituents-an electron and a 
positron-produce a specific amount of energy when they annihilate each other. 
But that energy simply wouldn't be there if the orthopositronium had oscillated 
into its undetectable mirror form.

 The missing energy would amount to about 1 million electron volts, which is 
twice the rest mass of an electron, and would be a telltale signature of the 
mirror universe, Gninenko asserts.

 There may be other ways of detecting mirror supernovas, and thereby the mirror 
world, Gninenko and Foot note. During a colossal supernova explosion, pairs of 
mirror electrons and mirror positrons would convert into ordinary electrons and 
positrons. Then, they might annihilate one another, generating bursts of 
visible light. Observers who record a brilliant, localized glow in the heavens 
without being able to identify the source may have found a mirror supernova.

 Similarly, a chunk of mirror matter, such as a mirror asteroid, could have a 
dramatic impact if it collides with Earth. Because it's made of mirror 
particles, the asteroid wouldn't burn up in Earth's atmosphere. It still could 
wreak havoc when it struck Earth's surface, however, if mirror photons 
transform into ordinary ones. In that case, the collision would generate a huge 
release of energy with nary a trace of a crater.

 While it's fun to speculate about a mirror world, "it's up to experiment in 
the long run" to prove its existence, says Foot. "I will believe it when there 
is enough evidence."

 Restoring symmetry: They do it with mirrors

 Although mirror matter may solve several problems in astrophysics, the teams 
examining that concept at the University of Maryland and the University of 
Melbourne say they were motivated by an even deeper riddle.

 Most interactions in physics appear the same when reflected in a mirror. But 
not all. When an atom emits a neutrino, the neutrino always spins in the same 
direction-counterclockwise. Reflected in a mirror, however, the neutrino would 
always spin clockwise.

 Just by looking at the spin of a neutrino, Lewis Carroll's Alice would know 
immediately whether she'd stepped into the looking glass world. In contrast, 
electrons can spin in both directions. So, the spin of an electron wouldn't 
give Alice any clue to what world she was in.

 The selective spin of neutrinos destroyed the symmetry that physicists had 
taken for granted. Physics would not necessarily be the same in a mirror world. 
That discovery of asymmetry, suggested in 1956 by Tsung Dao Lee and Chen Ning 
Yang, won them the Nobel Prize in Physics just a year later.

"Many physicists were upset by the asymmetry," recalled Robert Adair of Yale 
University in the February 1988 Scientific American. "I remember feeling that I 
no longer could hold anything I knew as being certain."

 In their 1956 journal article, Lee and Yang noted that the symmetry could be 
restored if a parallel universe existed in which neutrinos rotated in the 
opposite sense-clockwise-to that in our world. Considered together, the two 
worlds would restore the symmetry that appears to be lacking in each.


