Male Choice: Science News Online, Sept. 30, 2000

 Male Choice The search for new contraceptives for men

 By Damaris Christensen

 In his memoirs, legendary 18th-century lover Giacomo Casanova recommended the 
use of condoms-which he called "English riding coats"-to protect against 
unwanted pregnancies.

 Even with all that's changed in the world, today's Casanovas have few more 
contraceptive choices for themselves than the original did. It's primarily 
abstinence, withdrawal, or condoms for men, whether they have many partners or 
just one. A surgical approach to contraception for men, vasectomy, which became 
available in the early part of the 20th century, presents the only notable 
addition.

 In contrast, the number of contraceptive choices available to women has 
dramatically increased during this century, especially forms of so-called 
hormonal contraception such as birth control pills.

"We think there's a need for more alternatives for men," says Robert Spirtas of 
the Contraception and Reproductive Health Branch of the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, Md. "Some women are 
uncomfortable with or can't take hormonal contraception. At the same time, 
recent research has shown that many men in committed relationships would be 
willing to take a contraceptive pill."

 Although the contraceptive gender gap rests partly on financial concerns, 
biology also contributes, says Frances Hayes of Massachusetts General Hospital 
in Boston. Because of potential liability issues and the safe and effective 
female contraceptives, many drug companies have assumed that male 
contraceptives are unwise or unnecessary, she says. Moreover, men are 
constantly fertile, making it more difficult to design a contraceptive for them 
than for women, who are fertile for only a short time each month.

 In the past few years, however, two European pharmaceutical companies and two 
large private foundations have begun to investigate male contraceptives. 
Federal agencies are also now interested in stimulating such research, says 
Spirtas.

"There has been a groundswell of interest" in research on male contraceptives, 
agrees John K. Amory of the University of Washington in Seattle. "More 
candidate compounds are being introduced, and there is real optimism that male 
hormonal contraception will soon be available commercially."

 Most researchers agree that the ideal male contraceptive would be safe, 
effective, and reversible. In addition, it would be self-administered with 
little training and require neither elaborate surgical procedures nor prolonged 
periods of abstinence before becoming effective.

 Duplicating in men the success of the female birth control pill isn't simple. 
"Female mammals turn off ovulation during pregnancy and lactation, and you can 
imitate that process," says Malcolm Potts of the University of California, 
Berkeley. "There's no analogous system to interrupt in the male."

 Following the lead of the female pill, which alters concentrations of hormones 
coursing through a woman's blood and reproductive organs, groups trying to 
develop a male "pill" have tested drugs that block men's circulating hormones.

 One approach is to give a man doses of testosterone that result in blood 
concentrations that are significantly higher than normal. This causes his 
pituitary gland to slow the release of two hormones that produce the signals 
necessary for sperm development. These two hormones-follicle stimulating 
hormone, or FSH, and luteinizing hormone, or LH-act in a feedback loop to 
maintain normal concentrations of testosterone in a man's blood.

 Although some testosterone produced in the testes makes its way into the 
blood, it's the testosterone within the testes that's critical for sperm 
formation.

 A large, international trial sponsored by the Geneva-based World Health 
Organization was completed about 5 years ago. Men received weekly injections of 
testosterone over 2 years. The treatment was about 97 percent effective in 
preventing pregnancy among 400 couples. This success rate is higher than that 
of condoms but not quite as good as that of the female birth control pill.

 In some men, however, the high dose of testosterone needed to exert a 
contraceptive effect triggered acne and a slight weight gain and lowered the 
concentration of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), the heart-protecting 
cholesterol, in the blood.

 Most researchers have turned to other reproductive hormones called progestins 
to block testosterone production in the testes-and thus sperm formation. 
Success with this method, however, leads to a drop in testosterone 
concentrations in the blood. To prevent the resulting side effects-such as loss 
of libido-researchers have given men in the contraceptive trials low doses of 
testosterone, which maintain normal blood concentrations of the hormone.

 Last year, a team of British researchers reported in the January Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism a test in which 24 men took daily pills 
containing the progestin desogestrel and wore a testosterone-delivering skin 
patch. After 24 weeks, 23 of these volunteers had suppressed their sperm 
production to below 3 million sperm per milliliter of ejaculate, a count that 
most researchers consider incapable of producing a pregnancy.

 Similarly, in the July Human Reproduction this year, a Scottish team reported 
that after 8 weeks, up to 70 percent of men taking desogestrel and testosterone 
had sperm counts in the infertile range. These men took desogestrel pills and 
received the testosterone from pellets implanted under their skin. Side effects 
were minimal, the team reported.

 The results are "certainly very encouraging," says lead researcher David T. 
Baird of the University of Edinburgh. "We could have a male pill within 5 
years."

 In a follow-up study reported this month at the World Congress of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology in Washington, D.C., 30 men in Edinburgh and 36 in Shanghai took 
pills containing either 150 micrograms or 300 micrograms of desorgestrel daily 
and were given injections of 200 micrograms of testosterone in time-release 
pellets every 12 weeks.

 After 16 weeks, no men taking the higher dose of desorgestrel had detectable 
sperm production. After 24 weeks of the lower dose, 85 percent of the Scottish 
men made no sperm, compared with 61 percent of the Chinese men. This is the 
first large study to demonstrate complete sperm suppression in two different 
ethnic groups, according to Richard Anderson, also of the University of 
Edinburgh.

 Other researchers are replacing the progestins in such experiments with drugs 
that block the action of a hormone known as gonadotropin releasing hormone, or 
GnRH. Combined with testosterone, such GnRH blockers inhibit sperm production 
faster than testosterone alone or progestin-testosterone combinations do. 
Because the currently available GnRH blockers are expensive and must be 
injected into the fatty tissue just below the skin, scientists are developing a 
GnRH blocker that men can take orally, Amory notes. "This compound will require 
further testing, but it's an exciting candidate for future contraceptive 
trials," he says.

 All hormonal contraceptives for men that rely on testosterone face some 
disadvantages. Few researchers have had any success getting testosterone into 
the blood stream via a pill because the digestive system quickly breaks down 
the hormone and toxic byproducts can accumulate in the liver. Also, there's 
concern that hormonal contraceptives may increase a man's risk of prostate 
cancer.

 Researchers say they might be able to improve hormonal contraceptives by 
replacing testosterone in their formulations with so-called designer hormones, 
chemicals that have the effect of the hormone on some organs but don't affect 
others (SN: 10/16/99, p. 252). The New York-based Population Council is 
beginning trials of such a testosterone analogue, called 7 
alpha-methyl-19-nortestosterone. In rats, the compound doesn't stimulate 
prostate growth, though it does block sperm production.

 A disadvantage of any contraceptive that reduces testosterone in the testes is 
that it may take months to become truly effective and just as long to wear off 
when treatment ends. Blocking testosterone prevents only the initial step of 
sperm development, the release of precursor cells in the hundreds of 
seminiferous tubules of the testes. But sperm in one tubule are at a different 
stage of development than in the next, and after precursor release, sperm 
development is independent of testosterone. From start to finish-in the 
seminiferous tubules and then in the epididymis, a coiled tube just outside the 
testes-a cycle of sperm production takes about 72 days.

 While some scientists try to perfect methods of blocking sperm production by 
administering hormones, others predict that contraceptive compounds that act 
directly on sperm growth, maturation, and function could provide a better 
alternative. Agents that could disrupt the late stages of sperm development 
would be effective faster than testosterone-blocking contraceptives, and 
presumably their contraceptive effect could be reversed more quickly. Some of 
these contraceptives might be able to block sperm function without disturbing 
testosterone production, thus avoiding side effects.

 In September 1999, the National Institutes of Health sponsored a workshop that 
examined potential new targets for male contraceptives. Speakers pointed out 
that interfering with cellular processes that participate only in sperm 
development is the best way to develop contraceptives.

 Researchers are investigating ways to interfere with the effects of FSH and LH 
on sperm precursor cells without inhibiting the production of testosterone in 
the testes. Studies in rats suggest that maturing sperm cells die quickly when 
the hormones disappear, says Ronald Swerdloff of the Harbor-UCLA Medical Center 
in Los Angeles. When the hormones return, sperm development begins again. A 
hormone known as inhibin and perhaps antibodies directed at FSH can selectively 
inhibit FSH action in the testes.

 Another strategy focuses on meiosis. In this process, a cell divides to become 
two eggs or two sperm, each with only a single set of chromosomes instead of 
the usual double set. Researchers working with mice have identified two 
proteins that are involved in this process but not in normal cell division. 
Interfering with their action may have contraceptive action without side 
effects.

 Other opportunities for contraceptive activity arise from compounds that 
induce premature release of sperm from the testes to the epididymis. A chemical 
known as lonidamine prevents developing sperm from staying attached to the 
cells lining the seminiferous tubule and causes infertility in rats and men, 
says the Population Council's C. Yan Cheng. However, lonidamine's side 
effects-it can damage the kidneys-preclude its use as a contraceptive, he says.

 He and his colleagues have developed two less toxic compounds that share the 
core structure of lonidamine, Cheng reported in June at the Endocrine Society 
meeting in Toronto. Rats given the drugs orally become infertile, with no signs 
of side effects, and their fertility returns once the drugs are discontinued, 
he says.

 Other possibilities for fast-acting and easily reversed contraceptives come 
from compounds known to interfere with chemicals that initiate the movement of 
sperm tails or that allow sperm to penetrate the coverings of the egg.

 Another possible approach is called immunocontraception. Scientists propose 
that either women or men can be immunized against proteins vital to fertility. 
The Population Council is beginning trials in men of a compound that induces 
the immune system to form antibodies against GnRH. Studies in male rats and 
rabbits have shown that this compound is effective as a reversible 
contraceptive and has few side effects.

 In a recent survey of about 1,800 men living in Edinburgh, Shanghai, Hong 
Kong, and Cape Town, South Africa, up to 83 percent said they would use a male 
contraceptive pill. Overall, pills were more acceptable than injectable or 
implantable contraceptives, the researchers reported in the March Human 
Reproduction.

 Acceptability isn't the only problem. Money and politics have always been 
issues in fertility research. "Contraception is sometimes considered risky by 
companies in the wake of lawsuits" over female methods of contraception, says 
Amory. He adds, "Government funding for such research is opposed by some 
religious and voter groups."

 Although governments, nonprofit organizations, and pharmaceutical companies 
are devoting more funding to male contraceptives than ever before, it's hard to 
predict when a birth control pill will be available for men. "Each time a new 
paper [on male contraceptives] comes out, it makes headlines," says Hayes.

 But the headlines don't necessarily translate into advances that make hormonal 
contraceptives for men acceptable as well as effective, she says. Compliance 
with hormonal regimens is a problem. Even in clinical studies, men sometimes 
find the complicated schedule of pills and patches or injections difficult to 
handle, Hayes says.

"We know hormonal regimens work" to stop men's sperm production, says 
Swerdloff. "Now, we're trying to decide what's the best formulation to get the 
most effective and user-friendly contraceptives. People are beginning to feel 
more comfortable with male contraceptives. Politically, it's easier to fund 
[government] research. And pharmaceutical companies are beginning to believe 
this will generate revenue."

 Whether the wedding of the new scientific understanding of the male 
reproductive system and growing research-funding opportunities will produce an 
acceptable, practical male contraceptive is still unclear. If it succeeds, many 
couples will celebrate the new arrival.


