One-molecule chemistry gets big reaction: Science News Online, Sept. 30, 2000

 One-molecule chemistry gets big reaction

 Peter Weiss

 Scientists have long wanted to carry out chemical reactions one molecule at a 
time. In doing so, they imagined, they would probe the most intimate details of 
those transformations. Moreover, they've hoped they might find ways to create 
novel compounds that are impossible to make by conventional means. They also 
have anticipated assembling molecules that might be useful as nanometer-scale 
devices, they say.

 Now, for the first time, researchers have duplicated with individual molecules 
the full sequence of steps in a widely used chemical reaction. What's more, 
they've made a photo album of the molecular makeover as it unfolds.

 Karl-Heinz Rieder, Saw-Wai Hla, and their colleagues at the Free University of 
Berlin have miniaturized a century-old chemical transformation known as the 
Ullman reaction. Laboratories and industry use that process to link two 
iodobenzene molecules, Hla explains. Each contains a six-carbon ring known as a 
phenyl, so a barbell-shaped biphenyl results.

 Normally, the Ullman reaction proceeds in beakers or larger vessels inside 
which copper, a catalyst, blends countless reacting molecules. Heating the 
mixture to 400@C first breaks off the iodobenzenes' iodine atoms and then 
forges links between the phenyl rings left behind. Iterations of this reaction 
can produce multi-ring polymers.

 In its experiment, the Berlin team began with just two molecules of 
iodobenzene. These were placed on a copper surface shaped like a step and 
chilled to 20 kelvins. The researchers then used flows of electrons from the 
sharp tip of a scanning tunneling microscope, or STM, to break up the 
molecules. The tip dragged the fragments around, and its electron bursts 
provided the energy to rejoin the phenyl rings.

 Because the STM is able to sense the electron clouds that protrude from 
individual atoms, the researchers also used the instrument to image each step 
of the reaction. In the end, they checked their work by tugging one ring of the 
biphenyl product and finding that the other followed along.

 To his knowledge, says Phaedon Avouris of IBM's T.J. Watson Research Center in 
Yorktown Heights, N.Y., the new experiment is the first example of "really 
doing chemistry with the STM" rather than just performing part of a reaction.

 In 1995, Avouris and his coworkers used electrons from an STM to selectively 
snip molecular bonds, those between silicon and hydrogen atoms (SN: 6/24/95, p. 
391). Last November at Cornell University, physicists Wilson Ho and Hyojune Lee 
reported the first example of inducing a single atom, iron, and a single 
molecule, carbon monoxide, to bond-again using an STM.

"What's important is that [the German procedure] actually lets us visualize the 
reaction," adds Ho, now at the University of California, Irvine. Moreover, this 
experiment and similar ones that Ho expects to follow will "give us new 
insights into the nature of chemical bonds and how bonds are formed," he says.

 In general, these STM manipulations must take place at extremely low 
temperatures to keep the reactant molecules from randomly hopping around. In 
the new experiment, the deep chill also squelched the thermal energy that 
drives the breaking and reforming of bonds in a conventional, larger-scale 
Ullman reaction. The STM electron bursts provided that energy.

 Now that they have demonstrated molecular manipulation with a familiar 
reaction, the Berlin researchers have set their sights on molecular 
constructions never made before, especially ones that might behave like 
nanometer-scale transistors or other minuscule devices.


