New Images: They Might Be Planets: Science News Online, Oct. 7, 2000

 New Images: They Might Be Planets

 Ron Cowen

 Astronomers have obtained images of a group of objects beyond our solar system 
that, based on their mass alone, could qualify as planets. The faint objects 
lie in a young star cluster, sigma Orionis, 1,200 light-years from Earth in the 
constellation Orion.

 Several recent studies suggest that these faint, cool bodies may be rampant 
throughout the galaxy. Previous evidence for extrasolar planets has been 
indirect, from the wobble they induce on their parent star (SN: 8/5/00, p. 84).

 If the newly found objects are indeed planets, they're worlds apart from those 
in our solar system, report Maria Rosa Zapatero Osorio of the Instituto de 
Astrofisica de Canarias in Tenerife, Spain, and her collaborators in the Oct. 6 
Science. The objects are much heavier and younger than the sun's nine planets. 
Moreover, they roam freely through the star cluster rather than orbiting a 
parent star.

 That's why many astronomers argue that the newly found bodies are not planets 
at all but an unusually low-mass version of a failed star called a brown dwarf.

 According to the standard theory, brown dwarfs arise as stars do-from the 
collapse of vast clumps of cold gas and dust. Planets, in contrast, are thought 
to condense later, from the disks of material that swaddle newborn stars.

"I think the detections themselves are quite nice," says Alan P. Boss of the 
Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.). "The main problem is that the 
authors have chosen to use the p word," he adds. "I feel strongly that this use 
[of planet] is misleading and will only confuse people."

 Some astronomers, however, rely on mass-rather than location-to distinguish 
brown dwarfs from planets. Although brown dwarfs aren't as heavy as stars and 
can't sustain nuclear fusion at their cores, they're hefty enough at least 13 
times Jupiter's mass, to have burned nuclear fuel briefly. Planets are too 
lightweight to shine this way.

"I would regard objects with less than 13 Jupiter masses as planets," says 
Gibor S. Basri of the University of California, Berkeley. Zapatero Osorio's 
team has "made as good a case as I have seen for 'free-floating planets' having 
been found." Some of the bodies may have once orbited stars but were expelled 
by their parent.

 Zapatero Osorio says her team chose sigma Orionis for its planet hunt because 
the star cluster is nearby, contains little dust, and is no more than 5 million 
years old. Planets are easier to detect when they're young, and knowing the age 
and distance of the cluster made it easier to calculate the true brightness and 
mass of objects that lie within it.

 In near-infrared and visible-light images, the team spied 18 reddish objects 
that seemed cool and lightweight enough to be planets. The researchers then 
obtained visible-light spectra for two of the objects and infrared spectra for 
a third. The spectra indicate that the bodies aren't distant quasars, far-off 
galaxies, or reddened stars masquerading as planetlike objects.

 Models suggest that if the cluster is 5 million years old, then the 18 objects 
are between 8 and 15 times the mass of Jupiter. Most of the bodies would weigh 
less than 13 Jupiters. If the cluster is as young as 1 million years, then all 
18 of the objects would weigh less than this cutoff, the team finds.

 Boss says he prefers to call these low-mass objects "sub-brown dwarf stars." 
His calculations show that a cloud of gas and dust could spawn brown dwarfs 
only three times the mass of Jupiter.

 Over the next 10 million years, an astronomically brief interval, the sigma 
Orionis cluster could easily expel these free-floating objects, says Zapatero 
Osorio. If the objects are as abundant in other clusters, the number of 
free-floaters dispersed through the Milky Way could rival the number of stars. 
"We may be surrounded by these objects," she says, but because they would cool 
as they grow older, they would be difficult to see.

 Other studies support that intriguing notion. When English astronomers Philip 
W. Lucas of the University of Hertfordshire in Hatfield and Patrick F. Roche of 
the University of Oxford examined another star cluster, Orion's Trapezium, they 
found hints of 13 free-floaters with planetlike masses. They reported their 
observations in the June 1 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.

 Recently, Joan R. Najita of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories in 
Tucson and her colleagues took a census of brown dwarfs in the star cluster IC 
348 and found that the lower-weight dwarfs greatly outnumber the heavier ones, 
they report in the Oct. 1 Astrophysical Journal. She says that although the 
census didn't include objects weighing less than 13 times Jupiter's mass, her 
team's study provides "a strong hint that planetary-mass objects would exist in 
reasonable number as free-floaters."

"The definition of a planet has changed with time as our knowledge in science 
has improved," says Zapatero Osorio. "We may have to revise this definition 
just as our ancestors did."


