Titanium makes move toward mainstream: Science News Online, Sept. 23, 2000

 Titanium makes move toward mainstream

 Jessica Gorman

 Aeronautical engineers use titanium because it's strong, lightweight, and 
corrosion-resistant. Golfers like titanium in their clubs for similar reasons. 
So why doesn't everyone drive a car made of this supermetal? Sadly, titanium 
possesses one fatal weakness-its cost.

 Now, a novel method for producing titanium could make it more competitive with 
stainless steel, researchers claim. The cheapest form of titanium today costs 
at least several times as much as stainless steel. The new process could make 
as much titanium in a day as the usual method does in a week and could drop its 
price to one-third the current cost, says Derek J. Fray of the University of 
Cambridge in England.

 Titanium's boutique status stems from its production challenges, not its 
availability. Titanium dioxide, familiar as white pigment in paints, is 
abundant in Earth's crust. Yet wrenching titanium from titanium dioxide has 
traditionally required a difficult, time-consuming chemical process, that also 
suffers from the disadvantage of using and producing corrosive and volatile 
substances.

 As an alternative, researchers have sought to use electric current to obtain 
titanium. In the 1880s, scientists developed just such an electricity-based 
extraction method for aluminum. The price of aluminum subsequently fell so much 
that people could wrap sandwiches with it.

 Until now, however, electrochemical production of titanium hasn't offered much 
benefit over the strictly chemical method, says Fray. In the new approach, 
solid pellets of titanium dioxide are fed directly into liquid calcium 
chloride. Then, an electrical current separates the oxygen from the pellets, 
leaving behind solid titanium metal, Fray's team reports in the Sept. 21 Nature.

 Preliminary experiments with a scaled-up process suggest that the same 
procedure can produce kilograms of titanium, the researchers add.

"I think it looks extremely promising and potentially could result in a 
significant reduction in the price," comments Harvey M. Flower of the Imperial 
College of Science, Technology and Medicine in London. "And that would 
dramatically affect the potential market for titanium."

 One of the largest potential uses is in car manufacture, notes George Zheng 
Chen, a coauthor of the report and a materials chemist at Cambridge. Replacing 
steel car parts with titanium would lower a vehicle's weight, reducing both 
fuel use and emissions, he says.


