Breaking the Law: Science News Online, Oct. 7, 2000

 Breaking the Law Can quantum mechanics + thermodynamics = perpetual motion?

 By Peter Weiss

 Hopeful inventors have for centuries tried to create machines that would run 
forever: gizmos such as wheels that turn unceasingly with no motor to drive 
them and engines that endlessly exploit the heat in the oceans to power ships.

 The consequences of devising such perpetual motion machines would be wondrous 
because these tools would unleash energy without consuming fuel.

 Despite the machines' appeal, no one has ever succeeded in making one. 
Physicists attribute that miserable track record to the fact that the devices 
would defy fundamental laws of thermodynamics. Given that scientific 
lawlessness, most researchers don't give perpetual motion half a thought.

 Recently, however, several groups of scientists have taken a fresh look at the 
concept. They propose that the peculiarities of quantum mechanics permit what 
seem to be violations of one of the fundamental laws-at least on a microscopic 
scale.

 Quantum theory, which stands out already for its bizarre consequences, 
describes the behavior of extremely small objects such as atoms and other 
elementary particles. If verified, the new findings in the realm of quantum 
thermodynamics might indicate that a certain class of perpetual motion machines 
is, in fact, possible.

 Not surprisingly, these new proposals are getting a chilly reception from many 
physicists, even though one of the three recent theoretical reports appeared in 
the highly regarded journal Physical Review Letters ( PRL). Skeptics note, for 
example, that the innovative arguments in favor of perpetual motion have yet to 
be put to the test in working devices. They also say that the theory behind the 
claim may have subtle, but fatal, flaws.

 Scientists divide perpetual motion schemes into two categories depending on 
whether they violate the first or second law of thermodynamics.

 The first law says that energy can't be created or destroyed.

 The second law clamps a strong constraint on physical devices that do useful 
work by tapping the energy of something hot, like steam or burning fuel. The 
law requires that some energy must flow from one heat source to something else 
at a lower temperature. For example, a car engine must cough its exhaust heat 
into a cooler environment, not a hotter one. The take-home message of the 
second law is that not all of the heat source's energy can go into doing work. 
Some must be wasted.

 Perpetual motion schemes that rely on violations of the first law continue to 
be booed off stage by the scientific establishment. "This is something we don't 
dare to do," says theorist Theo M. Nieuwenhuizen of the University of Amsterdam.

 Nevertheless, he adds, when he and a colleague probed the second law, they 
uncovered a route to feasible perpetual motion. Nieuwenhuizen and Armen E. 
Allahverdyan of CEA/Saclay in Gif-sur-Yvette, France, which is outside Paris, 
describe their work in the Aug. 28 PRL.

 Testing the boundaries of the second law has been a sport for many physics 
luminaries including the late Richard P. Feynman. Each claim of a phenomenon 
that violates that law has stirred animated debate, and none has held up to 
scrutiny.

 James Clerk Maxwell, the 19th-century scientific giant who came up with the 
theory of electromagnetism, offered a famous second-law challenge in 1867. He 
imagined a tiny being, a "demon," who could observe and manipulate individual 
molecules and, by doing so, overthrow the second law (SN: 6/16/90, p. 378).

 Here's how: The imp could sit inside a gas-filled box that was divided by a 
partition with a small door in it. Because of random thermal fluctuations, some 
molecules in the gas would have more kinetic energy than others. The demon 
would open the door only to let the fastest molecules-those with the greatest 
kinetic energy-pass to the other side. That would transform what began as a 
uniform-temperature box into two sections at different temperatures-the second 
law's prerequisite for accomplishing useful work, Maxwell reasoned.

 Likewise, in their PRL report, Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen come to what 
they themselves assess as an "appalling" conclusion: Useful work might emerge 
from a single heat reservoir as if one of Maxwell's demons were at work. 
Although the researchers consider only an abstract mathematical model, they say 
their equations might apply to certain real-world systems of particles, albeit 
ones at a temperature close to absolute zero.

 In each of their perpetual motion scenarios, a minuscule "test particle" 
interacts with a surrounding bath of other particles. Think of a dust speck in 
a droplet of water. Viewed under a microscope, the speck jiggles incessantly as 
it is constantly bombarded by water molecules-a phenomenon called Brownian 
motion. Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen have analyzed a similar phenomenon that 
occurs on a much smaller scale.

 Examples of their scenarios include an atom entering an extremely cold metal 
box filled with bouncing microwave photons or an electron injected into a 
frigid crystal filled with phonons, the vibrations of lattice atoms.

 The researchers propose retrieving energy from those systems by pumping them 
with a smaller amount of energy. In the microwave case, they envision 
penetrating the box with a magnetic field having a strength that varies in a 
cyclical manner. For the crystal, a periodic variation in applied pressure 
could do the trick, Allahverdyan says.

 If the particles in the system vibrate in a particular way, the energy can be 
recaptured, the researchers contend. The pattern needed to make this happen, 
known as an anharmonic vibration, requires that the speed of the vibrations 
depend on their size. The mathematical model indicates that the pumping would 
release more energy from the system than it would drive into it. And that opens 
the door to the coveted perpetual motion.

 Various analysts have found that Maxwell's demon would require energy to carry 
out his task, thereby foiling his attempt to circumvent the second law. "You 
have to feed the demon," Nieuwenhuizen explains. Even a demon who scarcely 
moves a muscle to carry out his task would still need information about the 
molecules he sorts-and information is a form of energy, physicists have 
concluded.

 Nieuwenhuizen and Allahverdyan, however, say that they've come across 
theoretical evidence for quantum systems that wouldn't require the influx of 
energy that a demon would need. "Quantum mechanics is doing what the demon is 
supposed to do," Nieuwenhuizen says, but quantum mechanics doesn't need to be 
fed.

 Here's why. Classical physics portrays fundamental particles, such as atoms 
and electrons, as tiny billiard balls. Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, 
also represents them as waves. According to that wave nature, elementary 
particles extend across space and interact with each other through the 
overlapping of their crests and troughs.

 The extended interaction, known as quantum coherence, gives quantum systems 
their remarkable character. It permits electrons to flow without resistance 
through superconductors and superfluid helium to mysteriously climb out of a 
cup of its own accord.

 In the systems that they consider, Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen stipulate 
that the extended interactions between particles be strong enough that another 
even stranger type of interaction, known as entanglement, also takes place. 
Entangled particles share a single quantum state, so that whatever happens to 
one immediately affects the other, even if they are widely separated (SN: 
11/20/99, p. 334).

 A jolt of energy injected into a classical heat bath-as would happen by, say, 
dropping hot coals into a swimming pool-quickly peters out into random motions 
of molecules, slightly raising the bath's temperature. As the so-far universal 
failure of Maxwell's demon shows, once the energy has dissipated, the process 
can't be reversed.

 In the systems studied by Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen, however, quantum 
coherence and entanglement keep the energy accessible. It roams incessantly 
among the particles and waves. For example, when an atom enters a microwave 
cavity-or an electron penetrates a lattice-it joins in a back-and-forth 
exchange of energy and momentum.

 With all that quantum-scale activity going on, the researchers asked whether 
thermodynamics theory-including its second law-could be applied to these 
systems. One prerequisite for using thermodynamics theory is that the system 
should settle down to a balanced, unchanging state, an equilibrium, at a 
slightly higher temperature. But, that's not happening in their model.

 So, they conclude that thermodynamics doesn't apply. They argue that their 
theoretical system doesn't actually violate the second law; the violation is 
only "apparent." Yet they hold that their system still achieves what has long 
been considered impossible-it wangles useful work out of a single heat 
reservoir.

"The point with perpetual motion is whether you can work with one reservoir," 
Nieuwenhuizen remarks. "Here, we have a case where that is possible."

 Two other scientific reports in the past year also argue for a quantum route 
to perpetual motion. In one, Alexey V. Nikulov of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences' Institute of Microelectronics Technology and High Purity Materials in 
Chernogolovka, which is near Moscow, focuses on a hollow ring of deeply chilled 
superconducting material with electrons circulating in its walls. By switching 
superconductivity on and off in a segment of the ring, Nikulov argues, random 
thermal fluctuations would generate a useful voltage thereby violating the 
second law.

 In the other report, theorists Vladislav Capek and Jiri Bok, both of Charles 
University in Prague, the Czech Republic, propose that violations might take 
place even in room-temperature interactions, say, between ions and 
biomolecules. Indeed, Capek told Science News, those breakdowns of the second 
law might already be occurring in living systems.

 There's a caveat that applies to all three reports. None actually claims to 
make truly perpetual motion possible. If the first law could be violated, a 
machine could operate forever. However, a perpetual motion machine of the 
second type-a second-law violator-is powered by the kinetic energy of the 
reservoir. So, the machine's motion would stop when the bath's temperature hits 
absolute zero, just as an engine running out of gas would stop. This means that 
the motion of such a machine wouldn't be perpetual after all.

 Neither the Russian nor Czech work was published prominent venues such as PRL. 
The work of Capek and Bok appeared in the December 1999 Czech Journal of 
Physics. Nikulov's study hasn't been published; it's posted to the physics 
preprint server on the Internet ().

 How does a perpetual motion claim get into the austere, international, and 
highly respected Physical Review Letters? According to Gene Wells, one of the 
journal's editors, the quantum world remains so puzzling that the editor of the 
Allahverdyan-Nieuwenhuizen submission didn't balk. "As long as [the proposed 
second-law violation] is in that quantum regime, I'm not that troubled," Wells 
says.

 After all, even the sacred first law's conservation of energy breaks down in 
the quantum realm, albeit in a limited way, he notes. That's because 
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle allows energy momentarily to appear from 
nothing, although it must be quickly paid back.

 However, any perpetual motion schemes based on classical physics would trouble 
Wells. "If [the analysis] were purely classical, we, of course, would suspect 
it and may not even send it out to be reviewed," he says.

 Although stating their case in PRL gives Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen clout, 
many thermodynamics specialists still aren't buying their arguments. "Such 
breakthroughs have happened in science before," confesses Bjarne Andresen of 
the University of Copenhagen, "but I do not believe that this is another one."

 Quantum information theorist Barbara M. Terhal of IBM T. J. Watson Research 
Center in Yorktown Heights, N.Y., notes that Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen are 
working with a mathematical entity, not actual physical systems. "If they did a 
more careful analysis based on the physics," she ventures, "they would see 
nothing going on."

 Physical chemist John Ross of Stanford University isn't ready to draw any 
conclusions, but he's not expecting much. "It's easy to say foolish things 
about thermodynamics, and some very wise people have said foolish things," he 
cautions.

 Others, however, feel that the new research may be on a promising path. "The 
violation of the second law at very low temperatures for certain systems is 
real," says Mikhail Anisimov of the University of Maryland in College Park.

 William G. Unruh of the University of British Columbia in Vancouver explains 
that a decade ago, he and other physicists came upon the same quantum 
phenomenon that Allahverdyan and Nieuwenhuizen are probing, but the earlier 
workers didn't claim the possibility of perpetual motion. However, the new 
research goes further than the early work by, for instance, examining 
anharmonic vibration, Unruh points out.

 Nonetheless, he comments, "my strong suspicion is that the amount of energy 
you have to stick in . . . is as much energy as you get out."

 Igor M. Sokolov of the University of Freiburg in Germany thinks the PRL 
authors are onto something, though not necessarily a breakdown of the second 
law. They may have discovered unnoticed flaws in the mathematical tools used to 
describe quantum systems, he says.

 On the other hand, if they're right about perpetual motion, "it could give 
rise to a couple of Nobel prizes," he muses.

 If verified, any second-law violations would almost certainly have a dramatic 
impact on the scientific world. However, the practical consequences of these 
reports could still prove minuscule.

 Nikulov has already calculated the power that each of his proposed 
superconductive rings would generate. The device "cannot solve the energy 
problem. Its power is very weak," he concludes. Nonetheless, systems made up of 
many rings would generate enough energy to serve as direct-current sources in 
low-power circuits or to run microscopic refrigeration systems, he argues.

 Nieuwenhuizen says that he's given little thought to harnessing the unusual 
proposed energy source or how much energy it might provide. Perhaps the 
technique would provide a way to cool also-hypothetical quantum computers, 
Allahverdyan suggests.

 None of these possible applications seem like much by the standards of 
19th-century dreamers and their hopes of seawater-powered, transoceanic 
voyages. In the thermal fluctuations of a heat bath that's already nearly at 
absolute zero, there's too little energy for those visions. There's only 
enough, Nieuwenhuizen concedes, so that "a little quantum boat could cross a 
little quantum ocean."


