Unlocking Puzzling Polygons: Science News Online, Sept. 23, 2000

 Unlocking Puzzling Polygons Proof settles a wickedly prickly question about 
unfurling crinkly shapes

 By Ivars Peterson

 Polygons come in all sorts of shapes: triangles, squares, hexagons, stars, and 
a host of other straight-edged forms.

 Think of a polygon as a chain of rigid rods connected to each other in two 
dimensions with flexible joints. Start with any configuration, no matter how 
complex and intricately indented, or crinkly. Can you always find a sequence of 
moves that removes the indentations-unfurling the polygon into what 
mathematicians describe as a convex shape, like a triangle-without ever letting 
the rods cross each other?

 That's not as easy to do as it may sound. Imagine, for example, the outline of 
a set of fearsome jaws with interlocking teeth.

 Computational geometers and assorted others puzzled over this problem for more 
than a decade, ever since it came to the attention of robotics engineers who 
were trying to make a robot arm move from place to place. In recent years, the 
geometric speculation turned into a sort of game. Someone would propose a 
complicated configuration that appears to stay locked, and other enthusiasts 
would spend hours, even weeks, looking for the key to opening it up.

 Most of those who tackled the polygon problem believed that someone ultimately 
would come up with a polygon that could not be unfurled, at least not in two 
dimensions.

 No one ever came up with a stumper, however. Every tricky polygonal 
configuration anyone ever proposed was eventually cracked. "In a few cases, it 
took several months to find the answer," says Erik D. Demaine, a 19-year-old 
computer science graduate student at the University of Waterloo in Ontario.

 Now, the question is finally settled. Demaine, Robert Connelly of Cornell 
University, and Gunter Rote of the Free University of Berlin have proved that 
any polygon can be uncrinkled in two dimensions without any sides crossing each 
other during the unfolding.

 The researchers announced their proof last June in Minneapolis at a Society 
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics conference on discrete mathematics.

 Related geometric problems have practical applications, such as checking the 
range of movements of a jointed, robotic arm, designing a complicated antenna 
that opens up properly in space, or studying how a protein strand folds into a 
compact blob. At the moment, however, the new result appears to have no obvious 
applications.

 The puzzle's real appeal has been aesthetic rather than practical. "It's 
simply a natural question to ask and a beautiful problem," insists computer 
scientist Joseph O'Rourke of Smith College in Northampton, Mass.

 Over the years, studies of robotic arm movements have suggested purely 
mathematical questions about morphing one geometric shape into another. One 
important group of problems concerns chains made up of line segments. Such 
chains may be closed, like a polygon, or open-ended, like a segmented arc. 
Lines can also be linked to form a branched structure, termed a tree, where 
jointed segments sprout from a common vertex.

 Suppose, for example, that a tree has eight chains emanating from a central 
point. Suppose further that each of these chains is made up of three segments 
folded so that the entire tree looks like a stylized flower with eight petals.

 In 1998, Sue Whitesides of McGill University in Montreal and a large team of 
collaborators established that for certain segment lengths, the petals can't be 
straightened out without letting segments cross. Opening up one petal 
necessarily impinges on others.

 Researchers also found examples of three-dimensional chains, both open and 
closed, that are locked, or impossible to unfold. On the other hand, O'Rourke 
and Smith College colleague Roxana Cocan proved last year that in the roominess 
of four- or higher-dimensional space, one can straighten out any open chain and 
uncrinkle any polygon.

"That left the two-dimensional case as the major unsolved problem," O'Rourke 
says.

 Last year in July, Demaine, Rote, and Connelly all happened to be at a 
geometry conference in Ascona, Switzerland. In considering the polygon puzzle, 
Rote suggested that uncrinkling polygons had to require some sort of 
expansion-as if a balloon were inflating inside the polygon and forcing its 
sides outward.

"His suggestion was crucial, though we didn't realize why it was so helpful 
until later," Demaine remarks.

 The trio did observe, however, that if they could somehow find a sequence of 
movements in which the distance between any pair of joints stayed the same or 
increased, then the segments could never cross. So, the problem could be 
converted from one about avoiding intersections into one about expanding 
movements.

 By the time Demaine, Rote, and Connelly met again in November, this time in 
Budapest, Connelly had realized that the notion of expansion could be studied 
in the context of his own field of expertise: the rigidity of structures. With 
this concept, the team could look at polygons as frameworks of rods and 
invisible struts between nonadjacent joints, where rods have to stay the same 
size but struts can increase in length. The researchers could then consider 
stress patterns within that structure.

"This allowed us to apply some beautiful theorems in rigidity theory," Demaine 
notes.

 A proof that flat polygonal chains can't lock followed from that insight. 
Along the way, Demaine, Rote, and Connelly also established that any open chain 
can always be straightened.

 The big surprise is not the proof itself, O'Rourke comments, but the 
conceptual breakthrough that the opening move in any successful uncrinkling 
process has to be one in which each joint moves apart or stays the same 
distance away from every other joint.

 Last summer, Demaine, Connelly, and O'Rourke added another element to the 
original argument. They showed that the area inside an uncrinkling polygon must 
increase. "This seems almost obvious," Connelly notes, "but the proof that we 
have is not completely trivial."

 Now that the two-dimensional case is solved, Demaine is tangling with other 
fierce geometric beasts. An origami enthusiast, he's tamed the hyperbolic 
paraboloid. Demaine developed instructions for folding and gluing this classic 
saddle shape into complex paper hats and starbursts.


