Snap, Crackle, and Feel Good?: Science News Online, Sept. 23, 2000

 Snap, Crackle, and Feel Good? Magnetic fields that map the brain may also 
treat its disorders

 By John Travis

 A sharp sound, like a snapping rubber band, rings out. "Anything?," queries 
the neuroscientist standing behind my seat.

 I shake my head, which the researcher, Eric Wassermann, takes as "No." In 
response, he tweaks a knob on a nearby machine, which connects via a black cord 
to a paddle-like object that he holds to the back of my head.

 Snap!

 Hmm, did my right arm twitch a bit that time?

 Another small twist of the knob.

 Snap!

 No doubt about it this time. My right arm jerks.

 Snap!

 I don't feel any pain or notice anything unusual other than the sound, but my 
arm jumps again, seemingly of its own accord.

 Welcome to transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), one of the hottest 
research tools in neuroscience. Since its invention 15 years ago, TMS has 
become a relatively simple, noninvasive, and usually painless way to 
electrically stimulate specific brain regions. It's power tantalizes 
investigators who want to unravel how the human mind works. More recently, TMS 
has also grabbed the attention of physicians and psychologists, who predict 
that it has the potential to treat conditions ranging from epilepsy to 
stuttering to depression.

 There's preliminary evidence, for example, that TMS offers a less drastic 
alternative to electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), the treatment of last resort 
for people with severe depression. At the same time, investigators acknowledge 
that there's much they don't know about how TMS affects the brain.

"These are all pioneering studies," says David Avery of the University of 
Washington School of Medicine in Seattle, who studies TMS' use for depression. 
"As pioneers were crossing the prairie, some took one valley and others took 
another route. At this point, we don't know which is the easiest route, or the 
best route."

 The first attempts to alter brain activity with magnetism occurred around a 
century ago when it wasn't yet possible to produce very strong magnetic fields. 
Researchers could magnetically stimulate nerve cells in retinas, causing test 
subjects to perceive flashes of light, but they couldn't fire up brain cells.

 Until 1985, that is. That's when Anthony T. Baker of the University of 
Sheffield and his colleagues reported the first success at triggering brain 
cells with TMS. The principle behind TMS is relatively simple. If an electrical 
current suddenly courses through a wire coil, it momentarily generates a 
magnetic field. Unlike a direct electrical current, a magnetic field penetrates 
a skull easily and painlessly, as if it were a ghost passing through a wall. 
Within the brain, this field induces an electrical current perpendicular to 
itself and parallel to the coil. It's this current that stimulates brain-cell 
activity.

 The original coils used by Baker were doughnut-shaped and could only deliver a 
single stimulation per experiment. Many investigators now work with a 
figure-eight coil because the magnetic field generated by its two circles 
focuses on smaller regions of the brain than the simpler coil does. TMS devices 
today create magnetic fields with strengths up to 2 Tesla, about 40,000 times 
the Earth's natural magnetic field.

 By the 1990s, technology had advanced to the point where repetitive TMS, or 
rTMS, also became available to most researchers. In rTMS, scientists deliver 
repeated magnetic pulses at frequencies up to 50 times a second (50 hertz). As 
a result, the targeted brain region receives a barrage of brief electric 
stimulations.

 The early uses of TMS were the neurological equivalent of testing a person's 
reflexes with a hammer. By sending single magnetic pulses into the motor 
cortex, which is just under the scalp and easy for a magnetic field to reach, 
scientists found they could map how this brain region controls the body's 
muscles. Pulses directed to different spots on the motor cortex would make a 
thumb twitch, an arm jerk, or a leg kick. Physicians now employ this capability 
of TMS to check that the nerves conveying such orders from the brain are 
operating properly. In illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, that's not always 
the case.

 TMS began to show its true potential, however, when scientists probed beyond 
the motor cortex. After magnetic stimulation of a brain region, that area 
temporarily becomes unresponsive to the normal input from the rest of the brain.

"What TMS allows you to do is transiently inactivate an area and evaluate the 
behavioral consequences," says Leornardo G. Cohen of the National Institute of 
Neurological Diseases and Stroke (NINDS) in Bethesda, Md. "Nothing else can do 
that in humans."

 Those consequences depend on where scientists direct the magnetic pulse. For 
example, we can use TMS to prevent people from seeing a visual stimulus or make 
it hard for them to speak, says Wassermann, who, like Cohen, conducts TMS 
studies at NINDS.

 Scientists who study how the human brain works have long desired this kind of 
control. Using technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
positron emission tomography (PET), they've been able to watch the human brain 
in action, recording which regions act up or quiet down during various 
cognitive tests. Yet these scans can't prove a specific brain region is 
integral to such tasks as counting, reading, or seeing. An activated brain 
region may simply reflect a nervous volunteer tensing his muscles whenever he 
does a task in the laboratory.

 Instead of merely watching the brain in action, TMS can intervene, enabling 
investigators to more easily test hypotheses about the human brain. For 
example, Cohen and his colleagues have found that TMS applied to a brain region 
called the primary visual cortex impairs the ability of blind people to read 
Braille. That result supports a hypothesis, derived from MRI and PET studies, 
that blind people recruit parts of the brain normally used for vision to boost 
their sense of touch.

 A TMS study by Stephen Kosslyn of Harvard University and his colleagues 
confirmed the claim that a brain area known to process visual signals plays a 
similar role when a person imagines a mental picture. Future TMS research, says 
Wassermann, will look into the involvement of specific brain regions in many 
cognitive activities, including mathematical reasoning, visual attention, and 
memory.

 Even as they use TMS to probe brains, investigators have begun to examine 
whether it can also help brains. They've found that beyond the temporary 
disruption, rTMS treatments may bring about lasting changes in brain activity. 
This influence can last days, weeks, even months after the treatments stop. The 
type of change varies with the specifics of the stimulations. One rule of thumb 
among many researchers is that slow rTMS (1 Hz or lower) makes brain regions 
less easily excited, while fast rTMS has the opposite effect.

 Cohen and other researchers speculate that rTMS trained on specific brain 
areas can encourage recovery from strokes, spinal cord injuries, and even 
amputations, that cause so-called phantom limb pain. Such therapies would 
depend upon the brain's plasticity, its ability to adapt to trauma or 
experiences.

 Many neuroscientists used to imagine the brain as a microchip with fixed 
wiring, but they've learned that the brain is far more flexible. With rigorous 
training, for example, a person who's had a stroke and lost use of a limb can 
regain control by enlisting undamaged parts of the brain.

 Cohen has turned to TMS in several ways to probe such plasticity. The ultimate 
goal of such work, he says, is to enhance any brain plasticity that aids 
recovery from stroke or other trauma.

 The finding that rTMS can have lasting effects on the human brain has turned 
the technology into a potential therapeutic tool for several serious disorders. 
Take epilepsy, an illness in which the brain's nerve cells begin firing wildly, 
leading to seizures.

 In the June 26, 1999 Lancet, a group at the University of Gottingen in Germany 
reported promising results from the use of rTMS on nine people with epilepsy 
who were unresponsive to drugs. All but one described a reduction in number and 
severity of seizures after receiving five daily treatments of rTMS at a slow 
rate, one stimulation every 3 seconds.

 William H. Theodore, who heads the epilepsy research branch at the National 
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, cautions that the German trial was an "open 
study," meaning it involved no comparison group that didn't receive treatment. 
He points out that a placebo effect could just as well explain the success.

 Nevertheless, the data were provocative enough that NIH has begun its own 
study of rTMS for epilepsy. To create a control group, says Theodore, NIH 
scientists will angle the TMS coil so that some subjects don't receive brain 
stimulation. He expects the study to take a year to complete.

 Researchers also propose that TMS may help treat schizophrenia, a brain 
disorder for which few effective drugs exist. In the March 25 Lancet, 
investigators at the Yale University School of Medicine, report that rTMS 
significantly reduced auditory hallucinations experienced by a dozen people 
with schizophrenia.

 The hallucinations, usually perceived as voices in the head, afflict 50 to 70 
percent of such people and are often difficult to eliminate with antipsychotic 
drugs. "These voices can be very disruptive and produce some really bad 
consequences," notes study leader Ralph E. Hoffman.

 Brain scans of people with schizophrenia suffering auditory hallucinations 
have revealed abnormal activity in a speech-related brain region-the left 
temporalparietal cortex. Scientists suspect, says Hoffman, that "these auditory 
hallucinations arise from parts of the brain that are ordinarily involved with 
processing spoken speech."

 To test that theory, Hoffman and his colleagues directed magnetic pulses at 
the left temporalparietal cortex of schizophrenia patients for 4 to 16 minutes 
daily for 4 days.

 In most cases, the severity and frequency of auditory hallucinations decreased 
more with the real TMS treatment than with sham applications. In one person, 
the improvement lasted 2 months.

"Some patients don't respond at all, but the majority do," says Hoffman. One 
woman has "been free of hallucinations for the first time in many, many years. 
It's a miracle for her," he says.

"It's a very interesting study. I think they may be onto something," says 
Wassermann. He praises the work for pursuing a clear hypothesis. Some 
investigators, he says, just blast rTMS at various brain regions and hope for 
an effect.

 Peter Fox of the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio has 
concerns of his own about rTMS use. He worries that some investigators are 
prematurely applying it to disorders without understanding why the brain goes 
awry in the conditions or how the treatments alter neural circuitry.

 Moreover, he charges that many investigators simply hold the TMS coil above a 
person's scalp, a crude technique that doesn't allow precise targeting. "How do 
they really know what they're stimulating?" he asks. "I consider that about the 
same as having a neurosurgeon operate on your brain blindfolded."

 Fox further contends that the field's rule of thumb-that rTMS at 1 Hz 
suppresses brain regions, while higher frequency treatments excite them-rests 
on weak evidence primarily stemming from work on the motor cortex. So, 
researchers can't be certain whether they're exciting or suppressing a brain 
region when they treat a patient.

"We really want to go about this in a more rational way," says Fox.

 Fox studies stuttering with Roger Ingham and Janet Ingham, both of the 
University of California, Santa Barbara. Stuttering offers fertile ground for 
scientists because they can image brain activity both while a person stutters 
and while he or she speaks normally. People who stutter can often overcome the 
problem by singing, extending vowels, or speaking in unison with others.

 The investigators already have identified a set of brain areas that are 
abnormally active during stuttering. They're now combining TMS and PET scans to 
determine how areas involved in speech production connect to each other and to 
the rest of the brain.

"One of the most powerful ways to map connectivity is TMS," says Fox. "Once you 
trigger an area-fire its neurons-that activity will propagate in quite a normal 
way. We've been stimulating areas in stutterers to see if their connectivity 
patterns are different."

 Using 1 to 3 Hz rTMS and a robotic apparatus to precisely position the 
stimulus, the investigators have established that they can alter activation and 
connectivity patterns in the brain for up to several days. They haven't yet 
tried to stop a person's stuttering because they don't yet know all the brain 
circuitry involved. Any attempt at treatment now could just as easily increase 
a person's stuttering, says Fox.

 The clinical condition that has brought TMS the most attention is depression. 
In some of the earliest studies, investigators noticed that applying the 
magnetic fields to the brain's temporal lobes, which are regions just above the 
eyebrows, induced temporary mood changes in healthy volunteers. Zap above the 
right eyebrow and elation results. Targeting the left temporal lobe instead 
leads to sadness and apathy. These feelings last only a few hours, but that was 
enough to intrigue researchers.

 There was another major reason to think that TMS might have a chance at 
treating depression. Both TMS and ECT induce electrical activity in the brain. 
Despite its horrifying reputation-think Jack Nicholson in One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo's Nest-ECT has proven its capability to help severely depressed people 
time and time again. "ECT unquestionably works. It's the gold standard for 
treating depression," says Wassermann.

 The problem with ECT is that it must shoot a strong current through the skull 
into the brain. This can cause painful seizures, which is why people having ECT 
undergo general anesthesia. Since the massive burst of electricity hits the 
hippocampus, a seat of memory formation and recall, ECT also frequently 
produces partial amnesia. People receiving ECT may not recall the months 
leading up to a treatment.

"Despite its often-remarkable efficacy, ECT remains a crude technique, 
analogous to sculpting rock with explosive charges," Gary M. Hasey of the 
Hamilton Psychiatric Hospital in Ontario, Canada, noted in the March 1999 
Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience.

 The hope is that TMS can be a kinder, gentler version of ECT. So far, the data 
have nourished that hope. Several small studies have now compared TMS with sham 
treatments and even ECT.

"In small, controlled studies of people who fail to respond to antidepressant 
medication, transcranial magnetic stimulation continues to show effectiveness," 
says Avery, who has created a database to consolidate TMS depression studies. 
He suggests that TMS could become an intermediate stage of treatment between 
antidepressants and ECT. He also notes that some investigators are also testing 
whether TMS combined with drugs works better than antidepressants alone.

 Investigators have begun to tease out why some people may not benefit from 
TMS. "We found that the longer the duration of the current episode of 
depression, the worse the response. Those whose current episode had lasted 5 
years or longer didn't respond well," says Avery.

 Several studies hint that TMS may rival ECT in effectiveness, at least for 
depressed people with no other psychological problems. In one trial, Leon 
Grunhaus of the Sheba Medical Center in Ramat Gan, Israel, and his colleagues 
compared ECT with 10-Hz rTMS treatments in 40 people with severe depression. 
The investigators randomly assigned each patient to one of the two therapies.

"Our results indicate that rTMS is as effective as ECT in the treatment of 
patients with major depressive disorder without psychosis," the research team 
concluded in the Feb. 15 Biological Psychiatry.

 In an even more radical effort, a few researchers have begun to use TMS as a 
form of ECT. In other words, they use the magnetic stimulation to deliberately 
induce seizures in people with severe depression. These scientists argue that 
the seizures produced by ECT may be integral to its success and that TMS can 
generate seizures in targeted regions of the brain without affecting others 
areas, such as those involved in memory.

 On May 1, a woman in Switzerland became the first person to receive such 
"magnetic seizure therapy." A team led by Thomas Schlaepfer of the University 
of Bern in Switzerland and Sarah Lisanby and Harold Sackeim, both of Columbia 
University, was able to trigger seizures in the anesthetized woman in four 
separate trials. The group used 40 Hz rTMS and administered stronger magnetic 
pulses than those of standard rTMS treatments.

 The woman scored lower on depression assessments after the seizures and 
reported that she recovered more quickly from TMS than traditional ECT. Still, 
it's too early to gauge TMS' effectiveness as a seizure therapy, warns 
Schlaepfer.

"The field has not been helped by overenthusiastic interpretations of studies," 
says Schlaepfer. "My general reading of the field is that up to now there's no 
convincing proof of antidepressant effects, but there are certainly hints. What 
we really need are large, multicenter trials."


