Most-Wanted Particle Appears, Perhaps: Science News Online, Sept. 23, 2000

 Most-Wanted Particle Appears, Perhaps

 Peter Weiss

 Tantalizing new clues of a long-sought subatomic particle have set the 
particle-physics community abuzz. Vivid but sparse signs of the so-called Higgs 
boson at the Large Electron-Positron Collider (LEP) in Switzerland have also 
sparked a desperate race against time to catch further glimpses before 
researchers pull the plug on the 11-year-old machine.

"It's amazing. People are working around the clock," says Christopher Tully, a 
Princeton University physicist and a LEP researcher.

 The European Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN) near Geneva was ready to 
shut down LEP at the end of this month to make way for construction of the 
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). However, because of the recent findings, the 
laboratory's managers announced on Sept. 14 that they would extend LEP's life 
by a month.

 Despite frenzied efforts, the researchers stand only a slim chance of proving 
the Higgs boson exists, say physicists at LEP and elsewhere. The collider will 
most likely have too little time to collect enough data to stake a claim on the 
elusive Higgs.

 Theorists have proposed Higgs boson as the answer to one of physics' most 
basic questions: Why does matter have mass? Interactions with the boson, they 
say, would confer mass on otherwise massless particles.

 Finding the Higgs boson would also put the finishing touch on the so-called 
standard model of particle physics, which explains all the known particles and 
forces except gravity (SN: 7/1/95, p. 10). Of the roughly two dozen fundamental 
particles predicted by the model, only the Higgs boson, named after British 
physicist Peter W. Higgs of the University of Edinburgh, remains undetected.

"The situation at this moment is extremely exciting," comments theorist Marcela 
Carena of Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in Batavia, Ill. 
Theorists predicted the Higgs boson in the 1960s, and experimentalists have 
been searching for it since the 1970s.

 The hints that it may be within reach have emerged from an extraordinarily 
high-strung LEP. Over the years, researchers had steadily pushed the 
accelerator to higher energies-over 200 billion electron volts-but now the 
machine is on the verge of breakdown, physicists say. "We're balancing on the 
edge of a precipice," says Roger Cashmore, CERN research director.

 Running at those extreme energies since June, LEP has recorded four 
electron-positron collisions whose explosive patterns hint at the fleeting 
presence of a Higgs particle. The scientists monitored tens of thousands of 
electron-positron impacts.

 During the 1-month postponement of LEP's shutdown, researchers there expect to 
double the number of collisions measured by their detectors at the 
record-breaking energy. LEP scientists hope that the count of Higgs-like events 
will also at least double. If so, the case for the Higgs boson will grow 
stronger. Alternatively, the recent rash of apparent sightings could prove a 
fluke.

 Even if the cranked-up LEP fails to nail down the particle before the 
machine's demise, the recent close calls could help guide a Higgs search slated 
to begin at Fermilab in the next few years, scientists say.

 However, should four or five more events show up by Nov. 2, "there will be 
pressure on the CERN management to extend" LEP's life again, predicts Sau Lan 
Wu of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, a member of the LEP team that 
detected three of this summer's events.

 Acquiring enough events to declare discovery of the Higgs boson might require 
another full year of LEP operations, scientists speculate. But adding even 3 
months to LEP's life would excessively delay the LHC, Cashmore says. The 
extension would also cost millions of unbudgeted Swiss francs. "It's a price 
we're not willing to pay," he says.

 Carena and other physicists find LEP's few Higgs-like events particularly 
heartening because they suggest the particle can be created at relatively low 
energies. Such a low-energy Higgs dovetails with a popular, though unverified, 
theory known as supersymmetry.

 Supersymmetry includes the standard model but also goes beyond it by proposing 
a menagerie of new particles that are companions to the ones already known. The 
theory also predicts multiple Higgs bosons, and the least energetic of them 
falls into the energy range that the LEP events spotlight. For physicists 
hoping that supersymmetry will take the field beyond the standard model, the 
LEP events are "a very encouraging hint," Carena says.


