Device ups hydrogen energy from sunlight: Science News Online, Sept. 16, 2000

 Device ups hydrogen energy from sunlight

 Peter Weiss

 Here's a recipe for a cleaner, healthier planet: Take some water, add solar 
energy, extract hydrogen, and use it to power fuel cells for running cars and 
other machines. Then, collect their water emissions and start the procedure 
again.

 One look at the list of ingredients in today's fuel cells, however, shows that 
this ideal isn't yet being followed. Because processes that use sunlight to 
extract hydrogen remain costly and inefficient, fossil fuels still supply the 
hydrogen in most fuel cells.

 Hoping to break the fossil fuel habit, a team of Israeli, German, and Japanese 
scientists has created a device that boosts the efficiency of solar-powered 
hydrogen extraction by 50 percent.

 The group placed a photovoltaic cell on top of two flat, finger-long 
electrodes. The combination "is very efficient in converting solar energy [into 
an electric current] but also provides nearly the ideal voltage for splitting 
water" into hydrogen and oxygen, says team leader Stuart Licht of the Technion 
in Haifa, Israel. A water molecule splits, or undergoes electrolysis, at only 
1.23 volts.

 Licht and his colleagues describe their device in the Sept. 14 Journal of 
Physical Chemistry B. The gadget converts sunlight to an electrolysis current 
with 18.3 percent efficiency. In turn, the current creates hydrogen gas as it 
passes through acidic water.

 The device is "showing the pathway towards higher efficiencies for direct 
solar-to-hydrogen production," comments John A. Turner of the National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in Golden, Colo. The newly achieved 
efficiency may already be high enough for commercial hydrogen generators to be 
feasible. "That still needs to be figured out," Turner says.

 In 1998, he and Oscar Khaselev, then also of NREL, demonstrated a novel 
apparatus for solar-to-hydrogen conversion (SN: 4/18/98, p. 246). To achieve 
unprecedented efficiency, the device used multiple layers of semiconductor 
materials. The researchers arranged the layers to form two active regions, or 
junctions, that would absorb solar photons that dislodge electrons. Some of the 
less energetic photons weren't captured in the first junction but passed to the 
second, where they generated more current.

 The design gained an energy advantage by combining solar electricity and water 
splitting into one unit. Their cell's 12.4 percent efficiency-nearly twice that 
of any previous solar-to-hydrogen device-has held as the record until now.

 Licht and his colleagues have improved upon that pioneering effort in several 
crucial ways. In one sense, the NREL device was all wet: It had to be 
completely immersed in water to operate. That feature forced the researchers to 
select semiconductors that wouldn't break down in solution.

 By keeping their stack of semiconductor layers high and dry, Licht and his 
group were free to optimize them for both converting sunlight to electricity 
and water splitting. Their design permits a low electrolysis current, which 
also reduces energy waste.

 Licht and his coworkers say that besides besting the solar-to-hydrogen 
conversion record, their work opens the way to efficiencies not considered 
possible before. Using measured photoelectric efficiencies of seven 
semiconductor combinations not yet tested in hydrogen generation, they predict 
maximum solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies of up to 31 percent.

 Thermodynamics theory says the maximum could range above 40 percent for a 
two-junction converter, but no one has previously predicted better than 24 
percent performance for practical devices, Turner says. Experimentally 
achieving the new prediction "would be an accomplishment indeed!" he adds.


