Nicotine metabolism may spawn carcinogen: Science News Online, Oct. 28, 2000

 Nicotine metabolism may spawn carcinogen

 John Travis

 Chalk up another potential way for smoking tobacco to cause lung cancer. A new 
study indicates that the body can metabolize nicotine into products that the 
lungs subsequently may convert into a potent carcinogen.

 This still speculative suggestion may pose a challenge for companies trying to 
develop cigarettes with a reduced risk of causing cancer. The researchers say 
their work doesn't imply that people trying to quit smoking should abandon the 
short-term use of nicotine patches and gum.

"It's a heck of a lot better to use nicotine-replacement therapy than to 
smoke-by far," emphasizes study coauthor Sharon E. Murphy of the University of 
Minnesota Cancer Center in Minneapolis.

 Nicotine underlies the addictive nature of cigarettes and other tobacco 
products. It also indirectly contributes to their carcinogenic properties. The 
curing of tobacco, for example, can produce tumor-causing compounds, called 
nitrosamines, from nicotine. Burning tobacco, as in a cigarette, has the same 
result.

 Pure nicotine that enters the body has not been thought to be carcinogenic. 
Murphy and her colleagues, however, now offer evidence that enzymes in people 
can convert nicotine into aminoketone, the natural precursor of NNK. Animal 
tests have shown that this nitrosamine causes lung cancer.

 Scientists have long known that the human body initially metabolizes about 90 
percent of its nicotine load into cotinine, which is then further metabolized 
into a variety of other compounds. In previous work, Murphy, her colleague 
Stephen S. Hecht, and their coworkers had found that urine of smokers and 
people wearing nicotine patches contains two nicotine metabolites, keto acid 
and hydroxy acid, but that these compounds didn't derive from cotinine.

"If you give people cotinine and look for keto acid, you don't find it," says 
Murphy.

 Reporting in an upcoming issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the investigators show that bits of liver cells, which contain 
nicotine-metabolizing enzymes, can convert nicotine into keto acid without 
going through a cotinine stage. They further demonstrate that one of the 
enzymes, known as cytochrome P450 2A6, participates in this process by making 
aminoketone, NNK's precursor.

 The investigators suspect that this novel metabolic pathway also functions in 
the lung. There's a lung-specific enzyme similar to 2A6, notes Murphy. Her 
group is now investigating whether this enzyme generates aminoketone from 
nicotine.

 The medical relevance of this newfound metabolic pathway remains unclear. 
Scientists don't know how much of the aminoketone generated in the body becomes 
the carcinogenic NNK. Indeed, people using nicotine patches don't have elevated 
concentrations of NNK in their urine, Hecht finds.

 It's hard to prove absolute safety, but this patch study is "reassuring," says 
Jack Henningfield of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Henningfield, 
who has reviewed nicotine's safety record, notes that when people in Sweden 
switched to smokeless tobacco that's naturally low in nitrosamines, they 
drastically reduced their risk of mouth, head, and neck cancers.

"These people are still getting huge amounts of nicotine per day," says 
Henningfield.

 However, such work doesn't dismiss the possibility that some lung cancer comes 
from NNK spawned in the lungs by nicotine. "It's not a major pathway in the 
total person. The question becomes, Is it important in a specific tissue?" says 
Murphy. The activity of nicotine-metabolizing enzymes varies considerably, so a 
subset of people might produce significant amounts of NNK, she adds.

 Researchers suggest that concerns about nicotine itself may become important 
as companies begin to market cigarettes with tobacco prepared in ways that 
reduce nitrosamines. "What this [finding] implies is that even if you get 
tobacco free of nitrosamines, you can make a certain amount of them [in the 
body] just from the exposure to nicotine," notes Harold Seifried of the 
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.


