Cetacean Seniors: Science News Online, Oct. 14, 2000

 Cetacean Seniors Whales that give new meaning to longevity

 By Janet Raloff

 Like a stream of massive torpedoes, thousands of blubbery dynamos are making a 
southwest migration through the icy Arctic Ocean. They're bowhead whales 
heading toward winter haunts in the Bering Sea, just north of the Aleutian 
Islands.

 Along the way, Inupiat Eskimos in Alaska will legally harvest several of these 
endangered mammals-30-to-60-foot-long behemoths that sometimes tip the scales 
at 50 tons or more.

 Having hunted these whales for centuries, the Inupiat are keen observers of 
the bowhead ( Balaena mysticetus). Their tales recall whales that hunters had 
recognized by distinctive scars. In some cases, several generations of 
storytellers described encountering the same whale, leading to speculation that 
bowheads might live some 60 years.

 Studies now suggest that these whales can actually outlive people-perhaps by a 
century.

 The new research was triggered by hunters finding ancient harpoon points in 
the foot-thick blubber of newly landed whales. Six points made of stone or 
ivory have turned up since 1981. None of the Inupiat subsistence whalers could 
remember having seen such primitive tools used.

"You have to understand that [the Inupiat] are technological pickpockets," 
quips biologist David W. Norton, with a grin of respect. Now working in 
Fairbanks, he conducted research in Barrow, Alaska, over roughly 3 decades. 
During that time, he saw Inupiat hunters in Alaska's northernmost county, the 
North Slope Borough, quickly embrace any useful technology to which they were 
exposed. Indeed, history shows that as soon as Inupiat whalers gained access to 
metal, around 1870, they swapped it for stone and ivory in their tools.

 Against that backdrop, the old harpoon points suggest that at least some 
contemporary bowheads are survivors of run-ins with whalers 100 years earlier, 
observes biologist Todd M. O'Hara of the borough's Department of Wildlife 
Management in Barrow.

 To investigate this provocative possibility, O'Hara's colleague J. Craig 
George began looking for a way to determine the age of elder bowheads. A little 
research led him to Jeffrey L. Bada of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
in La Jolla, Calif.

 A geochemist, Bada has been refining a technique for dating fossils on the 
basis of changes in their aspartic acid. This amino acid can exist in either of 
two mirror-image forms. Living things make and use only the left-handed 
version. However, after death, a body's aspartic acid gradually converts to a 
50-50 mix of the two forms. In fossils, that conversion takes about 1 million 
years.

 Bada's team had shown that this change in the ratio also occurs in living 
animals' body parts that are not undergoing metabolism, such as teeth and the 
lens of the eye. In such tissues, body heat sets the pace of change in the 
ratio of left-handed to right-handed aspartic acid.

 Indeed, the conversion rate appears to be identical in the lenses of all 
animals with the same basic body temperature. The scientists have tested more 
than 20 species, including people and bowhead whales. Bada offered to help 
calculate the age of North Slope bowheads from that ratio of the two forms of 
aspartic acid in eye lenses.

 George sent tissues from 48 bowhead whales to Bada without letting him know 
whether each had come from an infant, juvenile, young adult, or mature adult. 
The chemist's assays accurately dated the relative age of the young whales and 
indicated that most adults had been 20 to 60 years old at death. However, the 
lens analyses from five large males suggested that at the time that Inupiat 
hunters harpooned them, one was 90, four were between 135 and 180, and one was 
more than 200 years old.

 O'Hara's group has recently recruited two other research teams to apply other 
techniques to estimate bowhead ages.

 Next month, for instance, Mark Baskaran of Wayne State University in Detroit 
expects to start measuring radioactive lead in samples of bowhead bone. The 
lead isotope forms during the decay of radium, a naturally occurring 
calciumlike radionuclide in seawater. Because both the radium and lead decay at 
known rates, Baskaran can use their ratio to determine the age of bones more 
than a year old.

 Cheryl Rosa of the University of Alaska, Fairbanks plans to assay pentosidine 
in samples of whales' skin. Aging leads to a progressive build-up of this 
chemical in many animals' skin. Rosa envisions eventually using it to determine 
the ages of living whales. A tethered dart can extract a small chunk of skin 
from a passing animal. Rosa notes, "The whale doesn't even seem to notice."

 Bada points out that these complementary studies are important to confirm the 
longevity indicated by his work. They might even provide further surprises. 
Unless whales' eyes are much warmer than people's and therefore have a faster 
aspartic acid conversion rate, Bada says, "what we have assigned the bowheads 
are only minimum ages-which is staggering! These are truly aged animals, 
perhaps the most long-lived mammals."

 However, he points out that other members of the whale family may also have 
the capacity to be centenarians, even if they don't live as long as bowheads. 
Bada claims to have "a bunch of pretty compelling data" to suggest several 
other whales can get "quite old."


