Bacteria Provide a Frontline Defense: Science News Online, Oct. 14, 2000

 Bacteria Provide a Frontline Defense

 Nathan Seppa

 With some genetic manipulation, scientists have turned mild-mannered bacteria 
into stout defenders against disease.

 Researchers have learned in the past 2 decades how to entice bacteria 
naturally found in the body to make compounds that fight a variety of ailments. 
The technique has been limited, however, because these compounds usually stay 
anchored to a bacterium's surface. Two studies from Europe now demonstrate that 
the bacteria can secrete such agents-freeing them to more effectively fight 
disease.

 So far, the approach works in mice and rats. If it succeeds in people, the 
technique could enlist bacteria as frontline troops against infection. The 
technology could also prove less expensive than another potential strategy-mass 
production of antibodies in a laboratory-which is being explored in current 
anti-infection research, says Vincent A. Fischetti, a microbiologist at 
Rockefeller University in New York City.

 Researchers in Italy report success in quickly ridding female rats of Candida 
albicans, a fungus that causes vaginal yeast infections. C. albicans also 
causes thrush, a sore throat prevalent in people with compromised immune 
systems.

 The scientists genetically engineered Streptococcus gordonii, a bacterium 
routinely found in people's mouths, either to display on its surface an 
antibody that's lethal to the yeast or to secrete that antibody. In a test of 
25 female rats with the yeast infection, the rats that received three infusions 
of the secreting bacteria into their vaginas took less than a week to heal, as 
did others treated with the common antifungal drug fluconozole. Rats receiving 
the bacteria that simply display the antibody on their surfaces took 9 days to 
get well.

 Other rats treated with a version of the bacterium with inconsequential 
genetic changes took 21 days to heal, as did untreated rats, the researchers 
report in the October Nature Biotechnology. The rats were considered healed 
when their vaginal concentration of C. albicans had dropped to one-fifth the 
original amount.

 The antibody produced by the engineered bacteria locks onto molecular 
receptors on C. albicans' cell wall and kills the fungus, says study coauthor 
Luciano Polonelli, a microbiologist at the University of Parma in Italy.

 Fischetti's team, which developed the technique of getting S. gordonii to 
display new proteins on its surface, has made a strep throat vaccine that they 
plan to test soon in people.

 The Italian study is the first to show an antimicrobial agent effectively 
secreted from bacteria in a living host, says Fischetti. By releasing these 
antibodies, the bacteria make them more mobile than anchored proteins so they 
can reach and dispatch the yeast more readily, he says.

 The mucus-lined surfaces of the mouth, throat, or vagina offer obvious proving 
grounds for the new technology, says Fischetti. About 90 percent of infectious 
diseases breach the body via the mucus membranes, he notes. Reducing the number 
of infectious agents at these sites would boost the immune system's ability to 
fight off disease, he says.

 Because S. gordonii's natural environment is the mouth, not the vagina, the 
rat findings suggest that genetically tweaked bacteria could serve as 
"workhorses" delivering novel antibacterial factors to specific body locations 
that are not necessarily their home, says Dennis F. Mangan of the National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research in Bethesda, Md.

 It's not yet clear how long the tiny bacteria can pump out agents toxic to 
other microbes. Bacteria modified and reintroduced into their home environment 
might have longer staying power than bacteria placed in an agreeable but 
unfamiliar site in the body, Fischetti says.

 In other work pitting bacteria against disease, Lothar Steidler and his 
colleagues at Ghent University in Belgium genetically engineered Lacococcus 
lactis bacteria to make and secrete interleukin-10, an anti-inflammatory agent. 
The researchers fed the modified bacteria to mice with inflammatory bowel 
disease, which causes diarrhea and pain. Within a month, the treatment reduced 
symptoms in the mice roughly by half, whereas untreated mice with the disease 
improved only slightly, the researchers reported in the Aug. 25 Science.

 The two studies represent "just the beginning of an exciting and potentially 
generally applicable strategy" for delivering protectants to mucosal surfaces, 
say Kevin J. Whaley and Larry Zeitlin of Epicyte Pharmaceuticals in San Diego, 
also in the October Nature Biotechnology.


