Some teens show signs of future depression: Science News Online, Oct. 14, 2000

 Some teens show signs of future depression

 Bruce Bower

 Certain characteristics typify teens who suffer recurrences of depression as 
young adults, raising researchers' hopes for devising improved depression 
treatments, a new study finds.

 But, the current outlook for depressed teens isn't bright. The results 
indicate that by their early 20's, about half of these young people have again 
experienced depression's trademark blend of melancholy, despair, and apathy.

 Adolescents destined for recurrences of depression had earlier exhibited 
severe symptoms of the disorder, had parents and siblings who had suffered from 
depression, and felt an overwhelming desire for the support and approval of 
others, reports a team led by psychologist Peter M. Lewinsohn of the Oregon 
Research Institute in Eugene.

 Depressed teenage girls more often experienced recurrences than their male 
counterparts did, the scientists add. Emotional prospects in young adulthood 
proved worst for depressed girls who clashed often with their parents and had 
difficulty forming stable friendships.

 These findings, published in the October American Journal of Psychiatry, 
underscore the mingled influences of biology and emotional life on depression, 
the scientists say.

 Still, several psychological factors that might plausibly influence a teen's 
emotional state showed little impact on later depression, Lewinsohn notes. 
These attributes included having a pessimistic outlook, low self-esteem, and 
few supportive relatives or friends.

 From a randomly selected group of 1,709 high school students in Oregon, all 
ages 14 to 18, the researchers identified 274 who had recovered from a single 
period of major depression. Those youngsters completed an initial psychiatric 
interview, a second interview 1 year later, and a final one after another 5 
years had passed.

 By the third interview, nearly half of the participants had plunged back into 
depression at least once. Rates of substance abuse and anxiety disorders rose 
more sharply in these teens than in those with no recurrences. Personality 
disorders associated with impulsive violence and unstable relationships also 
frequently appeared, the researchers say.

 Only one in five of the study participants received mental-health treatment of 
any kind during the study.

 Despite this generally bleak news, the findings offer hope for improving 
treatment, comment Andres Martin and Donald J. Cohen, both psychiatrists at 
Yale University School of Medicine, in an editorial in the same journal.

"Combinations of antidepressant medication, psychotherapy, and family 
interventions require more investigation," Martin says. Early, effective 
depression treatment may also reduce substance abuse, in his view.


