New work improves stainless steel surface: Science News Online, Oct. 21, 2000

 New work improves stainless steel surface

 J. Gorman

 Manufacturers polish, grind, and roll stainless steel to create countless 
everyday products. Such manipulations can produce, for example, an especially 
hard material for sharp edges on surgical tools and razor blades. Yet the 
resulting metal can be more brittle and prone to corrosion than other forms of 
stainless steel are.

 Now, an electrochemical technique seems to improve a stainless steel surface 
without degrading the rest of the material. The new process is so simple, says 
Tim Burstein of the University of Cambridge in England, that "you could just 
about carry it out in a schoolroom."

 Burstein and his colleagues ground and polished 1-centimeter squares made of a 
steel microstructure called austenite. As expected, X-ray diffraction revealed 
that their alterations had introduced another crystal microstructure, the 
brittle martensite, on the squares' surface.

 Then, Burstein's team placed the steel in a conductive bath of sodium nitrite 
and water at 80@Celsius. The scientists slowly pulsed electricity back and 
forth through the solution, alternating between two voltages. After 3 hours, 
new X-ray observations showed that the martensite had disappeared.

 Yet the desirable hardness remained, the team reports in the Oct. 19 Nature. 
Tests showed a surface even harder than that of the original polished steel 
square.

 For comparison, Burstein's group also used the conventional method of removing 
martensite. Treating stainless steel with very high temperatures can eliminate 
that crystal form, but there's a tradeoff. The heat can also alter the 
underlying metal's desirable properties.

 The team showed that heating polished steel samples to 750@C eliminates 
martensite but simultaneously decreases surface hardness.

 The Cambridge team produced their hardest surfaces yet by following an 
electrochemical treatment with a 550@C treatment. Burstein says any eventual 
use of the new process will likely include both electrochemistry and heat.

 Martensite also decreased during electrochemical processing of cold-rolled 
steel. Rolling had created the hard, brittle form of stainless steel throughout 
the samples and not just at the surface. Burstein reporsts that the 
electrochemical treatment eliminated the brittle structure even below the 
topmost atomic layers and reached as deep as 8 micrometers into the metal.

 Burstein notes that the mechanisms underlying the electrochemical technique 
remain unclear. Once researchers understand more of this chemistry, they may be 
able to use it to harden the surfaces of other metals, he adds.

"It's not a slam dunk yet," comments Robert G. Kelly of the University of 
Virginia in Charlottesville. Still, if further research reveals enough detail 
about how this new process works, it could have many applications.

 Consider razor blades. "You have the martensite at the cutting edge of the 
blade," Kelly says. "One of the reasons blades go dull after shaving is that 
they stay wet, and so they corrode. If you can remove the martensite and 
therefore slow the corrosion down, those of us who shave...would be much 
happier."


