Are most extrasolar planets hefty imposters?: Science News Online, Oct. 28, 2000

 Are most extrasolar planets hefty imposters?

 Ron Cowen

 The population of extrasolar planets may be an illusion, according to a 
controversial new study. Nearly half of the so-called planets may be much more 
massive and mundane-either lightweight stars or stellar wannabes known as brown 
dwarfs.

 The researchers who presented the contentious report this week at a meeting of 
the American Astronomical Society in Pasadena, Calif., call their results 
preliminary. Several other scientists, including an astronomer whose team has 
done a similar analysis, express skepticism.

 Still, the study highlights a well-known limitation of the standard technique 
to detect extrasolar planets: It can only detect the minimum mass of an 
orbiting object. The actual mass may be much greater.

 Planets that lie outside our own solar system are too faint to be easily seen. 
Instead, astronomers infer their presence through the tug they exert on the 
star they orbit. As a planet moves about its parent, it pulls the star to and 
fro. The star's back-and-forth motion along the line of sight to Earth shows up 
as a change in its spectrum, or a Doppler shift. As the star moves toward 
Earth, the light it emits appears shifted to bluer, or shorter, wavelengths; as 
it recedes, its light gets shifted to redder, or longer, wavelengths.

 The method is precise enough to detect objects lighter than Saturn moving in 
Mercury-like orbits (SN: 4/1/00, p. 220). But because the Doppler shift can 
only measure one component of motion-in and out along the line of sight-the 
extent to which it can reveal the true mass of the orbiting body depends on the 
tilt of its orbit relative to the line of sight.

 Suppose an object orbits a star so that it never disappears behind the star 
with respect to an Earthbound observer. In that case, the tug it exerts will 
primarily move the star across the sky rather than in and out. As a 
consequence, the Doppler shift will be quite small, and astronomers attempting 
to gauge the mass using the Doppler method could severely underestimate the 
weight of the object.

 That's the case for at least 15 of the 50 or so objects that have been deemed 
extrasolar planets, assert David C. Black of the Lunar and Planetary Institute 
in Houston, George D. Gatewood of the University of Pittsburgh's Allegheny 
Observatory, and Inwoo Han of the Korea Astronomy Observatory in Kyung-Book.

 The team arrived at that conclusion after combining the Doppler measurements 
with data from the European Space Agency's Hipparcos satellite, which tracked 
the astrometric, or side-to-side, motion of stars. Astrometric measurements, 
unlike the Doppler method, determine the orientation of an orbiting body and 
can therefore gauge its true mass.

 Black's team examined 30 stars purported to have planets with an orbital 
period of at least 10 days. The side-to-side motion induced by planets with 
shorter orbits can't be detected, Black says.

 The researchers report that four of the stars have companions hefty enough to 
qualify as low-mass stars rather than planets. The objects orbiting 11 other 
stars have masses ranging from 15 to 80 times that of Jupiter, which would make 
them brown dwarfs-bodies thought to form as stars do but that can't sustain 
nuclear burning. Another six stars require further study before the masses of 
their companions can be accurately measured. Just nine could still be planets.

"I think it is potentially revolutionary work," says Keith S. Noll of the Space 
Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, who heard Black lecture there last 
month. "If true, the whole field of extrasolar planets will be turned on its 
head."

 Theorist Alan P. Boss of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.), 
however, says he doesn't believe that the Hipparcos data, even in combination 
with the Doppler data, have the accuracy required to measure the objects' true 
masses. Moreover, the team's results suggest that planet hunters should find 
many objects with a minimum mass equal to a brown dwarf's. Instead, they find a 
dearth.

 Another analysis of Hipparcos' findings, by Shay Zucker and Tsevi Mazeh of Tel 
Aviv University, has concluded that the objects orbiting two stars examined by 
Black's team-rho Coronae Borealis and HD 10697-are heavier than a planet. But 
Mazeh says that Black's conclusion that most of the extrasolar planets are 
stars or brown dwarfs "is not justified by the data."

 In January, Mazeh plans to hunt for further evidence that rho Coronae Borealis 
has a companion that's a star, not a planet. He'll search for its fingerprint 
in the spectra recorded by a near-infrared spectrometer on the Keck telescope 
atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii.


