Signs of mass-giving particle get stronger: Science News Online, Nov. 4, 2000

 Signs of mass-giving particle get stronger

 Peter Weiss

 Signals from a particle collider near Geneva suggested in September that 
scientists might have sighted a long-sought particle thought to be the source 
of mass itself. Those hints of the so-called Higgs boson were enough to 
postpone the permanent shut-down of the 11-year-old Large Electron Positron 
(LEP) collider until Nov. 2 (SN: 9/23/00, p. 196). A new hint of the Higgs has 
cropped up in that extended run.

 The new data have bolstered the possibility that the particle is within reach. 
Besides its allure as the origin of mass, the Higgs is also a prominent 
experimental target because it's the last particle predicted by the central 
theory, or standard model, of particle physics that hasn't yet been found.

 The finding has rekindled excitement and tension at the European Laboratory 
for Particle Physics (CERN), where LEP is located. A huge accelerator project 
called the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) can't move forward until LEP's 
27-kilometer tunnel is available for the new tenant.

"It was pretty depressing most of the month," says Princeton University 
physicist and LEP researcher Christopher Tully. No new events suggestive of the 
Higgs appeared, and one of LEP's prior clues lost its luster under reanalysis. 
The new event on Oct. 16 "changed the whole picture," he says.

"It's a very good event, a very clean event," comments Marcela Carena of Fermi 
National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill.

 The just-observed hint of the Higgs boson is a collision recorded by the 
so-called L3 detector. The fireball of electron-positron annihilation spat out 
a particle that promptly decayed into a bottom quark and its antimatter 
counterpart. Researchers suspect that the short-lived particle was a Higgs 
boson in part because some energy escaped the detector. The missing energy 
suggests, as expected, that a Z boson was created along with the presumed Higgs 
boson and then decayed into a pair of neutrinos, which LEP's detectors can't 
pick up.

 The event may have caught a Higgs decaying in a scenario, or channel, less 
common than the so-called four-jet events seen until now at LEP. "What people 
are excited about is that you can see it from a different decay channel," says 
Sau Lan Wu of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, a member of the team that 
found the three strongest of the previous four events indicating a Higgs' 
presence.

 As of press time, the four LEP experimental teams were debating whether to ask 
CERN's managers on Nov. 3 to extend LEP's life another year-at the cost of 
millions of Swiss francs and a delay of the LHC-to give the scientists a shot 
at firmly discovering the Higgs.


