Aircraft trick may give big rigs a gentle lift: Science News Online, Oct. 28, 
2000

 Aircraft trick may give big rigs a gentle lift

 Peter Weiss

 Even as fuel costs soar, truckers' loads could become less of a drag. 
Moreover, making that happen would be a breeze, say researchers at a Georgia 
Institute of Technology laboratory in Smyrna.

 That breeze-sheets of pressurized air-would blow rearward from slits in an 
18-wheeler's roof, sides, and bottom at locations just forward of the truck's 
tail. Last week, the team began wind-tunnel tests on a model truck fitted with 
slits.

 In the model, artificial wind from compressed air slips over metal 
half-cylinders mounted along each edge of the trailer's rear. By forcing air 
billowing off other truck surfaces to fall in with orderly currents, those 
slit-fed air streams may calm a truck's typically stormy wake. That could cut 
drag on tractor-trailers by 35 percent or more, claims Georgia Tech engineer 
and team leader Robert J. Englar.

 Computer simulations and earlier wind-tunnel tests of models by Englar's group 
had shown that already-streamlined cars could shed 35 percent of their drag by 
blowing air through slits. For the boxy trucks on the road today, Englar would 
expect an even greater effect. Just a 35 percent loss of drag, however, would 
slice fuel use by 12 percent, he estimates. If all U.S. semitrailer trucks 
adopted the technology, they could thereby save 1.2 billion gallons of fuel per 
year.

 Other benefits are possible when the pneumatic system is used to blow air 
through one slit more strongly than the others, Englar says. For instance, lift 
created by air coming only from the top slit could lessen the load on the 
wheels up to 15 percent, cutting fuel use even further. Conversely, negative 
lift from the bottom slit could push the load down, increasing traction under 
slippery conditions. Bursts through the side slits could counter swaying 
motions that can cause trucks to jackknife.

"The trucking people who are aware of [this research] are really enthused about 
it," comments Victor A. Suski, an automotive engineer with the American 
Trucking Associations in Alexandria, Va. That organization helped drum up 
interest at the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), which funds the current, 
3-year study. Next year, the trucking group plans to help with tests on real 
trucks, Suski says.

 Richard N. Wares, the project's manager at DOE in Washington, D.C., concedes 
that the fuel-reduction estimates don't weigh in any added fuel that the truck 
might require to supply air to the slits. That air could come from engine 
exhaust, from compressors already present in trucks, or from additional 
compressors or tanks. Even if supplying the air cancels drag-reduction gains, 
the technology "can still be a useful control mechanism," Wares contends.

 The technology takes advantage of an effect discovered by Romanian scientist 
Henri Coanda in the late 1930s. A jet or sheet of gas, if moving fast enough, 
will bend to move along an adjacent surface that angles away from the source of 
the gas. Engineers use the effect to steer a gas jet along a tilted or a curved 
surface, even around the bottom of a plane's wing.

 Englar helped develop the technology initially to increase lift for U.S. Navy 
warplanes. Although the approach was proven effective in flight tests in 1979, 
the Navy hasn't embraced it, partly because of qualms about relying too much on 
compressed air that might shut off during engine failures, he says.

 Nonetheless, a commercial helicopter currently uses the technique. Also, tests 
on Formula 1 racecars have yielded "very promising results," Englar says. Most 
recently, automakers have contacted the team about improving the fuel economy 
of gas-guzzling sport-utility vehicles, he adds.


