Little Big Wire: Science News Online, Nov. 18, 2000

 Little Big Wire High-temperature superconductivity makes a bid for the power 
grid

 By Peter Weiss

 In 1986, scientists discovered a new family of materials that can conduct 
electricity with absolutely no resistance. Because these so-called 
superconductors work at much higher temperatures than any previously identified 
superconductors, the discovery was considered one of the most important of that 
decade. The findings triggered a wave of euphoria that flooded scientific 
meetings and the popular press.

 At an American Physical Society meeting in New York City that convened just 
months after the discovery hit the news, thousands of researchers overflowed a 
huge hall. An all-night session was filled with presentations about the 
phenomenon of high-temperature superconductivity and speculations about its 
impact. That event became known as the Woodstock of physics.

 Because the materials potentially could carry huge currents resistance-free 
and because cooling them to their effective temperature is far less onerous a 
task than it is for their lower-temperature cousins, many scientists turned 
visionary and predicted a technological revolution.

"We physicists were the darlings of the media for a year," recalls Paul M. 
Grant of the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) in Palo Alto, Calif. At 
the time, he led the research group at IBM's Almaden Research Center in San 
Jose, Calif., that determined the atomic structure of one of the materials. "If 
someone shoves a mike in your face...you can say some things that, in 
retrospect, are pretty silly," he says.

 To be sure, the revolution has yet to materialize, mainly because the new 
substances-complex and brittle ceramics-proved to be tougher to tame than the 
early pundits suspected. But the dream didn't die.

 Recently, researchers and designers have started demonstrating full-scale 
prototypes of electric power cables, motors, transformers, and other equipment 
made of high-temperature superconducting (HTS) wire. The new devices waste less 
energy than their conventional counterparts. The energy requirement is less 
even when taking into account the power to cool them to -196@C-or often lower 
temperatures when strong magnetic fields are present. Moreover, the new 
superconducting equipment is smaller, lighter, safer, and often more 
environmentally friendly than conventional devices.

"We're offering a way to make [motors and other electrical equipment] as 
perfect as they're ever going to get," says James Daley, manager of the 
Department of Energy's (DOE) superconductivity program, which is based in 
Washington, D.C.

 In Detroit next year, if all goes well on one of the projects sponsored by 
Daley's office, power will flow through HTS cables to commercial customers for 
the first time.

 The main component of the HTS devices now beginning to prove themselves is 
wire made with compounds of bismuth, strontium, calcium, copper, and oxygen. 
These materials are generically known as BSCCO (pronounced bisco).

 However, the high cost of using BSCCO looms as a serious obstacle to its wide 
use. That cost may come down through high-volume production of the wire and 
improvements in its performance. Still, even BSCCO manufacturers are looking 
for less expensive alternatives to the material.

 In labs throughout the world, researchers are racing to develop wire from 
another high-temperature superconductor called yttrium barium copper oxide, or 
YBCO (pronounced ibco). YBCO wires may cost less than BSCCO ones. They're also 
expected to carry higher currents than BSCCO wires in the presence of the 
magnetic fields found in many types of equipment.

 If YBCO wire can be made in practical lengths-a challenge that arose as soon 
as YBCO was discovered in 1987-high-temperature superconductivity may finally 
offer both cost low enough and performance high enough to become a central 
technology of the 21st century, say many industry observers. "It's a big leap 
of faith to go to YBCO," notes Donald U. Gubser of the Naval Research 
Laboratory in Washington, D.C. But it's a leap that "could lead to tremendous 
rewards," he adds.

 By ordinary human scales of hot and cold, there's nothing really high 
temperature about high-temperature superconductors. As the materials are cooled 
from ambient temperature, their superconductivity kicks in at so-called 
critical temperatures. But those temperatures are high only in comparison with 
the critical temperatures of the more aptly named low-temperature 
superconductors.

 Those substances, mostly metals or metal alloys, lose all resistivity when 
chilled to a temperature that liquefies helium, which is -269@C. By contrast, 
the critical temperatures of high-temperature superconductors tend to be above 
-196@C, the temperature at which nitrogen liquifies. That's still profoundly 
cold, but it's much less of a challenge for refrigeration systems to meet.

 Building practical power devices with high-temperature superconductors 
entailed making them into a suitable wire. That took more than a decade, but 
finally developers figured out ways to reliably encase the granular, brittle 
BSCCO in silver and extrude the package into long filaments.

 Further rolling and heating coerces the material, on a microscopic level, to 
align in a manner that permits large currents to flow. The technique, which 
researchers developed by about 1990, works because BSCCO crystals have a 
layered structure-"like a deck of cards," says Gregory J. Yurek, a former 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology metallurgist who co-invented the idea of 
blending BSCCO with metal. He's now president of HTS-wire maker American 
Superconductor Corp. in Westborough, Mass.

 Rolling shatters the weak bonds between the cardlike flakes of BSCCO, 
spreading each deck lengthwise by sliding layers past each other. Heating then 
merges overlapping flakes, creating an extended, continuous path along which 
current can flow.

 Even with this wire-making tactic in hand, there was still a long slog ahead 
to practical applications. "A lot of hard work has gone into fine-tuning the 
process incrementally so today you have wire with high enough performance," 
EPRI's Grant notes. At present, the maximum amount of current per 
cross-sectional area, or critical current density, of BSCCO-roughly 70,000 
amperes per square centimeter (A/cm2) at -196@C- is about three times what it 
was 4 years ago, he says. Above the critical current density, a superconducting 
wire starts to resist electric flow.

 Because BSCCO wires are made only partially of the pure superconducting 
material, the actual critical current density of wires reaches only about 
15,000 A/cm2. Nonetheless, that's 15 to 150 times copper's maximum current 
density, which varies dramatically depending on how well a cable or other 
device containing the metal can dissipate heat.

 Because of their high capacity, HTS cables can be so svelte that Detroit's 
local electric utility, in partnership with DOE and other institutions, is 
replacing nine underground, oil-cooled copper power cables that serve nearly 
14,000 customers with just three liquid-nitrogen-cooled BSCCO cables. By next 
summer, when the swap should be complete, a mere 900 pounds of BSCCO wire will 
have taken the place of 25,000 lbs. of copper wire.

 DOE estimates that because of electrical resistance and other losses, more 
than 7 percent of all the power currently generated in the United States is 
wasted. By converting the nation's power grid to HTS technology, "we can save 
half the existing losses," Daley claims.

 Last July, in a milestone for practical high-temperature superconductivity, 
another DOE project led by Rockwell Automation in Greenville, S.C., began to 
test the first HTS motor powerful enough to potentially find wide use in 
industry. According to DOE, motors rated at 1,000 horsepower or more eat up a 
large chunk-about 30 percent-of U.S. electric power. The prototype 
1,000-horsepower, BSCCO-based motor is currently half the size and weight of a 
conventional motor but shows about the same efficiency. However, its developers 
say that they expect to slice its energy losses in half.

 Meanwhile, the same consortium is building a 5,000-horsepower motor. And the 
U. S. Navy has been exploring the possibility of 25,000-33,000-horsepower HTS 
motors to drive all-electric ships. "Twenty-five-thousand-horsepower motors 
exist today, but they're so big and heavy that [ships] don't use them," Gubser 
notes. An HTS motor of that power would tip the scales at about 40,000 lbs., a 
third the weight of a conventional motor, he estimates.

 The green potential of HTS devices is soon to be put to the test by Waukesha 
(Wisc.) Electric, DOE, and their partners. Early next year, they expect to 
install a large, BSCCO-based transformer at a utility substation. Because of 
their low temperatures, HTS transformers don't require the hazardous oils that 
cool conventional transformers.

 The oils, which often contain toxic, flame-retarding compounds called PCBs, 
sometimes leak into the ground, Daley says. By eliminating the oils, HTS 
transformers and power cables offer an environment-protection bonus over 
conventional technology, Daley notes. Moreover, the new transformers could be 
used in buildings where conventional transformers have been banned because of 
the risk that their cooling oils will catch fire.

 Despite the apparent advantages of high-temperature superconductors, major 
economic and technical hurdles remain as engineers push the new materials 
toward the power grid.

 BSCCO is costly because it's encased in silver. Currently, BSCCO wire costs 20 
to 30 times as much as copper wire does. However, a number of superconductivity 
veterans predict the price will drop to a tenth of today's figure within the 
next 3 to 5 years, as long as the predicted demand for HTS cables and devices 
materializes.

 Contributing to that anticipated price drop, supply should also increase 
dramatically because American Superconductor is building the first large-scale 
plant for making the wire. By 2002, the company plans to be churning out 10,000 
kilometers of it per year. "We expect the cost of production to fall by about a 
factor of six when we open that plant," says company spokesman John B. Howe.

 As BSCCO becomes more abundant, its quality is also likely to continue to 
improve, Gubser says, so the cost of making devices from the wire may diminish.

 In the meantime, wire researchers are lavishing most of their funding and 
laboratory studies on what they hope will be BSCCO's successor-YBCO. "People 
believe that YBCO wire can be manufactured with significantly lower cost" than 
BSCCO wire, Gubser says.

 That's because scientists have found ways to make YBCO wire by starting with a 
strip of inexpensive metal such as nickel. The researchers then coat the strip 
with a few layers of materials that keep the metal atoms from contaminating the 
superconductor, and they finally add a thin YBCO topcoat.

 Because YBCO has a high critical current density, that last layer can be 
extremely thin but still enable the wire to carry as much current as BSCCO 
wire-and possibly more, scientists say. Researchers have measured up to 3 
million A/cm2 in some YBCO wire samples at -196@C, says David C. Larbalestier 
of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. That's more than 40 times the critical 
current density of BSCCO (SN: 4/29/95, p. 269).

 Yet making YBCO wire is more easily said than done. So far, no one has found a 
way to fabricate it in practical lengths. The challenge has been to get the 
YBCO, which lacks the laminar structure of BSCCO, to lie down in a uniform 
sheet that has crystal lattices lined up nearly perfectly in three dimensions 
from one grain to the next.

 Why must grain boundaries line up so well? Think of superconductivity as a 
flow of pairs of electrons, called Cooper pairs, says Oak Ridge (Tenn.) 
National Laboratory physicist John D. Budai (SN: 2/11/95, p. 88; 6/7/97, p. 
351). Those electrons "have to dance around each other in a careful way so as 
to never run into the atoms in the crystal," says Budai, who a decade ago 
developed one of the main ways of aligning YBCO films. "They can't keep doing 
that when they hit the boundary between two [misaligned] grains" because there 
the atomic layout abruptly changes, he says.

 By using very expensive fabrication techniques, researchers can now align 
their YBCO grains to within a 10@ angle of each other, which allows for 
adequate currents-but only up to a half-dozen meters. Beyond that, 
irregularities still wreck the wire's properties.

 Interestingly, a sprinkle of calcium where the grains touch could be a 
solution. In an experiment on just two grains meeting at a 24@ angle, Jochen 
Mannhart of the University of Augsburg in Germany and his colleagues found that 
a dose of calcium could boost current through the intersection sixfold. The 
calcium may directly modify the border, researchers suspect. Also, because 
there's a shortage of electrons in calcium ions compared with the yttrium ions 
that they displace, the calcium effectively injects additional positive charges 
that can ferry current across the boundary region. The researchers describe 
their findings in the Sept. 14 Nature.

 In a commentary accompanying that report, Grant calls this calcium doping "the 
best idea that's come along in the 5 years since coated conductors first 
emerged."

 Yurek says that he doubts such doping will benefit YBCO films because the 
grains are already much better aligned than those in the German experiment. 
Budai and Daley also doubt that added calcium is necessary for practical 
wire-making.

 While such uncertainties surrounding YBCO continue to challenge research 
scientists and engineers, the demonstrations of BSCCO-based devices are 
convincing utilities and industry that HTS technology works and is reliable. 
Says Larbalestier, "Technically, the picture is clear. Those things work."

 That should make it easier for YBCO-based technology, if and when it becomes 
ready, to take over what BSCCO has begun.


