Lamprey cyborg sees the light and responds: Science News Online, Nov. 11, 2000

 Lamprey cyborg sees the light and responds

 Sid Perkins

 The $6-million eel it ain't. But researchers who have taken the unprecedented 
step of connecting a brain, in this case a sea lamprey's brain, to a small 
mobile robot say they've got a roving fishbot that may someday lead to better 
prosthetic devices for humans.

 In the meantime, the two-wheeled robot that scoots about the lab bench in 
response to light may help scientists better understand how an animal's nervous 
system and a machine can communicate with each other.

 Led by Sandro Mussa-Ivaldi, a computational neurobiologist at Northwestern 
University Medical School in Chicago, the researchers described their findings 
this week at the 30th annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience in New 
Orleans.

"I'm very impressed with this work," says Stephen P. DeWeerth, a biomedical 
engineer at Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta. "It combines the 
realism of biology with the controllability of electronics."

 To create the cyborg, Mussa-Ivaldi and his team removed a lamprey's brain and 
part of its spinal cord and placed them in a refrigerated, oxygen-rich saline 
solution. Then, they rigged small wires to bring electrical signals from 
optical sensors mounted on the robot to the disembodied brain's vestibular 
system, which normally enables the animal to distinguish up from down.

 When the robot's sensors detected light, the lamprey's brain interpreted the 
signals they sent as conveying a certain orientation in the water, the 
scientists speculate. Electrical impulses that normally would have moved along 
nerves to the animal's muscles instead traveled along a second set of wires to 
the robot's wheels.

 Depending on the electrodes' placement in the brain tissue, the signals caused 
the robot to wheel toward or away from the light or to travel in a circle or a 
spiral. In experiments with more than 40 lamprey brains, approaching the light 
was the most common response.

 Mussa-Ivaldi says the disembodied brain's continuous response to the 
ever-changing signals from the robot's optical sensors is the first example of 
two-way interaction between neural tissue and a robot. Studying the behavior of 
this simple fish-robot hybrid may help researchers develop more complicated 
systems that combine biological and electronic elements, he notes.

"Scientists don't have a clear understanding of how to develop a two-way 
communication between a brain and an artificial limb," Mussa-Ivaldi told 
Science News. "We need to understand how the nervous system and a machine may 
talk to one another."

 The researchers chose a lamprey's brain to control their robot for several 
reasons, says Mussa-Ivaldi. For one thing, the neurons are large and easily 
identified. Also, the tissue can be kept alive outside the animal's body in a 
cold saline solution for weeks. Moreover, he notes, the lamprey's central 
nervous system can compensate for a lesion in the vestibular system. When some 
of these cells are damaged, connections between the neurons somehow rearrange 
so that the lamprey still swims normally.

 In their next set of experiments, the researchers plan to examine the brain's 
flexibility after such rewiring. They'll simulate a lesion in the lamprey's 
nervous system by electronically blocking the input to the brain tissue from 
one of the robot's sensors. After the brain has adjusted, the scientists will 
restore the signal and observe the robot's behavior. Such a before-and-after 
comparison would be impossible with a surgically induced lesion but easy to 
obtain via reversible electronic simulation, Mussa-Ivaldi says.

 Any organism that receives an implant or a prosthesis connected directly to 
its nervous system will have to adapt to the device's presence and learn to 
communicate with it, says DeWeerth. Characterizing the interactions between 
simple biological and electronic materials is a fundamental step in building 
true hybrid systems, he notes.


