King Midas' Modern Mourners: Science News Online, Nov. 4, 2000

 King Midas' Modern Mourners Chemistry resurrects-in Philadelphia-an ancient 
funeral banquet

 By Jessica Gorman

"Pan scrapings!" announced G. Kenneth Sams. "When you come down to it, that is 
what has brought us all here tonight-pan scrapings."

 It was probably not the most appetizing introduction for a $150-per-plate 
museum fundraiser. Some 150 guests, many in black tie, had just sat down to 
enjoy their first course at lavish banquet tables in the Upper Egyptian Gallery 
of the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology in 
Philadelphia. Did they really want to consider dirty dishes as they sipped wine 
and sampled the Turkish meze before them?

 Well, yes. After all, these weren't just any old dishes left in the sink 
overnight. Sams, of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and the 
project director for the Gordion archeological site in central Turkey, was 
telling the attendees about the vessels from which mourners ate an elaborate 
feast during King Midas' funeral 2,700 years ago.

 That wasn't all. The modern diners sitting before Sams were about to eat the 
first reconstruction of that feast-a celebration that had remained undiscovered 
for decades after archaeologist Rodney S. Young first excavated Midas' tomb in 
1957.

 Ancient Roman, Greek, or even Maya banquets had been re-created previously, 
but generally from texts and ancient recipes. Not so with the Midas feast. 
"It's the first time that somebody tried to do it working just from the 
chemical evidence," says Patrick E. McGovern, the museum's molecular 
archaeologist who led the analyses. In other words, from the pan scrapings.

 According to Greek myth, a foolish King Midas requested his famed golden touch 
from the god Dionysus. Soon after Dionysus granted his wish, however, Midas 
found that even his food became gold, and he faced starvation. Fortunately for 
Midas, Dionysus permitted the greedy king to return to his old self once he 
bathed in the river Pactolus.

 Archaeologists and historians know that the real king Midas was a powerful 
leader around 700 B.C. in Phrygia, a region in what is now central Turkey. When 
Young discovered and excavated what is almost certainly Midas' tomb at Gordion 
in 1957, he found that it held no gold but plenty of evidence of a royal and 
wealthy man.

 Yet even more treasure lay unrecognized near Midas' remains. Perhaps in 
Young's rush to finish his work before grave robbers could intercede, he 
misinterpreted some of the tomb's contents. He didn't realize that the vessels 
and wooden furniture he had found had been used by mourners for a funerary 
feast outside the tomb and then stashed in it.

 More than 20 years later, archaeologist Elizabeth Simpson found that the 
telltale clue to an outdoor feast had been lying right under Midas himself.

 While Simpson was drawing pictures of Young's excavation finds for a 
posthumous book on his research in 1978, she realized that something was amiss. 
She was recreating the structure of a deteriorated four-poster bed that Young 
had said the king's skeleton lay upon when the excavation team opened the tomb. 
But Simpson couldn't work out a satisfactory arrangement of a bed's pieces from 
the original tomb photos.

 She went to Turkey in 1981 and eventually turned up the so-called four-poster 
in a storage area at the Gordion site. It was not a bed, it turned out, but a 
hollowed-out log coffin that could have served as a bier for displaying the 
king's body. "And then, the light went on," she says.

 Simpson determined that four supports, which Young had thought to hold the 
bedposts, actually had steadied the coffin for display. However, these pieces 
of wood weren't in their supporting locations when Young opened the tomb. "That 
was how I figured out there was a ceremony outside," says Simpson. If the king 
wasn't properly on display in the tomb, he must have previously been on display 
somewhere else.

 It took Simpson the next 10 years to work out the details. She eventually 
determined that mourners had held a ceremonial banquet outside the tomb. All 
the while, amid the scene, Midas' body lay in state on his bier.

 After the mourners had their fill of food and alcohol, they lowered Midas' 
body into the tomb, along with their party leftovers. Simpson's theory was 
supported by other tomb contents, including furniture such as banquet tables 
and the best collection of Iron Age drinking vessels ever uncovered. Yet she 
became frustrated in her attempt to more completely reconstruct the event. She 
needed to understand what the ancient Phrygians had served in the vessels.

 Simpson knew that Young's 1957 research team had removed dry yellow powder and 
some brown residue from the tomb vessels and dumped the samples into bags. The 
excavators had then shipped the bags off to storage in the University of 
Pennsylvania Museum's Gordion archives. Yet Simpson couldn't find anyone who 
could tell her what those residues had looked or tasted like 2,700 years ago.

 Then in 1997, Simpson asked McGovern to help out. McGovern had by that time 
used modern chemical techniques to analyze the remnants of the earliest wine 
and the earliest beer yet found (SN: 6/8/96, p. 359). Simpson, who now leads 
the Gordion Furniture Project and is a professor at the Bard Graduate Center 
for Studies in the Decorative Arts in New York City, located and labeled the 
samples in the Penn archive and turned them over to McGovern.

 McGovern had an extraordinary amount of ancient material to work with-5 pounds 
of food residue and about a pound of beverage remains. Most of the tests that 
he and his colleagues wanted to perform require just a milligram, or even a 
microgram, of material.

"We have an embarrassment of riches here for molecular archaeologists," he 
says. "The real gold was inside these vessels, and that was the ancient 
material that we analyzed."

 Through a battery of tests-liquid and gas chromatography and mass 
spectrometry, for example-McGovern and his colleagues pinned down the signature 
compounds in the residues that would tell them what the mourners had eaten and 
drunk. That allowed the scientists to attempt to reconstruct recipes, he says.

 Analyses of the brown food leftovers showed specific fatty acids and a lot of 
cholesterol, indicative of goat or lamb meat, says McGovern. Presence of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons indicated that the meat was barbecued. A plant 
steroid was the fingerprint for lentils, he says, and anisic acid indicated 
that the food preparers had spiced this dish with anise or fennel. Elaidic acid 
pointed to the use of olive oil, as well.

 The Phrygians must have cut the meat off the bone to create a stew, since the 
tomb excavation uncovered no bones.

 The beverage's yellow, powdery residue revealed an unusual combination of 
honey mead, wine, and beer. The researchers recognized remains of honey mead 
when they discovered substances related to beeswax. They also found calcium 
oxalate, so-called beerstone, which is produced during barley beer brewing, and 
they identified tartaric acid, which appears in grapes and therefore wine. 
Whether the three types of beverages were brewed together or made separately 
and then combined, the researchers couldn't determine. They published their 
results in the Dec. 23/30, 1999 Nature.

 Sometime during all this research, someone decided it would be fun-and 
educational-for the scientists to actually taste the fruits of their labor. The 
researchers can't remember exactly who suggested it or when, but they 
eventually decided to attempt a reconstruction of the ancient food and brew 
served at Midas' funeral.

 For those tasks, McGovern approached a chef and a brewmaster.

 Chef Pamela Horowitz of Museum Catering Company in Philadelphia started 
working on the banquet menu months before the event. Horowitz reconstructed the 
lamb-and-lentil stew and then used her imagination to prepare Turkish 
appetizers and dessert.

"It's been a really great process to figure out how we want to present foods 
that were found to be in the tomb 2,700 years ago, which are still available in 
the region, and how to formulate a meal without recipes," says Horowitz.

 Almost all of the foods on her menu would have been found in Phrygia, with one 
major exception, she says. Since chocolate is a New World food, Phrygians 
probably didn't eat a gold-laced chocolate truffle, which to please modern 
museum patrons accompanied Horowitz' favorite part of the meal-a 
honey-caramelized fennel dessert tart.

 Moving on to the drink menu, McGovern says, "I was especially interested in 
trying to recreate the fermented beverage." He also wanted "to answer questions 
about whether it's even possible to brew these three things together and what 
combinations of different ingredients work well," he adds. McGovern assigned 
the challenge to microbrewer Sam Calagione of Dogfish Head Craft Brewery in 
Lewes, Del.

"We've gotten a reputation for brewing sort of esoteric beers," says Calagione.

 Although the chemical analysis had revealed the basic ingredients, much 
remained unknown about how to create the so-called King Midas Golden Elixir. 
Calagione had to make educated guesses and see if his instincts resulted in 
something palatable.

 For example, Calagione kept his brew at room temperature, reasoning that the 
ancient Phrygians didn't have refrigeration.

 He also decided to combine all three parts-the honey mead, the beer, and the 
wine-before fermentation. He targeted an alcohol content of 7.5 percent, midway 
between beer and wine, and an amount of carbonation also halfway between the 
two.

 The researchers suspected that some spice was present but couldn't identify 
it. Calagione decided to add saffron, which would have grown in Phrygia. He 
didn't know how much to include. "So, I added exactly four handfuls," about a 
pound, of saffron to make the six kegs of brewed beverage, he says.

 McGovern says he'd like to work with Calagione to eventually market the drink. 
It would cost about $75 per case to bottle and sell, Calagione estimates.

"It has more of the refinement and mellowness of a wine than the robustness of 
an ale," Calagione says.

 Finally, in late September, the University of Pennsylvania Museum hosted the 
affair.

"Here we are tonight, feeding on spicy lamb and lentils, just as those who saw 
off Midas did," Sams told the guests as servers brought in the main course.

 The stew was the hit of the evening.

"It's the best lamb stew I've had in a long time," said guest Albert T. 
Olenzak, a financial consultant and former engineer from the Philadelphia area.

 Banquet attendee Robert A. Moreau, who has a particular connection to the 
stew, agreed. He and his colleague Alberto Nunez, both of the Department of 
Agriculture's Eastern Regional Research Center in Wyndmoor, Pa., had analyzed 
the fats in the ancient food samples.

 As diners finished the entree, McGovern rose to speak. "After you've had such 
a fine stew, what do you wash it down with?" he asked the guests, while dessert 
and the sparkling yellow King Midas Golden Elixir appeared before them on the 
royal-purple tablecloths.

"It was delicious," says Simpson, who knows perhaps more about the meal's long 
history than anyone else. "I was so thrilled to be eating and drinking [the 
stew and elixir] after working on this project for such a long time."


