Chalk reveals greatest underwater landslide: Science News Online, Dec. 9, 2000

 Chalk reveals greatest underwater landslide

 Laura Sivitz

 The cataclysmic event that wiped out the last dinosaurs also triggered the 
greatest underwater landslides ever, scientists report.

 A chunk of a giant comet or asteroid slammed into Mexico's Yucatan peninsula 
about 65 million years ago, setting off earthquakes with magnitudes estimated 
at 10 to 13. The seismic shock waves generated meter-high vibrations in Earth's 
crust all along the east coast of North America.

 New research indicates that this shaking sent sediment from shallow waters 
sliding off the continental shelf. Once the ooze settled, it may have blanketed 
a region as large as 3.9 million square kilometers on the deep ocean floor-an 
area more than twice the size of Alaska.

 The researchers examined sediment drilled from the seafloor near Bermuda at 
depths of about 4,000 meters. Within those cores, 65-million-year-old layers of 
chalk contain fossil and geologic markers, including fragments of ancient land 
plants and pollen.

"You don't [normally] find that in open ocean sites," says John Firth, a 
paleontologist at Texas A&M University in College Station. He and his 
colleagues also found large amounts of fossilized algae that typically grew in 
much shallower water, he says.

 The chalk layers that the scientists examined lie nearly 640 meters beneath 
the seafloor. Previous acoustic studies had suggested a chalk layer at this 
depth underneath an enormous area of the western North Atlantic. In the 
December Geology, the scientists argue that this layer, known as Horizon A*, is 
in fact debris from massive landslides triggered by the impact in the Yucatan.

"This was never recognized before," Firth says. The researchers say that the 
layering pattern they see within the chalk could have been produced by moving 
sediment.

 Furthermore, Firth says that the deeply buried chalk layer contains remnants 
of only the small, juvenile forms of a protozoan that normally appears in a 
range of sizes. Chalk in previously drilled cores off the coast of Florida 
revealed only large varieties of the organism. The scientists suspect that as 
the underwater landslide began, large protozoa came to rest close to the 
continent while small ones were carried out to sea.

 Firth and his colleagues at Woods Hole (Mass.) Oceanographic Institution point 
out that small particles in clay lying above the chalk resemble pulverized 
stone that could have been thrown into the atmosphere from the extraterrestrial 
rock's impact. These particles, seen previously in ocean-floor cores, would 
have settled out of the atmosphere and water after the landslides, the 
researchers say.

 Other scientists agree that the case for underwater landslides in the western 
North Atlantic appears sound. Geologist Tim Bralower of the University of North 
Carolina in Chapel Hill says he found similar evidence in sediment around the 
Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean.

 Richard Olsson, a geologist at Rutgers University in Piscataway, N.J., also 
recently reported dramatic repercussions of the Yucatan impact. His team found 
evidence that seismic shock waves stimulated a giant landslide off the coast of 
New Jersey and generated a tsunami that roared ashore there.

 Still, Olsson takes issue with the claim by Firth and his colleagues that all 
of Horizon A* was deposited during the landslides. Too little is known about 
the layer to draw that conclusion, he says, adding, "The impact 
event...generated a great deal of devastation, and we are just beginning to 
sort [the record] out."


