An early cosmic wallop for life on Earth?: Science News Online, Dec. 22, 2000

 An early cosmic wallop for life on Earth?

 Ron Cowen

 Life on Earth either started with a bang or it suffered an unusually rocky 
childhood, a new study suggests.

 Analyzing lunar meteorites, researchers have found new evidence that a swarm 
of debris bombarded the moon some 3.9 billion years ago. That's about the same 
time that life may have formed on Earth. If our planet suffered a similarly 
catastrophic bombardment, as scientists claim, it could have dramatically 
affected the evolution of life here.

"This makes it more real that there could have been substantial editing of the 
biosphere and organisms...3.9 billion years ago," comments astrobiologist David 
J. Des Marais of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, Calif.

 Indications that the moon underwent a heavy bombardment date to the early 
1970s. That's when researchers analyzed age-revealing isotopes in moon rocks 
collected by spacecraft. The results of that work suggested that a huge number 
of asteroid or comet fragments had pummeled the moon's crust roughly 3.9 
billion years ago.

 To many scientists, the data indicated that the moon's entire surface had been 
battered. But critics noted that the rocks were all collected from the equator 
on the moon's near side. Perhaps the catastrophic event was limited to that 
region, they argued.

 To settle the argument, Barbara A. Cohen, now at the University of Tennessee 
in Knoxville, and Timothy D. Swindle and David A. Kring of the University of 
Arizona in Tucson analyzed four meteorites of lunar material. These differ in 
composition or texture from each other and from the rocks collected by the 
spacecraft, and so they probably constitute a more global sampling of the moon.

 Within each meteorite, the team zeroed in on glassy material-so-called impact 
melts-formed by the rapid melting and cooling of rock that occurs during and 
after an impact. The impact melts range in age from 2.76 billion to 3.92 
billion years, the team reports in the Dec. 1 Science.

 Finding nothing older "supports the concept of an early, intense period of 
bombardment in the Earth-moon system at about 3.9 billion years," the 
researchers say. The most violent era may have lasted half a billion years, 
they propose.

 Given Earth's proximity to the moon, it's "inescapable" that our planet also 
took a beating, says Des Marais. Indeed, because of its stronger gravity, Earth 
may have been pummeled by 10 to 20 times as much debris, Cohen notes.

 The largest of the ancient space debris would have boiled Earth's oceans, 
scorched the crust, and filled the atmosphere with vaporized rock, Cohen's team 
notes. Because Earth's surface has since been torn apart by volcanic activity 
and the slip-sliding of tectonic plates, signs of this cataclysm would be hard 
to spot today. The moon, in comparison, has been geologically dead for billions 
of years, and its rocks represent a pristine relic of its early history.

 Traces of carbon in some of the oldest rocks on Earth suggest life on our 
planet dates to 3.85 billion years ago (SN: 11/9/96, p. 292). That puts 
primitive organisms smack in the middle of a cosmic bombardment.

 A mere coincidence or not, the timing suggests three possibilities for the 
origin and evolution of life, says Christopher P. McKay of Ames. The 
bombardment may have delivered heat and organic compounds to Earth, sparking 
the rapid formation of primitive life. Alternatively, the pummeling could have 
wiped out existing life on Earth's surface but enabled other organisms to 
flourish-particularly those at the ocean bottom near heat-generating vents (SN: 
1/9/99, p. 24).

 Or life may have been delivered to Earth by the very projectiles that smashed 
up the surface. "In this case, life may have originated on Mars or come from 
outside the solar system," McKay notes.

 Although different theorists may favor one scenario over another, at present 
"we have no real basis for choosing between [these ideas]," he says.


