Weight Matters, Even in the Womb: Science News Online, Dec. 9, 2000

 Status at birth can foreshadow illnesses decades later

 By Damaris Christensen

 In the bathroom, at the gym, and in the doctor's office, most people in the 
United States keep an eye on the scale. We're usually more concerned about 
weighing too much than weighing too little. There's a social stigma to being 
heavy and public health messages regularly warn us that extra fat leads to a 
higher-than-average risk of developing high blood pressure, heart disease, 
diabetes, and other chronic ailments.

 The public health message, though, would be very different if it targeted 
babies about to be born. A growing number of studies confirm that small, thin 
newborns are more likely to develop certain chronic diseases when they become 
adults than are babies who are born heavier.

 Connections between low birth weight and adult disease were first discerned in 
England a little more than a decade ago. David Barker, an epidemiologist at the 
University of Southampton, noticed that some low-income regions that had had 
high infant-mortality rates in the early part of the century also had 
higher-than-average rates of heart disease in their adult populations during 
the 1970s and 1980s.

 High infant mortality is often attributed to low birth weight-defined as less 
than 5.5 pounds-since babies that small often have trouble breathing and 
develop other ailments. The observation that populations with high infant 
mortality were also prone to heart disease led Barker to propose that a 
full-term baby's weight could be linked to an adult's risk of developing a 
chronic disease. Even babies at the small end of the normal range are more 
likely to develop chronic diseases later in life than heavier infants are, he 
suggested.

 Initially, Barker's idea was controversial. Yet many studies confirming the 
association-in different countries and ethnic groups-have convinced most 
doubters that something is going on.

 The question is, What?

 Early skeptics of Barker's conjecture wondered if the socioeconomic status of 
children might correlate more strongly with adult health and disease patterns 
than birthweight does. Others pointed to genetics, arguing that heredity might 
be responsible for both low birth weights and a person's risk of chronic 
diseases, and that one doesn't necessarily lead to the other.

 Barker had a different explanation for the data. Poor nutrition for a mother 
restricts the normal growth of a fetus. He reasoned that this, in turn, hampers 
the growth and the function of the baby's developing organs and that this poor 
start influences the course of some major diseases in adults.

 A growing number of animal studies are confirming Barker's hypothesis. Some 
suggest that fetal nutrition, like hormone exposure, shapes the expression of 
genes throughout a person's lifetime. "It's only by understanding the 
mechanisms [through which low birth weight has an effect] that we're going to 
change things," says Peter W. Nathanielsz of Cornell University. "This is the 
story of the future of public health."

 One challenge to the research is that birth weight is an imperfect reflection 
of what's going on in the womb. "There's nothing wrong with being a 5-pound 
baby if your genes want you to be a 5-pound baby," Nathanielsz says. "The baby 
that's in trouble is the 5-pound baby whose genes wanted him to be a 9-pound 
baby."

 For people born decades ago, birth weight is often all the information about 
newborn health that's available. More recently, physicians have measured an 
infant's length, plumpness, and the size of its head relative to the rest of 
its body.

 Traits predisposing an infant to have a slow metabolism or a tendency to put 
on fat during childhood and adult life might be turned on in the 
nutrient-deprived womb, researchers speculate. Such characteristics presumably 
help babies stay alive during times of famine. According to Barker, however, 
those same traits can be troublesome if the infant is instead born into a world 
of plenty.

 There's experimental evidence for the view that developmental patterns in the 
womb may influence an adult's disease risks. When female rats were fed a 
low-protein diet for just 4 days of their 21-day pregnancies, the developing 
rat embryos were made up of fewer cells than normal, Tom P. Fleming of the 
University of Southampton and his colleagues reported in the Sept. 7 
Development. Twelve weeks after birth, these rats also exhibited high blood 
pressure, which often presages later health problems.

 Researchers propose that when a pregnant animal is underfed or when the blood 
flow to the fetus through the placenta is inadequate, the fetus diverts scarce 
resources to its brain. Other organs, especially the liver, kidney, and 
pancreas, suffer as a result. They develop fewer cells and an unusually high 
number of the cells that don't work properly.

 Supporting this scenario, several studies have shown that the kidneys of 
animals deprived of nutrients in the womb have fewer nephrons, the tubular 
structures that filter blood. Other recent work suggests that nutrient 
deprivation during pregnancy fosters small livers without enough cells to 
adequately clear cholesterol from the blood, Barker says.

 Some animal studies have found that blood vessels from undernourished fetuses 
are less flexible than blood vessels from well-nourished ones, a trait that may 
eventually lead to high blood pressure.

 The relevance of such evidence to people remains unclear, however. Among 603 
25-year-olds, the blood vessels of those who were light or short at birth were 
no stiffer than those of the participants who had been of normal size at birth, 
Yoav Ben-Shlomo of the University of Bristol in England and his colleagues 
reported in the June 17 Lancet. As in other studies, people who had had low 
birth weights did show slightly higher blood pressures than their 
normal-birth-weight counterparts, he says.

 Researchers studying the potential links between birth weight and adult 
diseases often confront conflicting data. For example, a study of babies born 
during the siege of Leningrad from 1941-1944 found no link between low birth 
weights and diseases such as diabetes and heart disease. On the other hand, a 
study of Dutch babies whose pregnant mothers suffered through a 7-month famine 
in 1944-1945 did show a correlation.

 One possible explanation for the discrepancy, says Barker, is the role of 
"catch-up growth." In the Netherlands, where food supplies were plentiful after 
the war, some small babies quickly put on weight, reaching average or above 
average weights by age 7. The babies born in wartime Leningrad, however, were 
malnourished throughout early childhood.

 Barker speculates that unknown physiological mechanisms linked to catch-up 
growth are critical in determining risks of adult disease. A study now in 
progress could weigh in on that speculation. Among more than 2,000 Filipinos 
followed since their births in 1983 and 1984, those who were born small have 
higher blood pressure than teens of the same weight who had started out as 
larger babies, say Christopher Kuzawa of Emory University in Atlanta and Linda 
Adair of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

 The researchers measured cholesterol concentrations in the blood of some of 
these young people. Among teens with similar levels of physical activity, those 
who were born small had higher cholesterol concentrations than the others did, 
Kuzawa reported at a meeting in April.

 Kuzawa's studies show that small babies who become heavy teens are at highest 
risk of having high cholesterol and high blood pressure. Several other studies, 
show that people with low birth weights who later became overweight have higher 
rates of heart disease and diabetes compared with people of similar weights who 
were born heavier or to people born small but who stayed relatively thin.

"Things don't just stop when you're born," says Ben-Shlomo. "It may be 
particularly dangerous to be born small and then get fat."

"The relative importance of early and later nutritional factors may vary from 
place to place," says Adair. India, for example, is experiencing an epidemic of 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes. "A high prevalence of low birth weights is 
coupled with [the population's] rapid transition to higher-fat diets and more 
sedentary behavior," says Adair. In more-developed countries, she adds, the 
relative importance of birth characteristics may be smaller.

 Researchers suspect that nutrition isn't the only explanation that links life 
in the womb and adult diseases. Some scientists suggest that the prenatal 
environment affects which genes get turned on in each person.

 In laboratory experiments, some rat genes are silent during embryonic 
development in one solution of nutrients but are active in embryos growing in a 
different solution, Marisa Bartolomei of the University of Pennsylvania 
reported this October at the American Society for Human Genetics meeting in 
Philadelphia. She suggests that, in people, altered environments in the womb 
also may influence the expression of genes and thereby predispose a child to 
disease later in life.

 Maternal and fetal hormones also direct prenatal development. Insulin and 
other hormones regulate fetal growth and respond rapidly to changes in 
nutrition. In several studies of birth and health records, Barker and his 
colleagues have shown that low-weight babies tend to grow up more resistant to 
the action of insulin and more prone to adult-onset diabetes than normal-weight 
babies are. Overexposure to insulin in the womb might lead to insulin 
resistance, Barker speculates.

 Fetal exposure to stress hormones, such as cortisol, also may have 
consequences in adulthood. For one thing, rats and sheep exposed to a stress 
hormone in the womb are born smaller and are more apt to develop higher blood 
pressure later on than are those not exposed to the hormone.

 A study published in the Jan. 16, 1999 British Medical Journal found that 
women who reported feeling stressed during their pregnancies were more likely 
to have abnormal patterns of blood flow to their babies than were women who 
felt less stressed. Follow-up studies will track high blood pressure, heart 
disease, or diabetes in the offspring later in life.

 To consider fetal exposure to certain hormones, Nathanielsz has monitored 
blood pressure and heart rate continuously in fetal sheep during the last third 
of gestation. He's found that glucocorticoids-synthetic hormones related to 
cortisol-cause the fetuses' heart rates to drop and their blood pressure to 
rise. Such boosts to blood pressure also appear persistent, he says. Sheep 
exposed just once to glucocorticoids in the womb have higher blood pressure at 
3 years of age than sheep who weren't exposed to the hormones.

 This finding could be clinically important since doctors frequently give 
glucocorticoids to women who are at high risk of delivering their babies 
prematurely. The compounds speed lung development and increase a premature 
baby's chance of surviving, Nathanielsz says. But because these hormones are 
widely viewed as safe, multiple doses are sometimes given. This practice could 
have harmful long-term consequences, he warns.

 The concept that prenatal conditions can affect chronic diseases in adults 
"has been accepted only slowly," says Claude Lenfant, director of the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md. "However, today the weight of 
the evidence is so strong it cannot be resisted."

 That said, researchers disagree about the relative impact of prenatal 
environment, genetics, and adult lifestyle.

"In general, the effect of birth weight [on risk for chronic diseases] seems to 
be fairly small," says Brian Walker, a British Heart Foundation research fellow 
at Western General Hospital in Edinburgh. In the June 17 Lancet, Walker and his 
colleagues reported that when preterm babies reached their early 20s, they were 
more likely than young adults who had been full-term babies to have high blood 
pressure and high concentrations of sugar in their blood. The results were 
similar to those previously reported for babies born small but not early.

 Premature babies who were smaller than expected for their gestational age were 
the same in this regard as those preemies who had birth weights appropriate for 
their gestational age, he says. This suggests that slower growth in the womb is 
not solely responsible for the risk factors that show up in later life, he 
cautions.

 Between 1 percent and 35 percent of adult-onset diabetes might be attributed 
to low birth weights, according to a report in the September Diabetes Care. 
Edward J. Boyko of the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Seattle examined a 
variety of studies and applied a complex statistical analysis that took into 
account many risk factors. "Predestination according to birth weight is not the 
case, though the effects of birth weight may still be important," he concludes.

 Nathanielsz takes a more deterministic view. "Your environment in the womb 
will have at least as much effect on your cardiovascular system as your 
genetics." he says.

 Whatever the ultimate balance, "this field is transforming the way we think 
about health," says Ezra S. Susser of the Mailman School of Public Health at 
Columbia University. "There's a dynamic interplay between genes, the prenatal 
environment, and then the rest of your experiences throughout life."

 As researchers attempt to untangle the complex give and take of these factors 
and to tease out the mechanisms that underlie correlations between birth weight 
and adult health, they hope that this knowledge will eventually help physicians 
prevent some chronic disease.


