Out on a Limb: Science News Online, Nov. 25, 2000

 Out on a Limb The science of body development may make kindling out of 
evolutionary trees

 By Bruce Bower

 Over the past 25 years, paleoanthropologists have nurtured one evolutionary 
tree after another, hoping to reap ever sturdier portrayals of humanity's 
descent. Each of these trees sprouts out of an approximately 5-million-year-old 
presumed common ancestor and then branches along lines for various 
australopithecine and Homo species, ending at Homo sapiens. Recently, 
investigators have become fond of assigning new fossil finds to unique rather 
than established species, so evolutionary trees have gotten downright bushy.

 When paleoanthropologists craft evolutionary trees, they usually select bone 
and tooth measurements, sometimes as many as several hundred from different 
fossils, to plug into a computerized statistical analysis. This technique, 
called cladistics, places species on related limbs of the tree according to the 
number of recently evolved skeletal characteristics that they share with each 
other but with no other species. Scientists also have applied cladistics to 
differences in the nucelotide sequence of segments of DNA.

 However, a growing number of investigators, including some formerly ardent 
evolutionary-tree nurturers now suspect that the branching cladistic creations 
suffer from conceptual root rot. The whole enterprise rests on shaky biological 
and misleading statistical assumptions, they say.

 Anthropologists first need to enter the unfamiliar territory of developmental 
biology and learn how complex chains of molecular processes form the bones and 
soft tissues that coalesce into bodies, argues Tim D. White of the University 
of California, Berkeley.

 As a codiscoverer more than 25 years ago of the famous 3.2-million-year-old 
remains of the human ancestor now known as Lucy, White has spawned his share of 
evolutionary trees. Over the past decade, though, advances in developmental 
biology have led him to abstain from that practice.

 Biological research now suggests that as an organism grows from fetus to 
adult, the shape and arrangement of its bones reflect a cascade of molecular 
processes that were ignited by certain genes but then responded flexibly to a 
variety of influences in their biological milieu. So, genuinely informative 
skeletal traits for evolutionary trees are relatively uncommon and can't be 
identified by simply eyeballing specimens, he says.

"You can't [break up] skeletal anatomy, put all of the traits into a 
[statistical] program, and generate something that makes biological sense," 
White asserts. "A lot of people who have published cladistic trees are going to 
be in trouble."

 White may be right, but statistical comparisons of our fossil ancestors' 
skeletal features are likely to remain popular, remarks anthropologist Erik 
Trinkaus of Washington University in St. Louis. Many researchers prefer to 
explore evolution with cladistic analyses of bones, DNA, or both, he says.

 Agreement on the general technique doesn't imply agreement on the best data to 
use with it. Scientists frequently disagree about which skeletal traits are 
recently evolved and which specimens share them.

 Skull and tooth measurements from people, chimps, gorillas, and orangutans-the 
same measurements frequently employed to generate evolutionary trees for human 
ancestors-give rise to a primate evolutionary tree that clashes with the 
genetic version, reported Bernard Wood of George Washington University in 
Washington, D.C., and Mark Collard of University College, London, in the April 
25 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. These genetic data have set 
an evolutionary standard that skeletal traits can't match, Wood and Collard 
concluded.

 Genetic studies have converged on the view that people bear a particularly 
close evolutionary relationship to chimpanzees, while gorillas and orangutans 
arose along separate evolutionary lines, according to these researchers. 
However, Wood and Collard's cladistic analysis of skeletal traits places 
chimps, gorillas, and orangutans along closely related evolutionary branches, 
with people on a more distant limb.

 A separate, broader cladistic analysis, which includes a comparative set of 
skeletal measurements from baboons and several other African monkeys as well as 
the apes, places humans and orangutans in one evolutionary group and gorillas 
and chimpanzees in another.

 However, 197 measurements of muscles, nerves, blood vessels, and connective 
tissue from various modern primates generate an evolutionary picture that 
corresponds to the established DNA version, according to Wood, Collard, and 
Sally Gibbs of George Washington University.

 The researchers' cladistic analysis of soft-tissue features, such as the 
branching patterns of specific arteries and the number of fingers that receive 
input from certain nerves to the hand, appears in the Sept. 26 Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences.

 Muscle attachments to bone and other soft-tissue traits may remain far more 
stable than bone itself does during individual development, comments 
anthropologist David Pilbeam of Harvard University. Perhaps some of the marks 
left on bones by muscle attachments and blood vessels may hold critical 
evolutionary clues for fossil investigators, Wood suggests. He and his 
colleagues are now looking for such cladistic candidates.

 Cladistics produces valid evolutionary insights only when it's used to analyze 
numerous parts of an organism that have developed independently of one another. 
For instance, evolutionary primate-tree builders typically assume that 
different sets of genes orchestrate the shapes of the jaw and of the forehead, 
rendering measurements of both features suitable for cladistic analysis.

 Ongoing research in developmental biology raises ominous warning signs about 
such assumptions. It indicates that many features of bones and teeth arise as 
by-products of other traits during an individual's skeletal development.

 Wood, who until recently was an avid and influential evolutionary tree 
builder, now doubts the accuracy of cladistics as currently practiced. "I'm 
eating large bowls of humble pie these days," Wood says. "My defense is, 'If 
you make a mess, you need to clean it up.'"

 Genetic approaches to evolutionary-tree building also evoke controversy (SN: 
2/6/99, p. 88). For instance, one scientific camp holds that Neandertals' DNA 
composition pegs them as a dead-end species (SN: 7/19/97, p. 37). Trinkaus and 
others view the genetic data as ambiguous and say that a recent fossil find 
exhibits a mix of traits produced by interbreeding of Neandertals and modern 
humans (SN: 5/8/99, p. 295).

 Such debates will prove fruitless, not to mention endless, unless scientists 
manage to discern how bones develop and which of their features reflect direct 
genetic effects, White says. Along with anthropologist C. Owen Lovejoy of Kent 
(Ohio) State University and biologist Martin J. Cohn of the University of 
Reading in England, White coauthored a paper in the Nov. 9, 1999 Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences summarizing what's known about the biology of 
bone development.

"Anthropologists arbitrarily choose anatomical traits for cladistic analysis," 
Lovejoy says. "We need to find out how these traits develop and which ones 
truly have an evolutionary signal."

 Lovejoy's group devotes particular attention to vertebrate DNA sequences known 
as homeobox genes, which biologists have studied over the past 15 years. 
Homeobox genes control the general shape of the fetal body. These genes also 
trigger a series of biological processes that foster the growth of integrated 
sections of the skeleton rather than the development of individual bones, 
Lovejoy asserts.

 For instance, the same two homeobox genes appear to regulate the growth of 
both the vertebrate forearm and all fingers except the thumb, whereas a couple 
other of these genes participate only in thumb growth, Lovejoy and his 
colleagues report in an upcoming Evolution and Development. Relatively subtle 
alterations of these genes or their protein products at various times could 
easily have accounted for the evolution of hand proportions typical of modern 
primates and of our fossil ancestors, the researchers theorize.

 Lovejoy and his colleagues used chemical probes injected into mouse embryos to 
establish that one pair of homeobox genes displays a distinctive molecular 
footprint in the thumb bones, while another pair leaves a unique calling card 
in bones of the forearm and the remaining four fingers.

 In a sample of 65 skeletons from people, apes, and monkeys, Lovejoy's team 
then found that the adult forearm is longer or shorter in concert with 
corresponding size differences in all fingers except the thumb. In contrast, 
from one skeleton to the next, the presence of a short or long thumb showed no 
relationship to a short or long forearm or the lengths of the other fingers.

 Evolutionary tweaking of the two pairs of homeobox genes may have yielded hand 
proportions ranging from the sturdy thumbs attached to short forearms and 
fingers typical of modern humans, to the tiny thumbs affixed to elongated 
forearms and fingers characteristic of some monkeys, Lovejoy says.

 Fossil evidence from human ancestors indicates that marked growth of the thumb 
and reduction of the other fingers occurred between 2.5 million and 1.5 million 
years ago, a time that featured the emergence of Homo, the line of direct human 
ancestors. Homeobox-gene modifications probably triggered this evolutionary 
shift to hands capable of making and using stone tools, Lovejoy holds.

 A similar scenario may explain tooth evolution in human ancestors and have 
implications for much of the rest of the skull, according to anatomist Melanie 
A. McCollum of Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland and biologist Paul 
T. Sharpe of Kings College London.

 Recent experiments on tooth development in mice indicate that separate 
homeobox genes regulate the growth of teeth in the upper and lower jaws and at 
the front and back of the mouth, McCollum and Sharpe report in an upcoming 
BioEssays.

 Alterations of these genes may have spurred the relatively rapid evolution 
around 2.5 million years ago of so-called robust australopithecines, who had 
smaller brains than their predecessors and greatly expanded chewing teeth at 
the back of the mouth, McCollum says. She's already proposed that the unusual 
tooth proportions of robust australopithecines prompted the formation of many 
other of their distinctive skull features (SN: 4/24/99, p. 267).

"In early human ancestors, evolutionary forces seem to have operated on genes 
that affected the teeth but not much else in the face," McCollum asserts. "Yet 
in most cladistic analyses, dental traits seem to play a minor role compared 
with skull measurements."

 Alterations to homeobox genes appear capable of quickly reshaping the body's 
layout and generating new species without having to progress through a series 
of transitional forms, says anthropologist Jeffrey H. Schwartz of the 
University of Pittsburgh in his book Sudden Origins (1999, Wiley).

"There's a tremendous amount to be done before the key molecular pathways for 
[body] development are worked out," Schwartz says.

 In an attempt to spur research into the genetics and biology of body 
development, anthropologist Timothy G. Bromage of City University of New York's 
Hunter College has submitted a proposal to the National Science Foundation to 
establish a Science and Technology Center for Comparative Bone and Skeletal 
Structure. The 10-year, $30-million venture would include 34 
scientists-including Lovejoy and McCollum-from 20 public and private 
institutions.

 Today, many anthropologists show little interest in how biological development 
shaped the bodies of our fossil ancestors, Bromage says. In contrast, medical 
researchers have launched a number of projects to unravel processes of bone 
formation and repair involved in diseases such as osteoporosis (SN: 1/15/00, p. 
41). That work, along with findings in genetics and developmental biology, 
would inspire research at the proposed bone-and-skeletal-structure center, 
according to Bromage.

"We can't solve debates over Neandertals or any other human ancestors using 
anatomical characteristics that are subjectively defined and don't have a clear 
relationship to evolutionary history," he remarks. "Let's examine bones with a 
fresh perspective on biology and life history."


