Certain memories may rest on a good sleep: Science News Online, Dec. 22, 2000

 Certain memories may rest on a good sleep

 Bruce Bower

 When practicing a musical piece, a gymnastics move, or any other activity that 
depends on effortless, virtually automatic execution, here's some 
memory-enhancing advice: If you snooze, you cruise.

 That, at least, is the implication of two new studies in which people who 
practiced a task that demands quick visual processing performed it better on 
ensuing trials if they were first allowed to get some sleep.

 Moreover, one investigation suggests that the initial night of sleep after 
learning so-called procedural skills proves crucial for memory. The other 
findings indicate that sleep early in the night, which includes mainly 
slow-wave electrical activity in the brain, aids procedural recall. 
Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep later in the night strengthens only memories 
already bolstered by slow-wave sleep, the researchers report.

 Both studies appear in the December Nature Neuroscience.

"It's becoming increasingly clear that sleep is critical for consolidating 
procedural memory into a usable form," says neuroscientist Robert Stickgold of 
Harvard Medical School in Boston.

 Stickgold and his colleagues conducted one of the new studies. In an afternoon 
session, they trained 133 volunteers to perform a visual-discrimination task. 
Participants viewed, for a fraction of a second, an image including a small set 
of diagonal bars against a background of horizontal bars. The screen then went 
blank for a variable period, followed by a distracting pattern for a fraction 
of a second. Then, the participants reported the orientation of the diagonal 
bars.

 The researchers determined the minimum amount of blank-screen time needed by 
each volunteer to overcome the distraction and discern the orientation.

 Participants who slept on the night after training performed the task 
better-just as accurately, using less blank-screen time-the following day. They 
showed further gains over the next 3 days.

 In contrast, people deprived of sleep on the night after training didn't 
perform the task better the next day. Even when allowed to catch up on their 
sleep over the next 2 nights, they exhibited little improvement.

"These results suggest that the first night of sleep is crucial for acquisition 
of the new visual skill," says neuroscientist Pierre Maquet of University 
College London in a comment published in the same journal. Maquet has linked 
brain changes during REM sleep to procedural learning (SN: 7/22/00, p. 55).

 The slow-wave portion of sleep may nevertheless prove essential for 
procedural-memory formation, according to the second study, directed by Steffen 
Gais of the Medical University of Lubeck in Germany. Gais and his coworkers 
trained 21 volunteers on a visual task much like that used by Stickgold.

 Performance improved markedly for those who trained for 1 hour in the 
afternoon and then were tested after sleeping for the first 3 hours of the 
night, during which the brain shows mainly slow waves. No improvement occurred 
for those who trained after awakening from the first 3 hours of sleep and were 
tested after sleeping through the rest of the night.

 Volunteers who slept through the entire night after training exhibited a much 
larger performance boost than those tested after the first 3 hours of sleep. 
These findings suggest that slow-wave sleep triggers procedural memory 
formation, whereas REM sleep amplifies that process, Maquet remarks.

 However, neither of the new studies establishes sleep as essential to memory 
consolidation, says Robert Vertes of Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton. 
Stickgold's data also show memory improvement with the mere passage of time, 
Vertes points out.

 Researchers know even less about the effects of sleep deprivation on memories 
that require conscious effort, Stickgold notes. For instance, staying up all 
night to cram for a test may work for some students, although they probably 
forget what they have learned in a few days, he says.


