Chemistry Catches Cocaine at Source: Science News Online, Nov. 18, 2000

 Chemistry Catches Cocaine at Source

 Jessica Gorman

 Law-enforcement officials have a new weapon in the hunt for South American 
growers who cultivate coca plants for cocaine production. Scientists in the 
United States have devised a method for identifying the hidden chemical stamp 
of the narcotic's geographical origin.

 The research team analyzed 200 sets of coca leaves of known origin provided by 
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to determine the signatures for five 
distinct coca-growing regions in the Andes. With this database, the team 
pinpointed the origin of their cocaine samples with 96 percent accuracy, as 
reported in the Nov. 16 Nature. More recently, the researchers used the 
database to identify additional samples.

 The method works because cocaine retains the chemical signature of the 
environment in which it grew, says James Ehleringer of the University of Utah 
in Salt Lake City. Various isotopes-atoms of the same element that have 
slightly different masses-of carbon and nitrogen find their way into coca 
plants in different proportions based on climatic conditions such as humidity, 
length of the dry season, and soil nutrients.

 These isotopic ratios correctly identified the birthplace of 90 percent of the 
samples tested, says Ehleringer, who did the study with colleagues from both 
the University of Utah and a DEA laboratory in McLean, Va. Trace molecules, 
called alkaloids, provided the researchers with further distinctions among 
genetically different coca plants grown in various valleys, raising the 
accuracy further, Ehleringer says.

"This is the right approach," says Yves-Loic Martin of the Nantes, France-based 
biotechnology company Eurofins Scientific. The company analyzes the purity and 
origin of foods and recently has studied heroin and a few cocaine samples.

 Martin says he would like to see more data. The team's conclusion of 96 
percent accuracy could be "a little bit optimistic," he notes.

 Recent unpublished results of analyses by the U.S. group support the high 
accuracy claim, says Ehleringer. His team is also working out whether 
year-to-year climate variations, such as those from El Nino, affect 
identification of the five growing regions. Preliminary results indicate they 
don't, he says.

 The new method can trace the drugs one step farther back than can techniques 
now in wide use, most of which search for chemicals introduced by processing 
practices common to particular regions, says Ehleringer. The DEA is about to 
start using the new system, he adds.

"Such technology would assist in tracking the original exporters...and 
determining drug-trafficking routes," comments Paul Marsh, a spokesman for the 
Drug Analysis Section of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.

"Through the United Nations Drug Control Program, this technology could assist 
field crews in reporting areas of cultivation and potential drug yields. It 
could also aid in determining where crop-eradication efforts should be 
focused," he says.


