Will Mr. Bowerbird Fall for a Robot?: Science News Online, Dec. 2, 2000

 Will Mr. Bowerbird Fall for a Robot? Push a button and she turns her head. But 
can she turn his?

 By Susan Milius

 Gail Patricelli wasn't so sure that courtship is really as one-sided as the 
ill-fated show "Who Wants to Marry a Millionaire?" where contestants strutted, 
and a watcher of the other sex selected. So, Patricelli decided to build a 
robot to find out.

 The question of dating dynamics comes up in many species. However, Patricelli 
is sticking to satin bowerbirds. They make a lot of human strut-your-stuff 
behavior look positively restrained.

 To illustrate the birds' exuberance, Patricelli leads the way into a small, 
windowless room in the biology building at the University of Maryland in 
College Park. About 2,000 videotapes jam shelves from chin height to the 
ceiling: tapes from surveillance cameras hidden at bowerbird bachelor pads half 
a world away.

 For more than a decade, Patricelli's mentor at Maryland, behavioral ecologist 
Gerald Borgia, has been sending research teams to a forested valley in New 
South Wales, Australia. Each September-to-December mating season yields several 
thousand more tapes of bowerbird love life, which undergraduates review in the 
tape-lined room. They sort through humdrum hours-avian housekeeping, lizard 
visits, and birds peering into the camera lens-while waiting for the real 
action.

 And what action it is. The males of this extraordinary bird family build 
special arenas where they perform in front of each female who drops by. 
Patricelli fires up one of the video monitors with a director's cut of some 
recent seasons.

 Pictures in bird books, even strings of diagrams, don't prepare a viewer for 
the male bowerbird's wacky intensity. When he finds a female settling into his 
bower-for most species, a small structure in a cozy forest clearing-he grabs a 
beakful of feathers from piles he's accumulated and throws himself into a 
fast-forward, quick-change show. He shoots across his arena, buzzing like the 
death rattle of a small engine.

 Then he poses, cawing perfect imitations of a crowd of cockatoos or a 
plaintive, far-away crow. With the abrupt changes of shtick and the tearing up 
and down, has some punk '80s guitarist been reincarnated as a bowerbird?

 Throughout the show, the female just sits in the bower. Well, Patricelli 
points out, she often crouches forward. The female's most dramatic gesture, if 
she decides this guy's the bird, comes when she crouches even further forward 
and fluffs her feathers into a receptive posture.

 With all due respect, her part of the act's not too exciting, and theorists 
have never assigned much of a role to her. Because male bowerbirds don't 
provide parental care, these biologists say, What do you expect? Ornithologists 
generalize that only bird couples that share chick care perform interactive 
courtships. For them, each action invites an answering gesture in a duet 
negotiating the birds' bond.

 However, males of non-monogamous, or polygynous, species like bowerbirds mate 
with as many females as they can and don't help raise the chicks. So, the 
females are just shopping for sperm, the common view holds. Males strut; 
females watch. No duet here.

 Patricelli's not so sure. She and some other bird behaviorists are rethinking 
the female's role in polygynous courtship, and the satin bowerbird makes a 
great test species.

 Patricelli's suspicion that females and males do perform interactive 
courtships sparked a 4-year adventure in the outer fringes of the study of 
animal behavior. Patricelli wanted more than surveillance cameras. She wanted 
to direct the female's behavior. She envisioned controlling a robot that could 
replace the female and fool a male completely. So, she created the fembot.

 Patricelli's work builds on decades of studies by Borgia's team and other 
scientists illuminating courtship bowers. Of the world's 18 species of 
bowerbirds, 14 court in a special bachelor pad that the male arranges.

 The lower-tech species create lichen mats in small forest clearings, perhaps 
enhancing the romantic setting with a heap of snail shells. Another group of 
species organizes its bowers around a central sapling or some other sort of 
pole. For example, Macgregor's bowerbirds mound small sticks around this 
upright to raise a doughnut platform. Vogeltop bowerbirds go even further, 
weaving small sticks into a tidy Polynesian-style hut around the center pole 
and adorning its grand entrance with flowers and shells.

 Patricelli's satin bowerbirds belong to a third school of architecture, the 
alley builders. They construct variations on a pair of thick, woven-stick 
walls, about knee-high to a birdwatcher, with a narrow passageway between them.

 Despite the 2 or 3 months that the male spends building and tending his bower, 
no bird ever lives in one. The male doesn't roost inside his bower. He's too 
busy repairing it, defending it, and perching on nearby branches belting out 
songs to advertise it. When he rests, it's in a tree.

 Each of a succession of female birds flies into the bower for a few 
minutes-perhaps 15 if the male's show turns out to be convincing-and then, 
she's outta there. The fluttering consummation, if it occurs, takes maybe 3 
seconds. After mating with a male, the female selects her own site to build a 
nest and raise chicks, without male assistance.

 For all the effort a bower demands, why bother?

 Scientists since Darwin have wondered about it. More than 20 years ago, 
biologist E. Thomas Gilliard contended that the bowerbird species in which 
males themselves flash colorful plumage tend to build simple structures, 
whereas the plainer birds create more highly decorated concoctions. This trend, 
he contended, supports the view that bowers serve as competitive sexual 
displays, perhaps versions of a peacock's tail, with some assembly required.

 Filming satin bowerbirds in New South Wales, Borgia and his students have 
tried to figure out what makes certain bowers-and the shows that go on at 
them-so attractive. For the bower system does make big winners and big losers, 
they report. In one tally of nearly 30 males, 10 never scored during the entire 
mating season, while one of their neighbors successfully strutted his way to 
fatherhood on 33 occasions.

 Construction quality of the bower turns out to influence a male's chances of 
success. "The funny thing is that you can tell, as a human, which are the good 
bowers," Patricelli says. "The ones that I like, the female bowerbirds like 
too."

 A genuine bower, collected from the wild, adorns the top of the refrigerator 
in the laboratory where Patricelli works. Now a connoisseur of avian 
architecture, she praises the refrigerator-top bower as the work of a fine 
builder.

 On tiptoe, she points out the uniformity of the several hundred dark, slender 
twigs massed to form the pair of gently curved walls. End on, they look like a 
pair of bottom-heavy, thatchy parentheses. Their gentle inside curve seems just 
right for cradling a female bird. The builder didn't merely poke sticks into 
the ground but wove them into a firm mass, much like a bird nest. Another 
expert touch, Patricelli notes, shows in the symmetry of the two walls.

 A male begins building at the age of 6, when he starts to get his dark, 
satiny, blue-black plumage. For the next year or two, his technique typically 
improves, but after about three seasons, he seems about as good a builder as 
he's going to be.

 A young male's first attempt at a bower risks skimpiness and irregular form. 
Some junior builders find their bowers slumping over into a heap of sticks. 
"When they're bad, they're really, really bad," Patricelli says.

 Borgia's team has also found that decoration affects a male's chances of 
convincing a female to mate. Males strew their display court with blossoms, 
feathers, and knickknacks, particularly in shades of blue. Occasionally a male 
in a decorating frenzy flits into the cabin where the Borgia team lives and 
carries off trophies.

"We don't even take blue toothbrushes there anymore," Patricelli says. "It's 
the one place in the world where when you lose a blue ball-point pen cap, you 
have a good idea where it is."

 Males steal from each other, too. The research teams number each decorative 
item at a bower and do a daily inventory. Blue feathers get stolen most 
frequently, the researchers report. The number of feathers displayed around a 
successful stud's bower peaks at the height of mating season, just when the 
feather counts drop at the losers' bowers.

 The videotapes also reveal males flying into a rival's bower when it's 
unoccupied and trashing it. A marauder can do quite a bit of damage, ripping 
wads of sticks out of the walls and making off with prize decorations.

 Hence, both Borgia and the team of Stephen and Melinda Pruett-Jones of the 
University of Chicago have proposed that well-built, abundantly ornamented 
bowers signal dominant males that can successfully defend their own territories 
and get away with harassing their neighbors.

 Whatever it is that females are shopping for, they're efficient at it, 
Patricelli and her Maryland colleagues J. Albert C. Uy and Borgia reported in 
the Feb. 7 Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B. Females that chose the 
local top studs, the males that racked up the most matings during the season, 
seemed to use that happy experience to shorten their future shopping. The next 
season, they just mated with Mr. Wonderful again. Females that had mated with 
lower-tier birds, however, made another shopping effort.

 Scientists inventing theories about how birds shop for mates need to take 
caution from these bowerbirds, Patricelli urges. Models so far have largely 
ignored any carry-over effects from previous seasons, yet such memories seem 
likely to influence strategy in long-lived birds.

 A few years ago, while mulling over the problem of how to study interactions 
between courting birds, Patricelli took some videotapes over to University of 
Maryland robots expert Greg Walsh. He coaches the student team that took the 
world title in an annual international robot-jousting competition in Japan. So, 
Patricelli figured he'd be able to take in stride her request for a robot that 
could impersonate a female bowerbird.

"Of course, what I really wanted was one that would fly into a bower," she 
reminisces. The lab nickname for her robot, the fembot, came from the scantily 
clad, electronic beauties that fooled espionage goofball Austin Powers in The 
Spy Who Shagged Me. However, Walsh and Patricelli agreed to lower their 
expectations to a robobird that could perform a few basic robomoves: turning 
its head, crouching, and extending its wings slightly away from its body.

 When Patricelli was in Australia setting up cameras for the 1997 breeding 
season, Walsh shipped her the unadorned guts of the first fembots. They're an 
impressive monument to the power of human hope. As Patricelli holds a version 
up in the lab, it looks as if it could barely seduce an electric can opener, 
much less a bird. Nuts and bolts hold several small motors and a circuit board 
on a hand-size plate mounted on a metal stake.

"It's lucky I had a degree in art," Patricelli chuckles. Still, bringing that 
hunk of metal to life took months.

 Walsh's prototype had proportions more appropriate for a pigeon than a svelte 
bowerbird, so Patricelli trimmed as much extraneous metal as she could. Then, 
she wrapped the delicate machinery in a mummy shroud of waterproof tape and 
embarked on a frantic quest for the right material to make the bird body. After 
a lot of shopping and consultation with bemused sales staff in Australian craft 
stores, she discovered the wonders of the plastic backing used for cross-stitch.

 Patricelli wove florist wire through the cross-stitch backing so the material 
would hold a shape. Then, she molded a skin of wired backing around the metal 
guts to form a bird body.

 Satin bowerbirds abound in eastern Australia, pillaging vegetable gardens and 
picking through garbage for trinkets. So, Patricelli was able to obtain a 
feathered skin for the outer layer of her fembot. However, she still needed 
eyes-lilac-colored eyes, as a matter of fact. She sent a bowerbird photo to a 
taxidermy-supply company. "They did a pretty good job," she says, holding up a 
finished fembot so the sun can catch its lavender beads.

 To test her creation, Patricelli hid the fembot under a piece of denim and 
crept up to a bower while its owner was away. She poked the fembot's stake into 
position in the bower alley, trailed the controlling wires back into the 
shrubbery, and then whisked off the denim cover to reveal-she hoped-a typical 
female bowerbird waiting for a show.

"I felt like I was I on a first date," Patricelli says. Holding the fembot's 
controls, she hid near the bower. Males often return to find a female in the 
viewing stand, so she hoped the situation would seem natural even though the 
female did have a stout metal stake coming out of her belly. "The prototype was 
pretty overweight," Patricelli admits, but she hoped the male would be 
enthusiastic rather than discriminating.

 When the male returned, he did indeed perform courtship antics for the fembot. 
The slight whirring of her head didn't seem to throw off his performance. All 
went as Patricelli hoped, and when she twirled the control knobs to make the 
fembot bend forward in acquiescence, the male accepted the gesture as the 
consent he'd been dancing for.

 In her Maryland lab, Patricelli deftly twists knobs on the robot's control box 
to demonstrate the female's gesture of acceptance. A male responding to the 
crouch dashes to the back of the bower for actual mating but gets a view of a 
protruding chunk of cross-stitch backing, florist wire, and machinery. Does 
this spoil the mood?

 No, Patricelli reports, "at that point, he's totally focused."

 In fact, the design was so successful that she often had to interrupt 
courtships, diving out of the bushes and shooing away the male, just to save 
wear and tear on the fembot.

 Once Patricelli and Walsh had worked out the design, she fixed up three 
ready-to-flirt fembots. Patricelli and two colleagues spent the 1998 and 1999 
bowerbird seasons testing male reactions to the speed at which the fembots 
crouch. Patricelli kept track of whether female gestures seemed to prompt a 
male to intensify his performance or to cool it down.

 The rate of crouching does seem to set the pace for the performance. "The male 
is altering his display," Patricelli concludes. The theme of customizing a 
male's intensity echoes one of Borgia's ideas, that a sheltering bower permits 
a male to act out aggressive gestures that arouse the female but don't scare 
her so much that she flees (SN: 11/21/98, p. 326). Patricelli's work adds more 
evidence for such an interaction.

 That conclusion doesn't particularly surprise another close observer of female 
birds, Meredith West of Indiana University in Bloomington. West has studied 
cowbirds for years, particularly the multiple songs of males.

 A male cowbird may burble along, seemingly on his own, West notes. Yet the 
songs that come to predominate in his repertoire are those fragments that earn 
a female's response. Her reaction may not be even remotely as showy as his, but 
her subtle gestures drive his song.

 West's tale from another species fuels Patricelli's curiosity about other 
quiet female gestures that may have been overlooked. And yes, she thinks it 
would be great fun to study cowbirds with a female cowbot.


