Lemon-scented products spawn pollutants: Science News Online, Dec. 9, 2000

 Lemon-scented products spawn pollutants

 Janet Raloff

 While prepping for holiday guests, many hosts will deploy cleaners and air 
fresheners that impart a pleasant lemon or pine scent. Though they can mask 
stale smells, their fragrant ingredients-under certain conditions-may also be a 
rich source of indoor pollution, a study finds.

 Several years ago, Charles J. Weschler, a chemist at Telcordia Technologies in 
Red Bank, N.J., stumbled onto the polluting alter ego of an aromatic citrus 
compound. While experimenting with the terpene called limonene, Weschler 
noticed a white message board in the lab turning dingy. Investigation revealed 
it was building up a thin coat of submicron particles that were forming in 
reactions between limonene gas and ozone.

 Scientists have long known that much of the haze shrouding eastern U.S. 
forests traces to particulates created in reactions of ozone with terpenes, 
such as the fragrant pinene emitted by evergreens. The size of these and other 
small particulates-less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter-permits people to 
inhale them deeply into their lungs. EPA regulates outdoor particles of this 
size, which aggravate heart and lung disease.

 Weschler teamed up with chemists at Rutgers University in Piscataway, N.J., to 
study the conditions under which terpene-derived particulates form indoors. The 
New Jersey team sprayed a wooden coffee table for 15 seconds with a 
lemon-scented wax and measured limonene's release into the air for the next 3 
hours. Then, they loaded a test chamber with concentrations of limonene similar 
to those recorded and of ozone typical of indoor air on a smoggy, summer day.

 Within 30 minutes, particulates started forming. Under the most productive 
conditions, notes Junfeng Zhang of Rutgers, air concentrations of the 
particulates reached one-third of the revised particulates limit for outdoor 
air under proposed federal rules (SN: 12/21-28/96, p. 410). Zhang and 
Weschler's team reports its findings in the December Environmental Health 
Perspectives.

 What C. Arden Pope Jr. of Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, finds 
"interesting" about the study is that the interaction of ozone and a seemingly 
innocuous cleaner can generate enough particulates indoors to approach 
concentrations that have triggered adverse health effects.

 However, cautions Joel Schwartz of the Harvard School of Public Health in 
Boston, no one yet knows whether these terpene-derived particulates are as 
toxic as those that typically form in outdoor urban air.


