Antibiotics, vitamins stall stomach cancer: Science News Online, Dec. 16, 2000

 Antibiotics, vitamins stall stomach cancer

 Nathan Seppa

 In the 1970s, when he worked as a pathologist in the Colombian city of Cali, 
Pelayo Correa noticed that migrants from the state of Narino in the country's 
southwest seemed prone to stomach cancer. Later studies showed that these 
people indeed are five times as likely to get the disease as other Colombians 
are.

 Now at Louisiana State University (LSU) in New Orleans, Correa has come up 
with a way to derail incipient stomach cancer as it marches through its 
predictable stages of aberrant cell growth in the stomach lining.

 Correa and his colleagues in Colombia and at LSU report in the Dec. 6 Journal 
of the National Cancer Institute that antibiotics, vitamin C, or 
beta-carotene-a precursor of vitamin A-can reverse precancerous stomach 
conditions.

 In 1992, the researchers began taking stomach biopsies of more than 1,200 
Narino adults. They then selected volunteers who had aberrant cell growth, 
which falls into one of three successive premalignant stages-multifocal 
nonmetaplastic atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, and dysplasia. Of those 
volunteers, 97 percent had stomach infections caused by Helicobacter pylori, a 
bacterium that can cause ulcers and lead to stomach cancer.

 Participants received either a placebo pill, a vitamin C or beta-carotene 
supplement, or antibiotics against H. pylori. Some other volunteers received a 
combination of drugs and supplements. The vitamins were included in the test 
because other research had suggested that they can thwart cancer. Neither 
researchers nor volunteers knew which participants had been assigned each 
treatment.

 The scientists took stomach biopsies of 631 patients after 3 and 6 years of 
treatment. Volunteers with atrophy who were getting one or both of the 
supplements or the antibiotics were roughly five times as likely to experience 
regression of this premalignant cell growth as those getting a placebo were. 
Among those with metaplasia, the volunteers who were taking supplements or 
drugs were three times as likely to improve as those getting placebos were.

 The volunteers with dysplasia, the last stage of stomach disease before 
cancer, didn't improve significantly with any of the treatments. "The earlier 
in the process [that we intervened] the better the chance of regression," 
Correa says.

 Over the 6 years, the antibiotics cleared up H. pylori in three-fourths of 
those who received them. Among people with atrophy who were cured of the 
infection, the precancerous condition regressed nearly nine times as often as 
it did among those getting placebos, Correa says.

 The new study is "very encouraging" because it is the first to show that 
treating H. pylori in people produces clear benefits against precancerous 
conditions, says Lisa Ganjhu of St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in New York.


