Visions of Infinity: Science News Online, Dec. 23 & 30, 2000

 Visions of Infinity Tiling a hyperbolic floor inspires both mathematics and art

 By Ivars Peterson

 Even the most brilliant innovators get their inspiration from somewhere.

 For the Dutch graphic artist M.C. Escher, such a creative impetus came from a 
particular illustration in a 1957 mathematical article about symmetry. It gave 
him what he later described as "quite a shock" and inspired him to create four 
artworks: the Circle Limit series of prints.

 The illustration showed a curious tiling of black and white triangles with 
curved sides. Enclosed within a circle, the alternately colored triangles 
became progressively smaller as they approached the circle's perimeter.

 The concept of infinity had long intrigued Escher, and he had sought to 
capture this elusive notion in visual images. One strategy that he employed was 
to create repeating patterns of interlocking figures. Although Escher could 
imagine how such arrays could extend infinitely, the actual patterns he drew, 
of course, represented only a fragment of an infinite expanse.

 In another approach, Escher tried to fit together replicas of a figure, such 
as a fish, that diminish in size as they spiral into or recede from a point in 
the middle of a square or circular frame. However, he wasn't entirely satisfied 
with these efforts.

 The mathematical drawing-an illustration of the so-called hyperbolic 
plane-that had so startled Escher offered him a precise, aesthetically pleasing 
way to depict diminishing figures within a circle.

 The article containing the diagram had been written by H.S.M. Coxeter, a 
mathematician at the University of Toronto. Today in his nineties, Coxeter 
continues to focus on the interplay of symmetry and geometric shapes. His 
research covers topics such as the mathematics of kaleidoscopic patterns.

 Coxeter had sent Escher a copy of his symmetry article as a thank you for 
permission to reproduce several of Escher's periodic drawings as illustrations. 
The men had met in 1954 in Amsterdam at the International Congress of 
Mathematicians, where there was an exhibition of Escher's work. That encounter 
led to correspondence between the two, which continued until Escher's death in 
1972.

 Escher in 1958 mailed Coxeter a print of "Circle Limit I"-the first fruit of 
the artist's venture, inspired by Coxeter, into hyperbolic geometry. In the 
decades since Escher's initial foray, the Circle Limit prints have motivated 
many mathematical investigations and artistic endeavors. Each year, 
mathematicians and computer scientists continue to add to the literature of 
hyperbolic tilings and related mathematical topics.

 Despite the many manifestations of Escher-inspired research, it all stems from 
the same basic principles of curved geometry.

 For example, if you draw any triangle on a sheet of paper and add up its three 
angles, the result is always 180 degrees. When you draw a triangle on a 
saddle-shaped surface, however, the angles invariably add up to less than 180 
degrees.

 Just as a flat surface-like that of a sheet of paper-is a piece of the 
infinite mathematical surface known as the Euclidean plane, a saddle-shaped 
surface can be thought of as a small piece of the hyperbolic plane. Picturing 
what the hyperbolic plane looks like on a larger scale, however, requires some 
mind-bending ingenuity.

 Freelance mathematician Jeffrey R. Weeks of Canton, N.Y., suggests making 
"hyperbolic paper" from a large number of equilateral triangles as one way to 
get a feel for the hyperbolic plane.

 Taping together equilateral triangles so that precisely six triangles meet at 
each vertex produces a flat sheet. In contrast, assembling equilateral 
triangles so seven triangles meet at each vertex produces a floppy, bumpy 
surface. The more triangles you use and the larger the resulting sheet, the 
more closely it resembles the hyperbolic plane.

 A similar construction can be done with pentagons. Mathematician and sculptor 
Helaman Ferguson of Laurel, Md., has made an intriguingly wrinkly hyperbolic 
quilt by sewing together pentagonal patches of fabric so that four pentagons 
meet at each corner. It's an unruly blanket that refuses to lie flat, he says.

 Such constructions are not the only way to visualize the hyperbolic plane. 
More than a century ago, French mathematician Henri Poincare introduced a 
method for representing the entire hyperbolic plane on a flat, disk-shaped 
surface.

 In Poincare's model, the hyperbolic plane is compressed to fit within a 
circle. The circle's circumference represents points at infinity. In this 
context, a straight line, meaning the shortest distance between two points, is 
a segment of a circular arc that meets the Poincare disk's circular boundary at 
right angles.

 Although this model distorts distances, it represents angles faithfully. The 
hyperbolic measure of an angle is equal to that measured in the disk 
representation of the hyperbolic plane. So, a repeating pattern made up of 
identical geometric shapes in the hyperbolic plane transforms, when represented 
in a Poincare model, into an array of shapes that diminish in size as they get 
closer to the disk's bounding circle.

 For his Circle Limit prints, Escher worked out the underlying rules of these 
disk models and developed his own method for constructing a hyperbolic grid, 
relying on his skill and intuition to create the geometric scaffolding he 
needed. Coxeter's "hocus pocus" mathematical text wasn't much help, Escher 
later remarked in a letter to Coxeter. Nonetheless, Escher executed the 
drawings with extraordinary accuracy, Coxeter comments.

"The first time I saw a print of 'Circle Limit III,' I said to myself, 'that is 
the most beautiful example I have ever seen of the Poincare circle model for 
hyperbolic geometry,'" says J. Taylor Hollist, a mathematician at the State 
University of New York at Oneonta. He's documented many historical interactions 
between Escher and scientists.

 Besides its beauty, "Circle Limit III" also presents a puzzle. For some 
reason, in this particular case, Escher drew a pattern of lines somewhat 
different from that in Coxeter's original drawing. The main arcs seen in 
"Circle Limit III" meet the circumference at a specific angle very close to 80 
degrees rather than precisely 90 degrees.

 Coxeter was able to demonstrate that each arc is of a type known to 
mathematicians as an equidistant curve. It bears the same relationship to a 
hyperbolic straight line as a line of latitude does to the equator on the 
surface of a sphere.

 When Coxeter worked out trigonometrically what the proper angle of such a 
curve in Escher's print should be, he obtained 79 degrees 58 minutes, again 
confirming the accuracy of Escher's draftsmanship.

 Besides intriguing professional mathematicians, Escher's Circle Limit prints 
and their repeating patterns prove to be useful vehicles for becoming 
comfortable with and teaching hyperbolic geometry, says Douglas J. Dunham of 
the computer science department at the University of Minnesota at Duluth. "Even 
to mathematicians, hyperbolic geometry is not that familiar," he contends.

 Dunham and his students have written several computer programs to generate 
hyperbolic patterns, particularly those made up of repeating motifs colored in 
various ways.

 Mathematicians use a standard notation for describing a mosaic made up of 
identical tiles, where each tile is a polygon with a given number of edges of 
the same length and the same number of corners or vertexes. On a flat surface, 
there are three such tilings. A tiling in which six equilateral triangles meet 
at each intersection is designated {3,6}, one in which four squares meet at 
each intersection is {4,4}, and one in which three hexagons meet at each 
intersection is {6,3}.

 The same notation applies to regular tilings of the hyperbolic plane. A tiling 
where four pentagons meet at each vertex is labeled {5,4}. In general, for 
polygons with p sides, meeting q at a vertex, the result is a hyperbolic tiling 
when (p - 2) multiplied by (q - 2) is greater than 4.

 Escher's "Circle Limit IV," which features interlocking devils and angels, is 
an example of a {6,4} tiling. In other words, the underlying hyperbolic grid 
consists of hexagons that meet four at each vertex.

 Dunham has developed a computer program that transforms a hyperbolic Escher 
design from one tiling pattern to another. For example, he can transform the 
{8,3} pattern of crosses in "Circle Limit II" into a strikingly different 
{10,3} tiling, where the central figure is a star.

 The same pattern can be transformed into an array of starbursts with any 
number of rays, Dunham notes. Indeed, there is an infinite number of hyperbolic 
tilings available for such transformations. The use of different motifs and 
color schemes increases the possibilities even further.

 At a conference on mathematical connections in art, music, and science held 
last summer at Southwestern College in Winfield, Kans., Dunham described a 
novel extension of some of these ideas. He had worked with Celtic knot 
patterns, used centuries ago in Ireland and elsewhere to decorate religious 
texts. Such knots are formed by weaving a ribbon into an alternating 
over-and-under pattern, then joining the two ends to form a continuous band.

 Dunham now has a computer program that generates intriguing hyperbolic 
versions of these ancient designs. He can also construct examples in which 
rings interlock in the over-and-under pattern characteristic of Celtic knots.

 Interestingly, Escher himself incorporated an intricate pattern of 
interlocking rings within a circular frame in his last woodcut, "Snakes." 
Dunham can show that this pattern is closely related to a hyperbolic variant of 
a Celtic weaving. Although Escher and Dunham approached these patterns from 
different perspectives, their intellectual common ground is apparent.

 In a 1960 essay later translated and published in the book The Graphic Work of 
M.C. Escher (1961, Duell, Sloan and Pearce), Escher noted, "The ideas that are 
basic to [my art] often bear witness to my amazement and wonder at the laws of 
nature which operate in the world around us.

"By keenly confronting the enigmas that surround us, and by considering and 
analyzing the observations that I have made, I ended up in the domain of 
mathematics," he continued. "Although I am absolutely without training or 
knowledge in the exact sciences, I often seem to have more in common with 
mathematicians than with my fellow artists."

 Constructing Escher

 Nowadays, mathematicians, computer scientists, and others have a variety of 
speedy computer-based methods for generating hyperbolic patterns and tilings. 
M.C. Escher didn't have such technology at his disposal. Neither did Henri 
Poincare and other 19th-century mathematicians who drew various pictures of the 
hyperbolic plane. They relied on the traditional tools of geometry-compass and 
straight- edge-to create their diagrams.

 In an article to appear in the January 2001 American Mathematical Monthly, 
however, Chaim Goodman-Strauss of the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville 
suggests what these procedural details might have been. He offers techniques 
and instructions for drawing by hand some tilings of the Poincare model of the 
hyperbolic plane.

"Remarkably, this may be the first detailed, explicit synthetic construction of 
triangle tilings of the hyperbolic plane to appear," Goodman-Strauss notes.

 His directions are built out of basic tasks familiar to a student of Euclidean 
geometry: bisecting a line segment, drawing a parallel through a given point, 
drawing a perpendicular through a given point, constructing a circle through 
three given points, and a handful of other operations.

 A suitable combination of those activities enables one to construct, for 
example, the hyperbolic line that passes through two given points. To achieve 
this, one must create a geometric scaffolding of lines and points outside a 
Poincare disk to guide the drawing of arcs and points within the circle's 
boundary.

 Goodman-Strauss worked out the method by extending his expertise in Euclidean 
geometry to encompass the types of curves and angles necessary to represent 
hyperbolic structures. He admits that there's probably nothing original in his 
contribution. "Surely, this was all well-known at the end of the 19th century, 
just as it has long been forgotten at the dawn of the 21st," he remarks.

 Nonetheless, reviving long-lost construction techniques has value. Such 
exercises offer an illuminating window on not only Escher's art but also the 
remarkable work of earlier mathematicians who explored non-Euclidean geometries.

"It is wonderfully satisfying to make these pictures by hand, patiently, with 
pencil and paper, compass and straightedge," Goodman-Strauss adds. "I encourage 
you to test this theorem for yourself!"


