Macho Waters: Science News Online, Jan. 6, 2001

 Macho Waters

 Some river pollution spawns body-altering steroids

 Janet Raloff

 On the way back from a field trip to one of Alabama's barrier islands in the 
late 1970s, W. Mike Howell and the students in his vertebrate biology class 
detoured over the state line into Florida to collect some fish.

 En route to Pensacola, they passed a shady stream, Elevenmile Creek. It was a 
searing hot day, so it seemed like a good idea to stop and cool off. The 
consequences of that detour continue to expand.

"Pulling off the interstate," Howell remembers, "we didn't have any earthly 
idea that this creek was polluted." But as the students climbed down its banks, 
the smell of chemicals hit them. "The water was dark," he notes, "but we 
assumed it was just due to the tannins and resins that you see in many swampy 
southern streams."

 An ichthyologist at Samford University in Birmingham, Howell had been studying 
the genetics of mosquitofish ( Gambusia holbrooki). During the Florida rest 
stop, he and a graduate student started to look for mosquitofish specimens in 
the creek's murky shallows.

 With each dip of their nets, they harvested a generous haul of the roughly 
2-inch-long fish. It didn't take long to realize that something was strange. 
Every mosquitofish looked to be a male, which the scientists recognized by its 
gonopodium--a thin, elongated anal fin that males use for copulation.

 As Howell and his student began speculating where the females could be, the 
pair realized that one of the males looked pregnant. On its side, it even bore 
the black spot signaling pregnancy.

"This suggested many of the others might also be females," Howell recalls. 
Further investigation confirmed that suspicion and launched the scientist on a 
23-year hunt to find out what had so convincingly masculinized the physique of 
every female mosquitofish in this stretch of the creek.

 The answer came from investigations of the Fenholloway River, an even more 
polluted stream 225 miles from Elevenmile Creek. Outside Perry, just east of 
Florida's panhandle, the southern Fenholloway bears the same reek and 
coffee-colored stain that Howell's team had encountered at the creek. In both 
cases, the water's aromatic pollution traced to wastes from nearby 
pulp-and-paper mills.

 In its upcoming paper in Environmental Toxicology & Chemistry, Howell's group 
reports finding trace contamination of the lower Fenholloway with 
androstenedione. Known among weight lifters as andro, this is the 
over-the-counter anabolic steroid that St. Louis Cardinals' slugger Mark 
McGuire took flack for consuming throughout his record-breaking 1999 home run 
streak.

 The Fenholloway's andro, however, doesn't come out of any bottle but arises 
from the biotransformation of pollutants. It also represents the first 
environmental androgen--a pollutant that functions like a male sex 
hormone--ever discovered in nature, says John A. McLachlan, a toxicologist who 
pioneered studies on environmental hormones (SN: 7/3/93, p. 10).

 In people, andro binds to receptors on cells and triggers the production of 
testosterone, the body's primary androgen. In the Fenholloway River and 
Elevenmile Creek, Howell now believes, andro helped give the female 
mosquitofish their masculine fins.

 But he and other scientists worry that mosquitofish may be the proverbial 
canary in the coal mine--a delicate species that signals threats to others.

"Most vertebrates respond to hormones in pretty much the same way," observes 
Stephen A. Bortone, environmental science director of the Conservancy of 
Southwest Florida in Naples. "I'm not saying that humans would be masculinized" 
by the hormone doses fish are getting, he says. "But if an androgen affects 
fish one way, it will likely affect humans in a similar way."

 Pulp-derived chemicals

 Five years ago, Bortone, who has collaborated with the Samford team, reported 
data showing that adding androgens to water in the laboratory could masculinize 
female mosquitofish (SN: 7/15/95, p. 44). However, paper-mill effluent didn't 
contain andro, testosterone, or any other of the compounds that he had tested.

 To discover what was transforming the fish, the Birmingham researchers turned 
to the espresso-colored lower span of the Fenholloway. It was an ideal site, 
notes Robert Angus of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, because the 
local mill uses so much of the upstream flow in its operations--at times, 100 
percent--that "essentially the whole of the [lower] river is effluent."

 A complex brew of pulp-derived chemicals, including cholesterol-like pine 
sterols, travels along the lower Fenholloway. Together with Angus, Ronald L. 
Jenkins of Samford ran various samples of the river through a test-tube assay 
for compounds that bind to the androgen receptor. That's how they found andro, 
which turned out to be present in the river at 15 nanograms per liter. That's 
similar to concentrations of various estrogens detected in undiluted sewage 
effluent from a Canadian site (SN: 6/17/00, p. 388).

 The river's bottom proved a far richer source of andro than the water itself, 
so the scientists probed the sediment's chemistry. At an October 2000 
environmental hormones symposium, hosted by the Center for Bioenvironmental 
Research (CBR) at Tulane and Xavier Universities in New Orleans, Jenkins and 
Angus reported finding at least three more compounds that bind to the androgen 
receptor. So far, they've identified only one: progesterone.

 Though this female sex hormone is normally associated with pregnancy, it can 
have androgenlike effects by opposing the actions of the body's primary 
female-sex hormone, estrogen. Jenkins told Science News, that bacteria in the 
sediment seem to chemically alter plant sterols to make the androgens.

 Water's androgens

 Water downstream of pulp-mill operations on the Fenholloway is strongly 
masculinizing, or androgenic, whereas water upstream of the plant and in a 
nearby river is not, Environmental Protection Agency scientists reported at a 
November meeting in Nashville of the Society of Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry (SETAC). Their findings confirm those of Jenkins and Angus. Gerald T. 
Ankley of the agency's Duluth, Minn., ecology lab is now working to identify 
the water's androgens.

 Androstenedione alone wouldn't appear "sufficient to explain the degree of 
androgenicity that we see," observes Ankley's coworker L. Earl Gray Jr., an 
environmental-hormones toxicologist at EPA's laboratory in Research Triangle 
Park, N.C. He expects a soup of androgens to emerge in further studies.

 The EPA team is collaborating with Edward F. Orlando and his colleagues at the 
University of Florida in Gainesville on studies of hundreds of female 
mosquitofish from the river. So far, Gray says, the Florida contingent has 
found at least some masculinization of all females collected downstream of 
pulp-mill operations.

 As Howell noted in 1978, however, these females remain fertile.

 Heather B. McNatt of the University of Alabama has been comparing pregnant 
females from the Fenholloway River with those in nearby Spring Creek, which is 
free of mill wastes. She's found that those at Spring Creek grow about 
two-thirds bigger than their counterparts in the Fenholloway. More importantly, 
Spring Creek moms produce bigger babies and more of them.

 The researchers also have seen differences in Fenholloway dads. Though male 
mosquitofish are normally smaller than females, Howell notes that males in the 
lower Fenholloway are dramatically stunted--evidence of being "precociously 
masculinized," he says. In mosquitofish, once the testes mature, a male's 
testosterone production soars, a gonopodium develops, and then growth ceases.

 Howell's group has found males little more than a half-inch long sporting 
gonopodia. "These very, very tiny males were adults," he notes.

 Masculinizing American eels

 From the mill-polluted rivers, Bortone and William P. Davis of the EPA in Gulf 
Breeze, Fla., have pulled up two other small species of fish that have been 
masculinized--the least killifish ( Heterandria formosa) and sailfin molly ( 
Poecilia latipinna). As with mosquitofish, effluent-exposed females develop 
fins resembling gonopodia.

 Davis found that the masculinized female killifish also developed an unusual 
belligerence. Ordinarily, he notes, "I could raise these tiny fish in tight 
quarters, 10 to a jar." Once he doctors their water with a little androgen, 
however, the females suddenly "turn aggressive--like little sharks," he says.

 American eels ( Anguilla rostrata) migrating up the lower reaches of 
Elevenmile Creek from the Gulf of Mexico exhibit a different form of 
masculinization. Born at sea, eels enter the creek as 4-inch juveniles. Males 
remain at the base of the creek in brackish or salt water while females 
continue traveling up into freshwater. Ordinarily, these fish would inhabit 
their respective portions of the creek for 4 to 10 years. Then, they'd develop 
gonads, change skin color, evolve huge eyes adapted for vision in the deep sea, 
and cease to eat--all changes in preparation for their return to the Caribbean 
for spawning. Yet studies 20 years ago in the lower Elevenmile Creek found that 
some males exposed to pulp-mill effluent were developing testes and big eyes 
and undergoing related changes several years early. Females returned from their 
upstream haunts unusually early, and underwent similar changes at the base of 
the creek.

 This precocious maturation appeared to be signaling the tiny eels to migrate 
long before they have the size and energy stores needed to survive the long 
swim to their spawning grounds, says Davis.

 These changes also can be triggered in the lab by adding androgens to the 
young eels' water. Presumably, Davis says, bacterial production of andro and 
related pollutants in the waterways foster the early maturation.

 Elevenmile Creek's bluegill sunfish ( Lepomis macrochirus) are also sensitive 
to pulp-mill pollutants, according to preliminary data that a Louisiana team 
reported at the CBR symposium. Henry L. Bart Jr. of Tulane University and his 
colleagues found that those fish living downstream of the mill are developing 
higher-than-normal androgen concentrations in their blood and growing unusually 
rapidly.

 Pulp-mill residues may be a concern in other countries, as well. A Swedish 
study of eelpout ( Zoarces viviparus) points to yet another masculinizing 
influence.

 This eel-like marine fish--like mosquitofish, killifish, and sailfin 
mollies--bears its young live. Most eelpout broods contain a 50:50 mix of males 
and females, D.G. Joakim Larsson and his colleagues at Goteborg University 
found. However, the sex ratio at two Swedish coastal sites in 1997 and 1998 
that were contaminated with pulp-mill wastes "was significantly shifted toward 
fewer females," the scientists report in the December 2000 Environmental 
Toxicology & Chemistry. One site produced 55 percent males, the other 58 
percent.

 In 1999, a brief plant shutdown occurred. All of a sudden, sex ratios for the 
fish returned to normal, reported Larsson at the SETAC meeting last November.

 Hormonal changes

 Androgens can trigger devastating changes in another hormone system important 
to aquatic life. Gerald A. LeBlanc of North Carolina State University in 
Raleigh has found in laboratory tests that androgens can derail the function of 
ecdysteroids--hormones that choreograph development in many invertebrates, 
including the molting of crustaceans. However, few natural waterways contain 
androgens at concentrations high enough to disrupt this development.

 LeBlanc works with tiny crustaceans known as water fleas ( Daphnia magna). 
Agents that perturb their ecdysteroid system can really "mess up embryonic 
development," he says. In some cases, the body will be grossly deformed, 
preventing if from swimming well. Other times, the young suffer what LeBlanc 
calls "embryonic arrest." They hatch and live briefly, even though they still 
"half resemble an egg," he says.

 After attending the CBR symposium in October, LeBlanc became interested in 
testing samples of Fenholloway sediment to see if its androgens might disrupt 
development in water fleas there.

 LeBlanc notes that some aquatic species throughout the world are experiencing 
yet another pollution-induced masculinization, known as imposex. Affecting 
various populations of some 100 species of marine snails, this condition 
saddles both genders with grossly exaggerated male sex organs.

 The males go into a reproductive mode that never shuts off. Affected females 
can develop a huge penis that blocks their release of eggs. The resulting 
egg-engorged females eventually die.

 The one agent now known to trigger this excessive masculinization is tributyl 
tin. It's not an androgen, but a toxic compound used to retard barnacle 
development on ship hulls. How this pollutant masculinizes the snails remains a 
mystery.

 Gender-bending pollution

 Some female fish change into males in response to local sex ratio or social 
cues. Scientists have been puzzling over those animals for decades (SN: 10/ 
21/95, p. 266). The chemistry behind the switch has remained elusive. The 
Birmingham team's report on andro and related compounds now indicates that 
besides natural factors, pollution can have gender bending effects.

"This work is important and something we should pay attention to," says 
McLachlan, CBR's director.

 For instance, he argues, andro's production by sediment-dwelling microbes 
bolsters "the potential for bacteria to be active players in any type of 
pollution," an idea to which he says few people have paid much attention.

 He's also impressed by the growing list of hormonal signals that have been 
identified in the environment. Even 5 years ago, scientists recognized only a 
few instances of environmental hormones, all estrogens, McLachlan notes. More 
recently, agents that masquerade as melatonin (SN: 10/17/98, p. 252), 
anti-androgens (SN: 4/3/99, p. 213), and thyroid hormones have emerged (SN: 
10/2/99, p. 212).

"I now suspect," he says, "that for every hormone that we know of, we will 
eventually find things in the environment that mimic or block it." McLachlan 
adds that by knowing what environmental hormones can do--even through such 
serendipitous findings as the macho mosquitofish--ecologists and health 
researchers can begin to look for subtle harm in other populations, including 
people.


