Botany under the Mistletoe: Science News Online, Dec. 23 & 30, 2000

 Botany under the Mistletoe Twisters, spitters, and other flowery thoughts for 
romantic moments

 By Susan Milius

 A holiday merrymaker loitering under the mistletoe may not be thinking much 
about parasitic plants. That's a loss, because the world's mistletologists are 
making wondrous findings about the more than 1,300 species they study.

 Some of the plants have flowers with trick openings. Some shoot their seeds 
farther than most watermelon spitters can spout. Some mistletoes grow as 
parasites on other parasitic mistletoes. And some give North Americans and 
Australians yet another way to misunderstand each other.

 All in all, when you bump into someone under a suspended sprig, there's a lot 
more to say than "Kiss me, you fool."

"I can get rhapsodic very quickly," says Job Kuijt of the University of 
Victoria in British Columbia. He ranks certain mistletoes among the world's 
most beautiful plants. True, he's devoted decades to working out their 
classification and might be suspected of a certain bias. Yet he's sure that 
most people would be wowed by the 11-inch-long tubular red-and-yellow flowers 
of a rare mistletoe in Ecuador and Peru or a more common species that ornaments 
the coast of Chile with great billows of pink and white flowers. And then, 
there's the Christmas mistletoe.

 What's to marvel at there? Viscum album, the holiday mainstay in England, puts 
out flowers no bigger than a pea and sprouts white berries. In North America, 
most holiday mistletoe comes from the equally modest genus Phoradendron.

 No, that's not what Kuijt means at all. For a spectacular holiday-season 
mistletoe, one has to go to southwestern Australia. There, what people call the 
Christmas bush grows into a tree up to 30 feet high and flares into 
orange-yellow blooms around December. Whereas most mistletoe plants are bits of 
shrubby fluff parasitizing trees, Australia's Nuytsia floribunda-itself a 
tree-grows an underground network that parasitizes smaller plants, such as 
grass and even the domesticated garden carrot.

 The various Christmas bushes raise the question of just what botanists mean by 
mistletoe. It's not a strict taxonomic term in the sense that holly means one 
of the plants belonging to the genus Ilex.

 Mistletoes represent some, but far from all, of the flowering plant order 
Santalales. The order is named for the renowned fragrance source, sandalwood, 
which is a parasite but not a mistletoe. Mistletoe generally refers to those 
shrubby, parasitic cousins of sandalwood that poke into their hosts aboveground 
instead of attacking roots. The Australian Christmas bush and several other 
oddballs therefore don't quite fit the pattern. However, they're such close kin 
to standard mistletoes that botanists lump them into the group, anyway.

 With their varied qualifications, 1,306 species have made it into the 
mistletoe club, according to Dan Nickrent of Southern Illinois University in 
Carbondale. He would like to know how their odd lifestyle came about.

 At this year's Western International Forest Disease Work Conference in Kona, 
Hawaii, he reported on his ongoing genetic analysis of mistletoes. Nickrent and 
his colleagues compared DNA sequences from representatives of all the big 
groups of mistletoes.

 By clustering plants with similar sequences, he drew a most-probable pedigree. 
It indicates that the mistletoe lifestyle evolved independently at least five 
times, says Nickrent.

 Members of Viscaceae, the family of holiday cheer in North America and Europe, 
seem to have arisen from just one of these origins. A different origin gave 
rise to a family called Misodendraceae, Nickrent suggests. This family's scaly 
sprigs jut out of the branches of South American beech trees, and in blooming 
season, the female plants of several species grow silky blonde hair-swinging 
whisks of yellow filaments several inches long.

 In all of the plant kingdom, parasitism evolved on nine separate occasions, 
says Kuijt, who wrote the classic Biology of Parasitic Flowering Plants (1969, 
University of California Press). The mistletoe lineage arose from just one of 
these beginnings, he says.

 Mistletoes' attacks-as good a place as any to start tracing their life 
cycle-usually begin with a seed hitching a ride on or in an animal, usually a 
bird. For instance, the seeds of the European mistletoe spend about 30 minutes 
in transit as they pass through a bird called a mistletoe thrush. A trip 
through a more specialized mistletoe-eating bird, such as one of the Indonesian 
flowerpeckers, can take only 4 minutes.

 A species of Chilean mockingbird provides most of the transport for a 
mistletoe called quintral or Tristerix aphyllus. This plant requires the rather 
large favor of being deposited on the spiny surface of a cactus. An oddity even 
among mistletoes, quintral lives almost entirely deep inside the 
sugar-transporting tissue of the cactus. The mistletoe shows itself only during 
the Chilean winter, when its brilliant red tubular flowers burst out of the 
cactus column.

 When the quintral mistletoe berries ripen to a pale pink, birds dodge the 
spines to nab a feast. The diners often deposit seeds for the next generation 
on cacti that already host some quintrals. Even a near miss that just snags a 
seed on a spine works for the quintral. The seeds germinate within a day of 
arrival, and each sends out a red strand that can extend a millimeter or two a 
day for up to 8 weeks or until it reaches the main body of its host.

 Could mistletoe mooching push the cactus to evolve ways to discourage birds 
from dropping seeds on it? In the June Ecology, Rodrigo Medel of Universidad de 
Chile in Santiago reported that the quintral might be driving at least one host 
species toward longer spines. Among the big columns of the cactus Echinopsis 
chilensis, the plants with the longest spines had the fewest and shortest 
visits from perching birds. From the cactus' point of view, that must seem a 
trend worth encouraging, Medel notes, because mistletoe-ridden plants produced 
less than half the seeds of uninfected plants.

 In Eulychnia acida, the other cactus host that Medel studied, mistletoe 
infection didn't seem to sabotage reproductive success. The underlying 
difference isn't clear, and Medel warns against oversimplifying notions about 
relationships among hosts, parasites, and their carriers.

 A few mistletoes "have emancipated themselves from birds," as Kuijt puts it. 
Australia's Christmas bush needs only a breeze to deliver its winged seeds. In 
the Northern Hemisphere, dwarf mistletoes ( Arceuthobium) depend on tiny, 
green, exploding fruits that can shoot a seed 24 meters per second. When the 
seeds mature, at only a few millimeters long, the flower reaches an explosive 
point where a slight jiggle prompts it to launch its seeds for distances that 
commonly extend 5 m and can reach 15 m. It's a silent shot-people strolling in 
the woods don't hear popping mistletoe. By developing a sharp eye for flowers, 
Kuijt has learned to identify blossoms about to pop and gives them a gentle 
prod.

 For the next stage of a freeloader's life, settling into a host, mistletoes 
have some advantages over many other parasitic plants. Mistletoes tend toward 
the generalist's rather than the specialist's style of attack, Kuijt says. The 
European Christmas mistletoe takes up residence on any of more than 200 plant 
species, and a distant relative, Dendrophthoe falcata, infiltrates at least 343 
host species.

 Some mistletoe species, however, live on a more restricted diet of hosts. The 
dwarfs specialize in conifers, sometimes only a single species.

 Botanists have found three small mistletoes almost exclusively on other 
species in the group. A report from the 1920s even describes a parasite 
triple-decker: one mistletoe attacking a second, which grew on a third. And the 
third grew on a tree.

 Kuijt argues that people often shift host relations for one of South America's 
most entertaining mistletoes, Gaiadendron punctatum. This glossy-leafed beauty 
with long, slim, yellow trumpet flowers inhabits the rainforest's roof garden 
atop giant, old trees. The mistletoe doesn't sink its strands into the 
supporting tree but preys on other plants specialized to perch in the canopy.

 As people clear these grand forests, the Gaiadendron isn't dying out. Instead, 
it often grows as a tree itself, still parasitizing small plants, but on the 
ground. Kuijt has encountered one such mistletoe tree with a trunk more than 25 
centimeters in diameter.

 After arriving on a host, a typical mistletoe seed's first exploratory root 
grows away from light, and once in shadow, grows upward. When it bumps into 
something-in the best case, a young branch-the mistletoe sends in special wedge 
tissue in search of the plumbing. Hitting the host's network of water-carrying 
cells deep inside the plant, the mistletoe builds its own system of ducts to 
steal water and nutrients.

 With their parasitic lifestyle, mistletoes kick up a mix of emotions in 
people. While some observers are struck by the plants' beauty and ingenuity, 
others worry about the well-being of the hosts.

 All the sapping of host resources disturbs pathologist Brian Geils of the U.S. 
Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Research Station at Flagstaff, Ariz. He's one 
of the editors of a guide to dwarf mistletoes, Agriculture Handbook 709 (). 
Geils, who describes his job as "public health for trees," frets that these 
parasites are getting out of hand.

 Mistletoes attack young trees more readily than they infiltrate thick-barked 
oldsters. The dwarf mistletoes prey on conifers primarily in western North 
America. "We probably have a lot more young trees than we used to," Geils says. 
Logging, replanting, and other reshaping of the landscape have shifted the 
balance away from old-growth granddaddies toward arboreial teenagers.

 Also, suppressing forest fires has reduced natural pruning of dwarf mistletoes.

 People passing through a forest may dismiss mistletoes as relatively harmless 
frills on the trees, since these parasites don't seem to do much damage. "The 
tree's got to sit out there for 100, 200 years," Geils protests. A human being 
just doesn't have the attention span to understand the destruction under way, 
he says.

 Dwarf mistletoes can weaken or kill trees by sapping their resources and 
making them easy targets for marauding insects such as bark beetles, Geils 
warns. Also, the mistletoe's growth compounds can send a tree into a tizzy of 
sprouting weird, ultradense foliage called witches' brooms. Neither beetles nor 
brooms please the timber industry. A survey by the Canadian Forestry Service 
blames dwarf mistletoes for the loss of wood worth roughly $1 billion (U.S.) 
each year in North America.

 Discouraging the growth of dwarf mistletoes has not turned out to be an easy 
matter, Geils says. Plenty of herbicides could kill the parasite-and the tree 
to which they're intimately connected. Cutting down infected trees would slow 
the spread, Geils says. However, such proposals have proved contentious and 
even provoked suits by citizens with a different view.

 For one thing, the witches brooms improve bird habitat. Forests with abundant 
brooms have three times as many cavity-nesting birds as other forests do, 
according to studies in several states. And research published in 1995 found 
that the Mexican spotted owl, a species listed as threatened in the United 
States, prefers mistletoe-infected tree stands to uninfected ones.

 Some people oppose cutting down trees because they don't want to be left with 
stumps, and others see mistletoe as a natural force in the forest.

 Mistletoe "is quite the political hot potato around here," Geils sighs. He's 
pinning his hopes on work by Simon Shamoun at the Canadian Forestry Centre in 
Victoria. Shamoun has found two fungi that don't hurt trees but kill 
mistletoes. Colletotrichum gloeosporiodes strikes the leaves and stems, and 
Nectria neomacrospora attacks the parasite's tissues inside the host. Shamoun 
plans to combine them in a mistletoe-control cocktail.

 On the far side of the world, Dave Kelly and other New Zealand ecologists are 
working to save mistletoes. In the austral summer, Peraxilla tetrapetala 
bristles with clusters of narrow, hot-pink buds, which eventually open 
upside-down. The petals stay connected at their tips but split apart from each 
other at the stem end. Kuijt's ended his 1969 account of the flower, "We cannot 
even guess at the meaning of this bizarre performance."

 Kelly and Jenny Ladley, both at the University of Canterbury, published the 
answer to the mystery in 1995, based on surveillance videos of the flowers. The 
blooms do open from the top but only if given just the right twist by a bird. 
Then, the pink petals rip apart, flinging pollen onto the bird's head.

 Bellbirds and tuis have the knack. It turns out that some small bees can 
wrestle the flowers partially open to get at pollen. This is the first instance 
in which scientists have found invertebrates that can work trick flowers 
apparently tailored for vertebrates (SN: 12/21&28/96, p. 390). The bees prove 
as effective as the birds in pollinating blooms, according to recent 
observations.

 Unfortunately, competent birds and bees have grown so scarce at two sites on 
the South Island of New Zealand that the twist-off mistletoe and a close 
relative, lacking sufficient pollination, have seen their seed output drop by 
90 percent, reported Kelly, Ladley, and their colleagues in the June 1999 
Conservation Biology.

 Worldwide, more than 20 species of mistletoes have ended up in the endangered 
category of the Red List of the Switzerland-based World Conservation Union, or 
IUCN.

 The London-based Plantlife and other British conservation organizations issued 
a more cheerful report a year ago on the supply of England's traditional 
holiday mistletoe, V. album. As the first British mistletoe survey in 30 years, 
it found that the plant's old haunts-in apple orchards-indeed were shrinking. 
However, other niches seemed to be providing ample habitat. At least for the 
time being, no one has to worry about kissing that mistletoe good-bye.


