Researchers stretch for improved surfaces: Science News Online, Dec. 23 & 30, 
2000

 Researchers stretch for improved surfaces

 Jessica Gorman

 Chemical engineers have devised a simple way to create better polymer-based 
coatings for products ranging from surgical implants to ship hulls.

 The researchers have already used the method to make water-resistant coatings 
that last much longer than ones prepared by more conventional means.

 Materials designers often rely on chemistry to modify a surface. Using a 
conventional method, researchers choose a material-such as a light, flexible 
polymer-and then add small, chainlike molecules that line up on its surface. 
Each of these molecules has one end that sticks to the polymer and another end 
that bestows the resulting material with some desirable surface trait, such as 
water resistance.

 This method has a significant limitation, however. The deposited molecules 
arrange themselves no more tightly than nature permits them to pack on their 
own. Water squeezes between the relatively loosely aligned molecules and 
quickly degrades the polymer.

 Now, Jan Genzer and Kirill Efimenko of North Carolina State University in 
Raleigh have found a way to jam self-assembling surface molecules into denser, 
more stable arrangements. They reported the work last week in Honolulu at the 
2000 International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies and in the Dec. 
15 Science.

 The researchers first stretched a film of a common elastic polymer called 
poly(dimethyl siloxane), or PDMS, which is used for caulking, lubrication, and 
various other purposes. They let molecules with water-resistant tails line up 
on the stretched surface. As expected, the molecules' heads chemically stuck to 
the surface and their tails pointed away. The scientists then released the 
tension in the polymer, which sprang back to its original area. As a result, 
the surface molecules drew more tightly together.

"We were able to fool Mother Nature," says Genzer. Tests indicated that the new 
material, with its unnaturally dense surface, retained water resistance 
throughout a 7-day, underwater trial and for 6 months while sitting on a humid 
shelf. Coatings prepared without the new stretch-and-release step kept water at 
bay for only a day when submerged, adds Genzer.

"I think this is a very significant finding," comments Manoj K. Chaudhury of 
Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa. "The idea is very simple. However, the 
results are spectacular."


