Genes on Display: Science News Online, Dec. 16, 2000

 Genes on Display DNA becomes part of the artist's palette

 By John Travis

 A Time magazine cover featuring geneticists Francis Collins and J. Craig 
Venter. The box for an adult videocasette, entitled "Designer Genes," showing a 
buxom blonde in a revealing lab coat. A comic book called "The New Mutants." 
One of James Watson's original wire-and-metal models of the double-helical DNA 
structure, which he and Francis Crick discovered. This odd assortment of 
objects, reflecting both genetics' history and its influence on culture today, 
greeted visitors this fall at Exit Art, a gallery in the heart of New York's 
Soho neighborhood.

 The eclectic collection was part of the introduction to an art exhibit called 
Paradise Now: Picturing the Genetic Revolution. The show presented works by 
several dozen artists, all reflecting on genetics or biotechnology. It closed 
in October, but pieces from Paradise Now will go on display at other sites next 
year, and the exhibit remains on the Web ().

 Much of the artwork expresses concern about the so-called genetic revolution. 
Several works challenge the wisdom of using bioengineering to create foods-one 
painting depicts square tomatoes and six-winged chickens. Other works, such as 
a satirical video advertising a biotechnology mutual fund, question gene 
patents and biotech commerce.

"We barely knew what the genome was when we started [ Paradise Now]. We did 
this show to, in a sense, wake people up," says Carole Kismaric. She and Marvin 
Heiferman, both New York curators, organized the exhibit.

 Artists often comment on the issues of their times. A more curious trend, 
reflected in the Paradise Now exhibit, is a small movement some people have 
dubbed genetic art. The artists in this genre have turned the tools of 
molecular biology into their paint brushes or chisels.

 Some use techniques of geneticists or collaborate with them to produce 
portraits containing depictions of chromosomes or DNA sequences. Others have 
drawn upon living organisms, including genetically modified bacteria and cloned 
trees, to express themselves.

 Slightly more than a decade ago, veteran photographer Kevin Clarke turned to 
DNA. Inspired by a chat with a Boston geneticist, Clarke began doing portraits 
that are made up solely of a representation of a person's unique DNA sequence 
and an object or scene that captures his or her essence (available for viewing 
at ).

"I do not arrive at this image by putting the person in front of the camera, 
rather, I allow the genetic depiction to refer to their physicality. This frees 
me to make the image with the person in mind. The work becomes a visual 
elucidation of my musings about the person," writes the artist, who has a 
six-panel portrait in the Paradise Now exhibit.

 The depiction of a subject's DNA starts with a blood sample, which Clarke 
sends off to a genetics laboratory for sequencing. The lab sends back a 
printout of the letters A, T, C, and G, which scientists use to signify the 
four building blocks of DNA.

 Meanwhile, Clarke spends time with his subject to develop a sense of the 
person and come up with additional images for the portrait. In one work, Clarke 
superimposed part of the genetic sequence of a woman on images of floating 
balloons. In another portrait, he merged the genetic alphabet with a stylized 
photograph of a slot machine.

 The Clarke portrait series chosen by Paradise Now has an additional connection 
to genetics. Its subject is James Watson, now president of Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory in New York. The series of pictures shows empty laboratory shelves, 
slowly collapsing, with Watson's DNA sequence written on or above them.

 Clarke says that his portraits "focus on the invisible" and "contradict 
notions of biological determinism." He's now working on a Web site that would 
allow visitors to manipulate images of their own DNA or chromosomes, which they 
would supply by plucking a few hairs or swabbing a few cells from inside their 
cheek and then sending them to a laboratory.

 Several other artists are also creating what some people call genetic 
portraits, though Clarke personally doesn't like the term. Steve Miller in the 
early 1990s began using medical images-X rays, sonograms, and 
electrocardiograms, for example-in his portraiture. He then tried genetic 
imagery in 1993, in a portrait of art collector Isabel Goldsmith. She had asked 
Miller to do a traditional portrait, but he convinced her to let him depict her 
DNA instead.

 After receiving a sample of her blood, a geneticist used an electron 
microscope to photograph and identify Goldsmith's chromosomes. Miller then 
created a colorful, four-panel portrait of her DNA strands.

 Some artists have gone beyond depictions of chromosomes and DNA to incorporate 
living organisms into their works. Take Natalie Jeremijenko, a design engineer 
and artist at New York University's Center for Advanced Technology, who has 
launched an ambitious project she calls "One Tree" ().

 To challenge popular fears about cloning and genetic determinism, Jeremijenko 
in 1998 worked with plant scientists to create thousands of genetically 
identical seedlings of the paradox walnut tree. Derived from cell cultures of a 
single plant, the clones were initially grown in the laboratory, where they 
would experience virtually the same environmental conditions.

 Next spring, the artist intends to plant the trees in public sites throughout 
the San Francisco Bay area. There, she says, features of local 
microenvironments-such as weather, lighting, and pollution-will shape each tree 
into a unique reflection of its surroundings.

 Jeremijenko placed six saplings from the project on display in the Exit Art 
show. Visitors could see that despite their genetic identity, the trees have 
already developed distinguishing features. Brown leaves marred some but not 
all, for example.

"You can't help but see that they're different. They have different leaf 
numbers, branch patterns, et cetera. There is a profound limit to genetic 
heritage," says Jeremijenko.

 To her dismay, however, some art critics have missed or ignored those 
differences, viewing her trees instead as a sign that cloning threatens to 
homogenize the world. She notes in exasperation that a review of her piece in 
the Oct. 2 The New Yorker commented, "Clones are spooky."

 One of the most colorful figures in the genetic art scene is Eduardo Kac of 
Chicago. In a project he calls "GFP Bunny," Kac intends to adopt an albino 
rabbit that French scientists genetically engineered to glow green under blue 
light. The project includes the animal's creation, the public debate generated 
by it, and the "social integration of the rabbit" into his family household, 
says Kac.

 The researchers created Alba-Kac's name for the animal-by introducing into 
rabbit embryos a jellyfish gene encoding a molecule called green fluorescent 
protein (GFP). Kac, who visited the rabbit in France when it was born this 
spring, claims that the scientists created it at his request. They, however, 
contend that it was created for research purposes, and they have so far 
declined to release the animal to the artist.

 The genetic modification performed isn't novel. Scientists have previously 
added the gene for GFP to mice and fish in order to follow the fate of cells 
during development (SN: 10/18/97, p. 247).

 Alba isn't Kac's first brush with genetically modified organisms. He has an 
elaborate work called "Genesis" that has toured the country and will next 
appear in January at Woodstreet Galleries in Pittsburgh. Kac describes it as a 
"transgenic artwork that explores the intricate relationship between biology, 
belief systems, information technology, dialogical interaction, ethics, and the 
Internet."

 As installed at Exit Art, "Genesis" focused the visitor's attention on a petri 
dish at the center of a small, barren room. Growing in the dish were bacteria 
into which geneticists had added a gene whose DNA sequence was determined by a 
line from the Bible's Genesis: "Let man have dominion over the fish of the sea 
and over the fowl of the air and over every living thing that moves upon the 
Earth." Kac had translated the text into Morse code and then represented the 
code's dot, dash, letter space, and word space as C, T, G, and A, respectively.

 The scientists assembled the resulting DNA sequence into a gene that they 
added to the bacteria. The gene encodes a protein not normally made in nature, 
yet the bacteria making that protein seem to grow normally.

 Kac used a video microscope to display pictures of the living microbes on one 
of the walls of the room in "Genesis." In the background, synthesized music 
generated from DNA sequences serenaded the visitors with a New Age sound. An 
ultraviolet light, which can mutate bacterial DNA, shined on the microbes 
whenever someone clicked a button on Kac's Web site ().

 At the end of each showing of "Genesis," Kac has the added gene's DNA sequence 
reanalyzed by scientists and he translates it back into Morse code and then 
English. Mutations have usually altered the original Bible verse, creating 
gibberish or converting, for example, fowl into foul. "The words of Genesis 
have changed," remarks Kismaric.

 Kac isn't the only artist to employ bacteria in his craft. Paradise Now also 
contains a work by David Kremers, a conceptual artist in the biology department 
at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. Among his many projects 
concerning biology, Kremers has created abstract paintings by growing bacteria 
on clear acrylic plates. The microbes are genetically modified to produce 
enzymes of different colors.

 Heiferman and Kismaric note that the response to the Soho showing of Paradise 
Now was strong enough that they're forming a traveling exhibit. Pieces from 15 
artists will go on display this spring at the University of Michigan's Museum 
of Art in Ann Arbor, and the Tang Museum in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., will host 
the full show next September.

 Kismaric says, "This is the imagery of our times."

 Criticism splatters genetic art

 The Paradise Now exhibit in Soho offered works-such as food containers labeled 
"greed beans," "made from bacterial genes," and "randomly mutating food"-that 
were critical of genetically modified plants and animals. Nevertheless, one of 
the artists in the exhibit was still dismayed by what she contends was the 
show's overly optimistic spin on biotechnology. At a panel discussion at the 
gallery, Natalie Jeremijenko presented her own version of the show's 
advertising poster, one bearing the title "Invest Now" and listing the 
corporate sponsors instead of the artists ().

"We're not in the middle of a genetic revolution. Transgenic animals are not 
inevitable," she protested.

 In "The Industry behind the Curtain," an online commentary about the exhibit, 
political scientist Jackie Stevens, a visiting professor at Pomona College in 
Claremont, Calif., also questions the corporate funding of genetic art.

 Stevens writes: "Art about biotechnology, especially with a critical edge, 
serves to reassure viewers that serious concerns are being addressed. Even more 
importantly, biotech-themed art implicitly conveys the sense that gene 
manipulation is 'fact on the ground,' something that serious artists are 
considering because it is here to stay. Grotesque and perverse visuals only 
help to acclimate the public to this new reality."

 Whether or not biotechnology is here to stay, genetic art presents a separate 
issue. Some art critics have their doubts about its longevity. In his review of 
the Soho exhibit in the Oct. 2 issue of The New Yorker, Peter Schjeldahl 
contends that theme-based art "has the shelf life of milk. If you wish it would 
go away, you'll be gratified anon. 'Paradise Now' typifies a recurrent 
phenomenon, whereby denizens of the fragmented and generally aimless art world 
jump on a breaking story in the culture at large."


