X rays unveil secret lives of black holes: Science News Online, Jan. 6, 2001

 X rays unveil secret lives of black holes

 Ron Cowen

 Supermassive black holes lead busy lives behind veils of dust that keep much 
of their activity under wraps. New X-ray observations challenge the notion that 
these cannibals, which reside at the cores of galaxies, finished growing soon 
after their host galaxies formed. Instead, these gravitational beasts--1 
million to 1 billion times the mass of the sun--may pack on weight much more 
gradually, gobbling surrounding gas and stars for up to 2 billion years.

 These and other studies, all reported last month, suggest new ways to find 
black holes at the cores of galaxies and measure their mass. Supermassive black 
holes are the big brothers of stellar black holes, which typically weigh about 
10 times the sun's mass.

 Most of the new conclusions trace to data gathered by two satellites, NASA's 
Chandra X-ray Observatory and the European Space Agency's X-ray Multi-Mirror 
Mission (XMM)DNewton observatory. These satellites are the first to produce 
high-resolution images and spectra of the cosmos by detecting high-energy X 
rays (SN: 10/21/00, p. 266). Because energetic X rays easily penetrate dust, 
astronomers can now identify and study a host of heavenly objects--including 
supermassive black holes--that are too faint to be seen in visible light. 
"We've entered a new era in the study of black holes," says Richard F. 
Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md.

 Not all black holes hide behind dust. Some fuel quasars, the beacons of 
visible light that rank among the most brilliant objects in the cosmos. Black 
holes power quasars by converting gravitational energy--the energy gained as 
they suck in gas and dust--into radiation. The more a black hole eats, the more 
radiation it generates.

 Although almost every large galaxy in the nearby reaches of the universe seems 
to have a black hole, less than 1 percent have quasars. This led researchers to 
suggest that quasars--and the black holes that power them--are active for only 
a blip of cosmic time, about 10 million years.

 X-ray studies, however, suggest that's far from the whole story. By using 
quasars to estimate how long black holes stay active, astronomers overlooked 
the vast majority of galaxies with active black holes because they aren't 
easily detected in visible light (SN: 1/15/00, p. 36), Mushotzky notes.

 Using Chandra to examine several hundred optically bright galaxies, a team led 
by Amy J. Barger of the University of Hawaii in Honolulu and the University of 
Wisconsin in Madison found that about 10 percent of the galaxies in the sample 
emit a high concentration of energetic X rays from their core. The strength of 
the X rays suggests that these galaxies contain supermassive black holes that 
are eating voraciously.

 Extrapolating from these results, Barger suggests that all luminous galaxies 
go through a phase in which their cores show intense X-ray emission--a signpost 
that they harbor a black hole--and that at any time, about 10 percent of the 
black holes are active diners. In follow-up studies, Barger and her colleagues 
used visible-light and near-infrared telescopes to measure the distances to 13 
of the 20 X- rayDemitting galaxies. Many reside less than 6 billion light-years 
away, but one is so distant that the light now reaching Earth left the galaxy 
when the universe was only one-fifth its current age.

 The team found that in each interval of cosmic time examined--from the present 
back through some 10 billion years--roughly the same percentage of black holes, 
about 10 percent, were active feeders. If the universe is now 14 billion years 
old, supermassive black holes probably remain active, putting on significant 
weight, for about 1.4 billion years, calculate Barger and her colleagues, 
including Mushotzky and Lennox L. Cowie of the University of Hawaii.

 If black holes take so long to grow, they might not wield as strong an 
influence on galaxy formation as astronomers had thought, Barger says. Her 
team's observations indicate that at least 15 percent of all supermassive black 
holes accumulated most of their mass over the past 6 billion years, well after 
their host galaxies had fully developed. She reported the findings last month 
at the Texas Relativistic Astrophysics Symposium in Austin.

 Mushotzky cautions that the number of galaxies in the team's study is 
relatively small. Science News has learned that a team at Pennsylvania State 
University in University Park also finds that some 10 percent of optically 
bright galaxies show X-ray emission indicative of an active black hole.

"Even though we have more Chandra data and X-ray sources than [Barger's team] . 
. . we are being more cautious about deducing black hole growth times, et 
cetera," notes Neil Brandt, a member of the Penn State team.

 In other reports at the Texas meeting, researchers described new methods for 
searching for supermassive black holes and determining their mass. One group 
presented evidence that an X-ray fingerprint can reveal the presence of black 
holes and indicate their mass.

 X-ray spectra taken with the XMM-Newton observatory reveal emissions from iron 
atoms circling black holes. The proximity of the atoms to the black hole alters 
the width and location of peaks in their spectra. G-nther Hasinger of the 
Astrophysical Institute in Potsdam, Germany, and his colleagues used these 
telltale distortions to find evidence of black holes in two distant galaxies.

"The way the iron line is distorted . . . tells us that the mass concentration 
[responsible for the altered spectra] is so high that it can only exist in the 
form of a black hole," he says. Hasinger estimates that by searching for the 
characteristic iron-emission lines, XMM-Newton can detect several hundred 
previously unknown black holes.

 The iron spectra also contain information that enables astronomers to measure 
the distance to a black hole in a galaxy too faint or dusty for its 
visible-light spectra to be detected.

 Astronomers can use fluctuations in the intensity of the iron emissions to 
estimate the mass of the black hole. XMM-Newton only detects such variability 
in the iron spectra in far brighter, nearby galaxies. Future X-ray 
observatories are being designed to record fluctuations from more distant 
galaxies, which hail from a time when the universe was much younger, Hasinger 
says.

 Using this technique to weigh supermassive black holes that existed at 
different times, astronomers could directly determine how rapidly these beasts 
grow and if they were significantly smaller in the past, says Andrew C. Fabian 
of the University of Cambridge in England.

 Other techniques described last month, while more speculative, may eventually 
enable astronomers to measure the masses of black holes going back to the era 
when galaxies first formed. These methods require the presence of quasars.

 In one technique, researchers monitor the gas clouds that orbit a supermassive 
black hole and its quasar. If the quasar varies its brightness, so do the 
surrounding clouds. An observer detects the variation in the quasar first, and 
the time delay indicates the distance between the clouds and the black hole. 
Combining this information with the speed of the clouds, astronomers can 
determine the black hole's mass, note Karl Gephardt and John Kormendy of the 
University of Texas at Austin. Other researchers have recently confirmed this 
method by weighing black holes of known mass in nearby galaxies.

 A second method relies on the observation that the brightness of a gas cloud 
reflects its distance from the quasar. From this relationship and the velocity 
of the clouds, several teams of astronomers have begun calculating the mass of 
nearby black holes. If the techniques can be applied to the most distant 
quasars, astronomers will be able to probe the growth of black holes in the 
early universe.

"We have entered a golden age in observational studies of black hole accretion 
and growth," says Abraham Loeb of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for 
Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass. "The next decade is likely to be exciting."


