Pinning Down the Sun-Climate Connection: Science News Online, Jan. 20, 2001

 Pinning Down the Sun-Climate Connection

 Solar influence extends beyond warm, sunny days

 Sid Perkins

 Second in a two-part series on the sun-Earth connection. Part one available at 
.

 The solar flares that spew massive amounts of energy and particles earthward 
are notorious for the havoc they can wreak on satellites, power grids, and our 
planet's magnetic field (SN: 1/13/01, p. 26: Available at ). The charged 
particles that slam into the outer fringes of the atmosphere also ionize the 
air and stimulate shimmering auroras. During periods of increased solar 
activity, particularly during highpoints of the 11-year sunspot cycle, these 
breathtaking sky shows often appear far south of their normal Arctic venues.

 Strong solar activity can also have substantial short-term influences by 
cooling the atmosphere in some places and heating it in others. These 
meteorological effects typically last days or weeks. But many scientists 
propose that changes in the sun's magnetic field and radiation output during 
its 11-year cycle of activity also have longer-term effects. They influence the 
movement of weather systems and other aspects of atmospheric and climate 
patterns.

 It's tough to discern the subtle climatic effects of solar variation amidst a 
cacophony of strong earthly influences-greenhouse gases, volcanoes, sulfate 
aerosols, to name a few. But using sophisticated statistical analyses of an 
ever-growing stockpile of climate and weather data, scientists say they're 
uncovering ways in which even small variations in solar activity could have big 
effects down at ground level.

 Solar storms

 Intense solar activity has substantial short-term effects that can shape 
Earth's weather. Consider the magnetosphere, which swaddles the planet at 
altitudes between 1,000 and 6,000 kilometers. It's composed of thick layers of 
charged particles-primarily protons and electrons-trapped in space by Earth's 
magnetic field. When a strong solar flare delivers a jolt to these belts, it 
can shake loose a torrent of these charged particles. Auroras, which at times 
of increased solar activity sprawl across the sky more often than average, are 
merely one result of this ionic rain upon the upper atmosphere.

 An especially powerful type of solar eruption, known as a coronal mass 
ejection, can inject protons directly into Earth's atmosphere. As these 
high-energy solar protons rain down, they pummel the air like subatomic 
bullets. The kinetic energy of these charged particles may warm the outer 
layers of the polar atmosphere by several degrees, says Charles H. Jackman, an 
atmospheric scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. This 
heating-which typically lasts just a few days, Jackman says-primarily affects 
the air at heights above 50 km.

 At altitudes from 30 to 90 km, the energetic particles also split molecules of 
nitrogen into nitrogen atoms, which then react with oxygen in the air to form 
ozone-destroying compounds. This occurs mainly at polar latitudes, where most 
of the charged particles have spiraled in along lines of the Earth's magnetic 
field. Because ozone absorbs ultraviolet (UV) light, the depletion of ozone can 
cause the atmosphere to cool.

 During a large solar storm, a portion of the upper stratosphere in the polar 
regions can lose up to 20 percent of its ozone and cool as much as 3@C, an 
effect that can last for several weeks. Jackman is quick to emphasize that such 
solar activity is not the cause of the infamous "ozone holes," which occur at 
lower altitudes and are aggravated by chemicals such as chlorofluorocarbons.

 Driving Earth's climate

 Not only do solar storms influence day-to-day weather, but long-term, subtle 
variations in solar activity drive Earth's climate, scientists propose. 
Satellite data show that, overall, the amount of radiation Earth actually 
receives from the sun varies little between the maximum and minimum phases of 
the 11-year solar cycle.

 When measured across all wavelengths of light, the total radiation reaching 
the planet changes only about 0.1 percent during the cycle, says Rodney A. 
Viereck, a space physicist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration in Boulder, Colo. However, the amount of change in solar 
irradiance at Earth isn't consistent across all wavelengths, Viereck notes. For 
example, the type of UV radiation that converts oxygen molecules into 
stratospheric ozone varies as much as 8 percent during the solar cycle.

 At yet-shorter UV wavelengths-the ones that create the ionosphere, which is 
the layer of the atmosphere that lies above about 80 km in altitude-the 
disparity is even larger. During a solar maximum, Earth receives more than five 
times the amount of radiation in these far-UV wavelengths than it gets during a 
solar minimum.

 The significant differences in UV irradiance at Earth during the solar cycle 
have profound effects in the upper levels of the atmosphere because the air 
density there is low, says Viereck. As these layers absorb radiation, they heat 
and expand upward, reaching high enough to slow satellites in low Earth orbit. 
Such spacecraft, which circle Earth at altitudes of 250 to 600 km, need to be 
boosted in their orbits more often during solar maxima than at other times, he 
adds.

 Down at Earth's surface, the variations in solar irradiance during a solar 
cycle are relatively small. Many of the wavelengths whose intensities vary 
significantly are absorbed at higher altitudes, so they never reach the ground. 
Although no specific mechanism has been proposed to explain how solar activity 
might influence weather and climate, the solar cycle matches up with many 
earthbound patterns, says Judith Lean, a solar physicist at the Naval Research 
Laboratory in Washington, D.C. She recently reviewed data from a wide variety 
of research efforts. The list of phenomena following the 11-year cycle includes 
the frequency of rainfall in Africa, forest fires in North America, and 
hurricanes in the North Atlantic.

 Another example of an apparent solar influence on climate is the 11-year cycle 
of annual temperatures in Alaska. Using Fairbanks and Anchorage weather data 
extending back to 1919, R. Suseela Reddy, a climatologist at Jackson (Miss.) 
State University, found that the annual average temperatures at the sites were 
lower during solar maxima and higher during solar minima. Reddy presented his 
research at the American Meteorological Society's annual meeting in Albuquerque 
this month.

 At the same meeting, Alfred M. Powell Jr., an atmospheric scientist with 
Autometric in Springfield, Va., described a mechanism that he believes links 
changes in UV radiation that heat the upper atmosphere to effects on the 
weather at ground level.

 According to Powell, as stratospheric ozone absorbs heat, the boundary between 
the stratosphere and the troposphere-the lowest atmospheric level, where all 
the weather happens-is driven to lower altitudes. In effect, Powell says, this 
clamps a lid on the weather systems in the troposphere. Low-pressure systems 
grow stronger and more quickly, and they last longer.

 The lowered boundary also changes the circulation of air from the stratosphere 
downward into regions of low pressure, which, in turn, affects the flow 
patterns that steer weather systems. Previous research has shown that at solar 
maxima, weather systems are driven along a more southerly path and are 
stronger. Powell's model reproduces these characteristics.

 Climate changes

 Only for the past two solar cycles have scientists used satellites to make 
direct measurements of the 11-year variation in radiation reaching Earth. It 
turns out, however, that these changes in irradiance correlate closely with the 
sunspot number, which astronomers have been measuring for hundreds of years. 
This correlation enables climate researchers to look at sun-climate connections 
well into the past.

 In particular, scientists are interested in explaining climate changes since 
the Industrial Revolution began to spew carbon dioxide and other so-called 
anthropogenic greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. A team led by Peter A. 
Stott, a climate scientist at the Hadley Center for Climate Prediction and 
Research in Berkshire, England, used a computer to model the changes in global 
average temperature since 1860. Greenhouse gases can't fully explain the 
climate patterns of the past century, the team reported in the Dec. 15, 2000 
Science.

 Even though carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases have been rising 
constantly for the past 150 years, global average surface temperatures during 
that time have shown extended periods of both warming and cooling. After a 
period of warming early in the century, slow but steady global cooling began in 
the 1940s. It continued until the mid 1970s, when warming seems to have kicked 
in and overtaken the cooling trend.

 Stott says that anthropogenic emissions alone could explain the rapid rise in 
temperatures in the past 30 years and that solar variation alone could have 
caused the warming observed between 1910 and 1940. However, neither natural nor 
anthropogenic causes alone could explain temperature patterns throughout the 
entire century. A model that includes both causes could explain up to 60 
percent of the temperature fluctuations measured on land, Stott notes. The rest 
of the fluctuation can be attributed to normal year-to-year variations, he adds.

 Although these results show that the solar variation can be a major 
contributor to climate change, Stott says he expects rising anthropogenic 
emissions to increasingly dominate as a cause of global warming.

 Francis W. Zwiers, an atmospheric scientist at the Canadian Center for Climate 
Modeling and Analysis in Victoria, B.C., finds the British team's results 
compelling. In most runs of Stott's computer model, which uses a random 
statistical process in its calculations, changes in solar irradiance were 
needed to duplicate the century's temperature patterns, he says. Only in a few 
runs did natural year-to-year variation explain the climate changes.

 Gerald R. North, a climatologist at Texas A&M University in College Station, 
contends that the effect of solar variation is so small that it's of no 
practical significance. This effect is "no more that a few hundredths of a 
degree...a faint signal in a noisy system," he says.

 Teasing out the individual contributions of solar variation, greenhouse gases, 
and other factors to a complicated cycle of temperature changes is a "giant 
statistical problem," North says. "You've got to use pretty sophisticated 
statistical methods in these analyses, and the results can fool you really 
easily if you don't understand what you're looking at."

 Still, he notes, there's overwhelming evidence that Earth is warming. His 
models show with a 75 percent certainty that solar variation is contributing 10 
to 20 percent of the temperature rise of a fraction of a degree. This small 
change, he contends, is useful only as a theoretical test for climate models.

 Other scientists also have a tough time believing that just a small variation 
in solar irradiance over an 11-year period could have a strong effect on 
climate. "They've said, 'It just can't be,'" says NOAA's Viereck." But even 
some of the strongest nay sayers are starting to recognize that there's 
something there."

 One man who may convert more naysayers to yea-sayers is John K. Lawrence, a 
physicist at California State University in Northridge. Lawrence and his 
colleagues used what he calls "an extremely crude model" of three interrelated 
equations to simulate the flow patterns in the atmosphere at middle latitudes.

 Although simple, the model incorporates all of the basic physics equations 
needed to describe one aspect of the atmospheric flow around Earth. Researchers 
using this model can add input that simulates variations in solar radiation.

 The model calculates the average speed of the westerly flow of winds in the 
atmosphere as a function of latitude. This number provides a crude estimation 
of the speed of the jet stream that drives weather systems from west to east.

"It's a good general circulation model," says Lawrence. "But if you want to 
predict the weather in Scotland 2 years from now, this model won't do it."

 What the model does do, Lawrence says, is show that even a simple system of 
equations can answer many of the criticisms directed against those who say 
solar variation is an important factor in explaining significant global 
temperature changes.

 For one thing, the model exhibits what physicists call chaotic behavior even 
small changes in the inputs to complex systems can cause large variations in 
the answers (see "The Changes of Wind," below). This, Lawrence notes, helps 
bolster the claim that a 0.1 percent variation in solar irradiance can, in 
fact, significantly affect climate.

 Second, the model's calculations produce correlations that appear during the 
early phases of a simulation, disappear later in the simulation, and then 
reappear as anticorrelations. This matches the past behavior of the solar 
cycle. Between 1860 and 1920, cooler temperatures occurred when sunspot numbers 
were large. From the 1920s to the 1960s, there was no clear correlation between 
sunspot numbers and temperature. But after 1960, increased sunspots correlated 
with higher temperatures, Lawrence notes.

 Finally, Lawrence's model allows the Northern and Southern Hemispheres to 
fluctuate independently of one another and to have different correlations to 
the solar variation, as has been observed.

"Most scientists try to explain these things by creating incredibly detailed 
models and then solve them by brute force with lots of computer power," says 
Lawrence. "We're saying it's plausible to get big, complex effects from a 
remarkably simple model."

 For example, small variations in solar irradiance may drive big changes in 
climate. He adds: "Whether the climate actually works this way is another 
story."

 The Changes of Wind

 Output of a climate model that suggests even small variations in solar 
irradiance may drive big changes in climate: The image above shows a plot of 
average westerly wind speed as a function of the heating contrast between high 
and low latitudes (horizontal axis) and eddy forcing (vertical axis), a 
parameter that can represent the heating differences between land and sea. For 
some combinations of the two parameters, such as those represented in the upper 
left corner of the larger image, average wind speeds remain relatively stable. 
For other combinations, such as those shown in the lower left corner (a region 
shown magnified in the inset at left), even minuscule changes in input can 
cause significant fluctuations in average wind speed.


