Light Stands Still in Atom Clouds: Science News Online, Jan. 27, 2001

 Light Stands Still in Atom Clouds

 Peter Weiss

 Two independent teams of physicists have overcome the restless nature of light 
and stopped laser pulses in their tracks. A proposed method, now in tests by a 
third team, may even make light pulses creep backwards.

 It's not normal for photons to stop, let alone to back up. Those 
quintessential particles of light usually zip straight through a vacuum at 
300,000 kilometers per second and traverse other materials at slower but still 
dazzling speeds.

 In a sense, stopping light is a trivial feat, comments Michael Fleischhauer of 
Kaiserslautern University in Germany, who helped develop the theory behind the 
new stopping techniques. "Take a black piece of paper and you can stop light 
very easily," he notes. However, the photons absorbed by that paper are 
destroyed.

 What's remarkable about the new experiments is that the researchers stop a 
light pulse without destroying the photons, he explains. In each experiment, a 
so-called coupling laser illuminates a gaseous group of atoms in a glass 
chamber or magnetic trap while a pulse from another laser penetrates the gas.

 When the scientists turn off the coupling laser, the electromagnetic energy 
from the other laser vanishes, but the information that defines its light, such 
as amplitude and wave properties, transfers onto the gas atoms' quantum state 
known as spin. By turning the coupling beam back on, the researchers 
reconstitute the original pulse from the stored information.

"We park the light pulse in the atom cloud. When we feel like it, we turn the 
coupling laser back on . . . and out comes [the original pulse]," says Lene V. 
Hau of the Rowland Institute for Science and Harvard University, both in 
Cambridge, Mass.

 Reporting in the Jan. 25 Nature, she and her team describe how they shone a 
coupling laser on a cloud of ultracold sodium atoms, causing pulses from 
another laser to slow and then stop. A couple of years ago, she and Stephen E. 
Harris of Stanford University and their colleagues made headlines by slowing 
light to a bicyclist's speed (SN: 3/27/99, p. 207). In later experiments, Hau's 
group and others further reduced the speed.

 Using rubidium gas warmed to around 80@C, Ronald L. Walsworth, Mikhail D. 
Lukin, and their colleagues at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
in Cambridge also stopped light dead. A report of the work is scheduled to 
appear in the Jan. 29 Physical Review Letters (PRL).

 The transfer of light-defining information between light and atoms may ease 
the development of powerful computers (SN: 8/26/00, p. 132) and exceptionally 
secure forms of communication that exploit the quantum properties of particles, 
says Lukin.

 Whereas atoms confined in one place may handle quantum computations, photons 
seem better suited for transporting quantum information, Lukin explains. The 
new experiments suggest that data transfers between the two 
operations-computation and data transport-may be possible. To become practical, 
however, the technique will probably have to work in solids, not just in atomic 
clouds, he adds.

 The expansion of light-slowing techniques from gases to solids, a more complex 
medium, is already under way. In an unpublished experiment, Philip R. Hemmer of 
Hanscom Air Force Base near Boston and his colleagues have for the first time 
dramatically slowed light in a solid, Hemmer told Science News. Pulse speeds 
fell to about 45 meters per second in an exotic type of crystal.

 Methods of slowing and stopping light have evolved from a technique for making 
opaque material transparent to selected light frequencies (SN: 6/1/91, p. 340). 
In that technique, scientists shine on the material a coupling laser tuned to a 
frequency slightly different from that of the laser pulse entering the 
material. Like two audio tones generating a low-frequency warbling or beating 
sound when they're close in frequency, the two light signals interfere to 
create a relatively low-frequency beam. Instead of being absorbed by the atoms, 
as each of the two parent waves would have been, this signal passes right 
through them, Fleischhauer explains.

 However, the combined signal's photons still interact with the material's 
atoms by repeatedly imprinting their defining features onto the atoms' spins 
and then retrieving that information from the atoms. Those interactions bog 
down the pulse. Shutting off the coupling beam freezes that give-and-take 
between the photons and atoms, stopping the pulse.

 So far, Hau and her team report the longest storage time for pulses-about a 
millisecond. By then, random atomic motion had washed out most pulse 
information, the researchers suspect. The Harvard-Smithsonian team reports that 
its pulses' information is erased partly because atoms escape from the region 
lit by the coupling laser.

 It also may be possible to halt a light pulse in a warm gas without turning 
off the coupling laser, scientists at Texas A&M University in College Station 
now propose. In the Jan. 22 PRL, they suggest tuning the lasers so the pulse's 
photons interact only with atoms whose random thermal motion opposes the 
pulse's direction.

 If that backward velocity equals the light pulse's forward velocity, the pulse 
will stand still. Study coauthor Yuri Rostovtsev says that if the atoms' 
velocity is greater than the light pulse's velocity, excited atoms should "drag 
the light" backwards.


