Genes Seem to Link Unlikely Relatives: Science News Online, Jan. 6, 2001

 Genes Seem to Link Unlikely Relatives

 Sid Perkins

 Similarities in DNA, the genetic material that's passed along from an animal 
to its offspring, can be a strong indicator of kinship. After all, even if you 
didn't get your father's nose, you got a hefty dose of his DNA.

 Using that line of reasoning, an international team of scientists contends 
that markers in the genes of three proteins suggest a single African ancestor 
for animals as diverse as elephants and aardvarks. The researchers, led by 
scientists at the University of Nijmegen in the Netherlands, present their 
findings in the Jan. 2 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 Almost a third of the major groupings, or orders, of mammals actually can be 
lumped into a superorder called Afrotheria, says Wilfried W. de Jong, a 
molecular biologist at the University of Nijmegen and a coauthor of the report. 
Scientists had previously linked some of these animals, such as elephants and 
hyraxes, because of similarities in bone structure or other characteristics, de 
Jong notes. Although they sport similar genetic markers, other newly proposed 
group members--such as aardvarks and golden moles--have no obvious physical 
similarities to their supposed cousins.

"This is an odd collection of mammals, and it's tough to convince biologists 
who depend on morphology that this is a valid grouping," admits S. Blair 
Hedges. An evolutionary biologist at Pennsylvania State University in 
University Park, he says in the same issue of the journal that the genetic 
similarities can best be explained by a common ancestor.

 Morphologists, who seek biological relationships among organisms, typically 
look for common traits such as feathers or fur to discern kinship, says Hedges. 
In this particular case, he notes, the researchers have applied the 
morphologists' rules of classification to genetic instead of structural markers.

"One hopes that molecules and morphology would tell the same story," says de 
Jong. But when the two differ, he contends, genetic markers are simpler to 
interpret.

 It's always possible that convergent evolution could cause a particular 
physical feature to evolve, de Jong notes. However, he says, he can't imagine a 
biological mechanism that could randomly cause matches in markers on the genes 
for three different proteins in the Afrotherians. According to the team's 
statistical analyses, the probability of such an event is negligible.

 Over the past 3 years, studies of genetic material by de Jong and his 
colleagues have indicated that Afrotherians are descended from a species that 
probably lived about 100 million years ago. This common ancestor evolved in an 
Africa isolated after it split from South America but before the continent 
drifted eastward to join Eurasia and was likely a small forest dweller that ate 
insects, Hedges says.

 Although there are no physical characteristics that distinguish the animals 
linked by the genetic analysis, Hedges says, the combination of the molecular 
evidence, the geographic distribution of the animals today, and the geologic 
history of the African continent provides convincing support for their kinship.


