Protein May Tie Obesity to Diabetes: Science News Online, Jan. 20, 2001

 Protein May Tie Obesity to Diabetes

 Nathan Seppa

 The high incidence of obesity among people with type II diabetes suggests a 
connection between the two conditions. Scientists have sought a link by 
studying insulin resistance, the trademark symptom of type II, or adult-onset, 
diabetes. But they still don't know why cells in people with insulin resistance 
ignore insulin's signals to process blood glucose for use by muscles and other 
tissues.

 Researchers working with mice have now identified a hormone, called resistin, 
that is secreted by fat cells and appears to play a direct role in type II 
diabetes. Healthy mice given doses of extra resistin for 2 days develop insulin 
resistance, researchers at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia 
report in the Jan. 18 Nature.

 Interestingly, obese mice naturally produce copious resistin, says study 
coauthor Mitchell A. Lazar, a molecular endocrinologist at Pennsylvania. When 
given drugs that inhibit the effects of resistin, these overweight mice process 
glucose more efficiently, he says.

 The Pennsylvania researchers have identified the human gene that encodes 
resistin, but they haven't yet gauged the hormone's effects in people.

 Roughly four out of five people with type II diabetes are obese. The new 
findings "indicate that resistin may form at least part of the missing link 
between obesity and diabetes," says Jeffrey S. Flier of Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center in Boston in the same issue of Nature.

 Lazar's team found resistin in mice while monitoring the effects of a diabetes 
medication in the family of drugs called TZDs, or thiazolidinediones. Earlier 
studies in rodents had shown that TZDs slow type II diabetes even though they 
spur the creation of fat cells, a seemingly contradictory action. The drugs 
work by activating a receptor molecule, called PPAR-gamma, in fat cells.

 When PPAR-gamma becomes active, production rates change for some proteins in 
the cells. Although most of these rates rise in the presence of TZDs, the 
researchers focused on the few proteins having rates that dropped. Among these, 
Lazar and his colleagues identified one that they dubbed resistin.

 Further tests showed that TZDs indeed reduce the concentration of resistin in 
the blood of mice.

"This is a big deal," says Allen M. Spiegel, director of the National Institute 
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases in Bethesda, Md. Measuring 
resistin concentrations in blood could help physicians diagnose type II 
diabetes, both Spiegel and Lazar say.

 Resistin shares some qualities with another protein secreted by fat cells and 
associated with obesity, the hormone leptin. This hormone, discovered in 1995, 
seems to regulate food intake.

 Establishing that fat cells secrete resistin and leptin confirms that these 
cells are more than just "oily stuff in the body," Spiegel says. Fat in the 
body "is an endocrine gland, a hormone-producing substance involved in a 
dialogue with the brain, liver, and muscle in a complex [process] of nutrient 
metabolism," he says.

 Leptin doesn't appear to have a straightforward association with diabetes. In 
rodents, a leptin deficiency causes severe insulin resistance, but people with 
type II diabetes actually have high concentrations of leptin in their blood. 
Some research points instead to a compound called tumor necrosis factor alpha 
as a trigger for insulin resistance, Flier says.

 Resistin "is almost certainly a piece of the puzzle," Lazar says. "Resistin 
may actually play a big role in explaining why having too many fat cells can 
induce insulin resistance."

 The Pennsylvania researchers have already devised an antibody to resistin, 
which they used in the mouse tests to inhibit the newfound substance's effects. 
However, they still haven't found the molecular receptor that allows resistin 
to bind to cells. Identifying this molecule could give drug makers a target by 
which to chemically block the effects of resistin, Spiegel says.


