Do Meat and Dairy Harm Aging Bones?: Science News Online, Jan. 13, 2001

 Do Meat and Dairy Harm Aging Bones?

 Janet Raloff

 With advancing age, our bodies experience an inexorable loss of bone. Two 
major studies in elderly populations now underscore the importance of dietary 
protein in this structural erosion, which can lead to osteoporosis. The reports 
come to sharply different conclusions, however, about the effect of animal 
protein on the rate of bone loss.

 In one study, diets rich in animal protein correlated with greater bone loss 
and fracture risk. In the other, animal protein appeared to protect bone.

 Such contradictions, "which are not very satisfying," often emerge from 
observational studies where researchers record the natural habits and health of 
people, notes Robert P. Heaney of Creighton University Medical Center in Omaha, 
Neb. "That's not a criticism of such studies," he says, just a reminder of the 
uncontrollable variables rife in populations.

 However, he notes, the new studies are important because they're in the 
vanguard of efforts to understand protein's impact on age-related bone loss. 
This condition underlies a growing U.S. epidemic of hip fractures. Treating 
them costs more than $10 billion annually.

 The first of the new analyses computed bone loss over 7 years in some 750 
elderly women, all taking part in a larger osteoporosis study that's been 
running since 1986 at four U.S. sites.

 Women eating the most animal protein--roughly four times their 
vegetable-protein intake--lost 0.8 percent of the bone in their hips annually, 
notes endocrinologist Deborah E. Sellmeyer, director of the University of 
California, San Francisco-Mount Zion Osteoporosis Center. This is four times 
the rate of bone loss in participants who ate about equal parts animal and 
vegetable protein.

 The risk of hip fractures in women eating the highest proportion of animal 
protein was 3.7 times that in women regularly downing equal quantities of 
animal and vegetable protein, the team reports in the January American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition.

 The findings make sense, Sellmeyer argues, because digestion of animal protein 
unleashes large amounts of acid that the kidneys must excrete. Previous studies 
showed that when kidney function wanes with age and calcium intake drops, the 
body draws upon skeletal calcium to buffer the resulting buildup of acid, thus 
eroding bone. Most of the women in this study consumed only about half of the 
1,500 milligrams of daily calcium recommended for people their age.

 In a younger person whose kidney function is robust and calcium intake high, 
diets rich in animal products can help build bone, Sellmeyer notes.

 In the recent study, the women eating the least animal protein also averaged 
only 70 percent as much total protein as did those eating the most animal 
protein.

 Data from 600 senior citizens in the long-running Framingham (Mass.) 
Osteoporosis Study paint a picture quite different from Sellmeyer's results. 
Over a 4-year period, Marian T. Hannan of Harvard Medical School in Boston and 
her team measured changes in bone density among the elderly men and women.

 Participants eating relatively little protein--from any source--lost about 1 
percent of their hip and spine bone annually, whereas people eating the most 
protein held bone losses to about one-quarter of that. The scientists report 
their findings in the December 2000 Journal of Bone and Mineral Research.

 In this study, the ratio of animal to vegetable protein was high and differed 
little among participants. Still, animal protein didn't seem deleterious. In 
several sites especially vulnerable in osteoporosis, seniors routinely downing 
the most animal protein showed bone loss at only about half the rate of those 
eating the least animal protein.

 Two years ago, Ronald G. Munger of Utah State University in Logan and his 
colleagues reported similar evidence for a protective effect of animal protein 
in their study of hip fractures in Iowa women. But Hannan and Munger both say 
that ample consumption of meat and dairy products might also be a marker for a 
well-rounded diet that's good for bones.

 One unambiguous take-home message from all these studies, Sellmeyer says, is 
that elderly people "need to maintain a good protein intake."


