Life’s Housing May Come from Space: Science News Online, Feb. 3, 2001

 Life's Housing May Come from Space

 Ron Cowen

 Gimme shelter! The cell-like envelopes in which life on Earth arose and 
evolved may literally have dropped from the sky, a new study suggests.

 Scientists exploring the origins of life have focused on two 
ingredients-proteins, the workhouse molecules that underlie life's activities, 
and DNA, the molecule that carries the blueprint for future generations. But to 
thrive, life as we know it requires something else: a container to protect the 
molecular machinery from the vagaries of the world around it.

 Icy materials present in gas clouds throughout our galaxy could have provided 
this shelter, according to researchers from NASA's Ames Research Center, SETI 
(Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, Calif., 
and the University of California, Santa Cruz. The materials could have hitched 
a ride to Earth on comets, meteorites, or interplanetary dust.

 In their lab, the scientists prepared wafers of a frozen mix containing water, 
methanol, ammonia, carbon monoxide, and other molecules known to be present in 
interstellar gas clouds. They then subjected the wafers to the frigid 
temperatures and high vacuum present in deep space. Next, they zapped the ices 
with ultraviolet light for several weeks, mimicking the high-energy radiation 
that these molecules would receive in space.

 The researchers brought the residue of this icy mixture to room temperature 
and added liquid water, which would have been present on ancient Earth. They 
found that the resulting molecules had arranged themselves in spherical 
vesicles similar in size, shape, and structure to cell membranes.

"At some point, life had to become encapsulated. It had to separate itself from 
its environment," says biochemist Jason P. Dworkin of both Ames and SETI. "If 
this stuff is raining down from space . . . then early life may have had no 
problem in forming a shell around itself."

 Dworkin, David W. Deamer of UC Santa Cruz, and Scott A. Sandford and Louis J. 
Allamandola of Ames describe their findings in the Jan. 30 Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences.

 Deamer reported in 1989 that when organic compounds extracted from the 
so-called Murchison meteorite interact with water, they form hollow droplets 
that resemble cell membranes. When he and his colleagues analyzed laboratory 
ices, "to our surprise and delight, we found that vesicular structures formed 
that looked very much like those we saw in the Murchison material," Deamer says.

 Also, the vesicles absorb ultraviolet light and convert the energy into 
visible light. This is akin to the way living cells harvest energy, says 
Allamandola.

 The researchers have "been able to simulate the formation of these vesicles . 
. . using a pretty simple and completely plausible initial mix of molecules 
that should be present throughout the interstellar medium," comments SETI 
astrobiologist Christopher F. Chyba. "The sort of vesicles that encapsulate 
life on Earth [could] be everywhere throughout the galaxy."

 Other teams had previously shown that interstellar ices contain compounds that 
could be precursors for life. Chyba says it's even more startling to find that 
such ices are making structures "that really look like a cell membrane."


