Explosions, not collision, sank the Kursk: Science News Online, Jan. 27, 2001 

 Explosions, not collision, sank the Kursk

 Sid Perkins

 The Kursk-one of the largest submarines ever built and the pride of the 
Russian Navy-sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea on Aug. 12, 2000, 
during the Northern Fleet's largest exercise in more than a decade. The mystery 
only deepened as Russian officials put forth conflicting 
explanations for the tragedy, which claimed 118 sailors.

 Now, scientists report that analysis of the shock waves recorded at seismic 
stations across northern Europe indicate that the Kursk sank 
after onboard explosions, possibly of missile warheads or fuel. The researchers 
from the University of Arizona in Tucson and Los Alamos (N.M.) 
National Laboratory present their findings in the Jan. 23 Eos, the weekly 
newspaper of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.

 Patterns of ground movement generated by explosions differ from those caused 
by earthquakes, explains Terry C. Wallace, a University of 
Arizona seismologist and a coauthor of the Kursk analysis. Using the techniques 
of forensic seismology, he adds, researchers studying these 
vibrations can discriminate causes of explosions as diverse as underground 
nuclear testing, terrorist bombings, and detonations in fireworks 
factories.

 Underwater explosions send out a distinctive pattern of pressure waves known 
as a bubble pulse, which stems from oscillations in the rising 
bubble of hot gases. Because water is a nearly incompressible fluid, the 
pressure pulses from even small underwater blasts can generate strong 
seismic signals when they strike the lake or ocean bottom.

"You could throw just a couple of sticks of dynamite into Lake Michigan, and 
seismometers all over Michigan would detect it," says Wallace.

 The seismic data captured by the European instruments include two bubble 
pulses. Only a few seismometers captured the first blast, which the 
scientists estimate released energy equivalent to 250 kilograms of TNT-about 
the energy of a modern torpedo, Wallace notes. The second 
explosion occurred more than 2 minutes later and was detected up to 3,100 miles 
away. That blast released 18 times as much energy as the 
first, about the same as that in the fuel and warheads of eight Russian 
ship-to-ship missiles.

 Soon after the submarine sank, some Russian officials claimed that the Kursk 
colliding with another vessel caused the first set of seismic 
signals and the sub striking the ocean bottom produced the second set. The time 
that the second pressure pulse took to reflect from the ocean 
surface and return to the bottom, Wallace says, indicates that it was probably 
generated when the Kursk was on or near the ocean floor, about 
100 meters below the surface. Also, he contends, simple collisions wouldn't 
create a bubble pulse.

 Wallace's team used openly available data recorded at some of the more than 
16,000 seismometers installed worldwide. Unfettered access to 
such data is vital both for the study of natural phenomena and for verifying 
the details about incidents such as the loss of the Kursk, says 
Frank L. Vernon, a seismologist at the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary 
Physics in La Jolla, Calif.



