Old stars reveal universe's minimum age: Science News Online, Feb. 10, 2001

 Old stars reveal universe's minimum age

 Linda Wang

 Astronomers agree that the universe began in a Big Bang. Just how long ago 
that was remains a matter of debate.

 Now, using a more precise chronometer, an international research team 
estimates the universe to be at least 12.5 billion years old, give or take 3 
billion years. Previous estimates overlap with this figure but have a larger 
uncertainty.

 The universe must be older than its oldest stars, which formed 1 to 2 billion 
years after the Big Bang, explains Timothy Beers of Michigan State University 
in East Lansing. The more precisely astronomers can determine the age of these 
stars, the more closely they can zero in on the age of the universe.

 Astronomers have determined the age of many stars using radioactive dating. A 
radioactive element's half-life is the time it takes for half of its atoms to 
decay into lighter so-called daughter elements. By measuring the proportions of 
radioactive elements and their daughters, researchers can determine how many 
half-lives have passed since the formation of the radioactive elements in such 
objects as stars. Then, it's simple arithmetic to calculate the stars' ages.

 The method works only for stars containing radioactive isotopes. But the most 
ancient stars formed from just hydrogen, helium, and lithium-nonradioactive 
elements produced during the Big Bang. They are called metal-poor stars.

 The most massive of these stars exploded, setting off nuclear reactions that 
fused the light elements into heavier ones that were taken up in a second 
generation of metal-poor stars. A small percentage of these ended up containing 
radioactive isotopes, says Beers.

 Until now, astronomers have only been able to detect one such 
isotope-thorium-232-in any metal-poor star. Unfortunately, thorium-232's 
half-life of 14.1 billion years is too long for precisely dating the comparably 
aged universe. Using this isotope to measure cosmic age is akin to timing a 
short race with a stopwatch marked in minutes, says Beers.

 In the Feb. 8 Nature, Beers and his colleagues report finding a second 
radioactive isotope, uranium-238, in a metal-poor star located on the outskirts 
of the Milky Way. Because uranium-238's half-life is only 4.5 billion years, 
it's like having a stopwatch that ticks off seconds instead of minutes, Beers 
says.

 Although radioactive isotopes with even shorter half-lives would allow more 
precise cosmic dating, they would have dwindled to nothing long ago. "Uranium 
is pretty close to being optimal," says Brian Chaboyer of Dartmouth College in 
Hanover, New Hampshire.

 Using the Very Large Telescope in Cerro Paranal, Chile, Beers and a dozen 
coworkers detected spectroscopic signs of uranium in the star CS 31082-001. 
Different elements absorb light at different wavelengths, producing 
characteristic patterns in a star's absorption spectra. The researchers then 
calculated the age of the star and extrapolated a minimum age of the universe.

 The discovery of uranium in this star is "an important advance," says 
Chaboyer. When astronomers find more of these stars, they'll further nail down 
the universe's minimum age, he says.


