Hop . . . Hop . . . Hopbots!: Science News Online, Feb. 10, 2001

 Hop . . . Hop . . . Hopbots!

 Designers of small, mobile robots take cues from grasshoppers and frogs

 Peter Weiss

 Rush Robinett got the idea for his lab's new robot while out on his father's 
New Mexico farm. He was catching grasshoppers for trout bait and noticed that 
when he reached for the grasshoppers, they seemed to spring in random 
directions. They fell on their sides as they landed and then struggled back 
onto their feet before springing again.

 A robot designer at Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, Robinett 
realized that this kind of grasshopper mobility might be just the thing for 
developing new kinds of small, mobile robots. Program managers at the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), in Arlington Va., had been 
interested in creating wide-ranging minirobots for years.

 As both Robinett and his military sponsors knew only too well, small robots 
have a big problem.

 Consider Sojourner, NASA's celebrated hassock-size rover that poked around a 
tiny patch of Mars as part of the 1997 Pathfinder mission. According to the 
dictionary, to sojourn implies to stop and stay in one place for a spell. It 
seems that the small, wheeled robot did just that nearly every time a rock as 
big as itself blocked its way. Sometimes, it got hung up for days on end.

 Not exactly the kind of get-up-and-go you want from a robot sent millions of 
kilometers to explore exotic worlds.

 Agencies like NASA and the Department of Defense have been championing the 
idea of little robots because they can be cheap and portable but can still 
carry a payload-cameras, scientific instruments, or perhaps bombs. However, "as 
you get smaller, obstacles the size of yourself come along much more 
frequently," explains Sandia's Barry Spletzer. "If you're an Abrams tank, there 
are not many obstacles your size, but if you're an ant, every blade of grass is 
bigger than you are."

 While Sojourner was getting stuck on Martian rocks, two independent groups-the 
Sandia researchers and a joint team from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), both in 
Pasadena-independently hit upon the same new concept for dealing with the 
problem of obstacles.

 From the robot's perspective, it goes something like this: Throw yourself as 
high and as far as you can in the general direction you want to go. After the 
crash landing, right and reorient yourself. Then, do it again until you reach 
your goal. In the past few months, each group has unveiled a prototype of what 
it intends to develop into a new generation of hopping robots.

 The Sandia robot looks nothing like a grasshopper, but it sure can jump. 
"They've put an emphasis on really good thrusting. It's amazing," comments Joel 
Burdick, one of the designers of the rival JPL/Caltech machine.

 Dubbed by its inventors as "the knight" -after the chess piece that leaps over 
others-the robot is basically a piston-driving combustion chamber mounted 
inside a spherical, plastic shell about the size of a grapefruit. To propel 
each of the half-kilogram robot's leaps, a small charge of liquid propane or 
other fuel ignites within the chamber. This slams the piston against the 
ground. Typically, that push-off hurls the device about 1 meter into the air 
and a couple of meters away from its starting point.

 The New Mexico team is also working on a powerful, 2.5-kg version of the 
robot, which has leaped 4 m high and 5 m away in preliminary tests, says Sandia 
engineer Gary J. Fischer.

 When the hopper lands, the imbalance between its relatively lightweight, 
spherical top and relatively heavy, cone-shaped base causes it to automatically 
right itself. Then, a small, battery-powered motor rotates an internal, 
off-center weight to pivot the device around and realign it according to its 
built-in compass.

 Like a tacking sailboat, the robot can head more-or-less in a chosen compass 
direction. "Even though individual hops are fairly inaccurate, over the long 
term you get where you're going," Spletzer says. The Sandia team figured that 
more sophisticated navigation would be unnecessary for the uses their sponsors 
had in mind for the robot and would only add to the complexity, weight, and 
cost.

 Initially, DARPA officials envisioned a small, rugged, camera-equipped robot 
that soldiers or a SWAT team could toss into a building to snoop around. Then, 
another DARPA program took over funding for the robot's development. This 
program's goal is to create mobile antitank mines that can shuffle around the 
minefield and close up any gaps that enemy mine-clearing actions might have 
opened.

 The energy-efficient knight can hop thousands of times on a 20-gram fuel tank, 
enabling it to wander for at least several kilometers before running out of 
gas. With that kind of range, the device might serve other applications as 
well. "My favorite is for planetary exploration," Spletzer says.

 The robot designers at JPL and Caltech found their inspiration in another 
hopper in the animal kingdom. They call their electrically powered invention 
"frogbot."

 By appearances alone, the 40-centimeter-tall aluminum and plastic gizmo seems 
more like the skeleton of some big-beaked bird than a frog.

 Watch it move, however, and the reason for the frog moniker jumps out: A pair 
of hinged shafts, bent like a pair of squatting frog's legs and tethered 
together at the knees by a strong spring, suddenly straighten. The action 
resembles a frog's leap, except the legs share a single foot.

 Since it falls over when it lands, frogbot is equipped with plastic levers for 
righting itself. The levers push against the ground, forcing the 1.5-kg device 
erect. Then the motor pivots the device on its base to point in the right 
direction and rebends the legs for the next leap.

 In the prototype, an operator controls that direction, but future versions 
will contain an orientation sensor. "Mars, for example, has no [planetwide] 
magnetic field, [so] it is necessary to use a sensor that reads the position of 
the sun in the sky," says JPL engineer Paolo Fiorini, who heads the project.

 On Earth, frogbot lunges about 2 m per leap-roughly as far as the Sandia 
robot. But in the low gravity of Mars, it would go three times as far in a 
single bound.

 So far, the frogbot prototype hops only a half-dozen times before it must 
recharge its batteries, says Fiorini. However, he notes, models ultimately sent 
to space will rely on solar power, which will enable them to roam indefinitely.

 In 5 to 10 years, NASA could be sending hoppers into space by the hundreds, 
predicts Neville I. Marzwell, manager of JPL's advanced concepts and technology 
innovation office. His office and the National Science Foundation are funding 
the JPL-Caltech hopper's development.

 Spacecraft would drop groups of hoppers onto planets, asteroids, or other 
bodies. The robots would then fan out to explore the surface. Compared with 
wheeled rovers, hoppers would have a better chance of climbing mountains or 
descending into craters and canyons, Marzwell asserts.

 Mission-ready hoppers in the coming years would probably be smaller and 
lighter than today's experimental models. They would also be equipped with 
cameras and one or two scientific instruments, each no larger than a sugar 
cube. "Like a colony," Marzwell says, all the individual units would keep in 
touch with a "mother brain" on the orbiter or on one large rover on the surface.

 If hoppers stay simple and cheap, "the return on investment for science will 
be 1,000 times what it is today," Marzwell predicts. More than $100 million was 
spent on the lander and rover in the Pathfinder mission, he explains, whereas 
hoppers dropped from an orbiter would probably cost considerably less than 
$100,000 apiece and carry out more extensive scientific investigations.

 What's more, Marzwell argues, the penalties-financial and scientific-from 
losing a few of the robots would be minimal. "If I lose one or two, it's not a 
big deal. The mission can go on," he says.

 While both of the critter-inspired robots' designs leap beyond what 
roboticists have done before, they're not the first efforts to make machines 
hop.

 The record for the largest, heaviest hopper ever conceived may go to a leaping 
battle tank patented in 1945 by Henry W. Wallace. Although there's no record 
that Wallace ever built the machine, he described it in detail in his patent 
application. He proposed a multiton metal canister bristling with cannons and 
bounding around on a single, telescoping leg. A driver would steer the leg, 
powered by explosives and diesel fuel, as it hurled the tank into the air with 
each thrust.

 The idea of hoppers reappeared in a different guise when the space race began. 
Translated from German, a 1959 book called The Moon Car (Hermann Oberth, 
Harper) featured a hopping lunar vehicle.

 In the 1960s, H.S. Seifert of Stanford University set to work on a hopping car 
that he intended to transport astronauts around the moon's surface. He built a 
prototype and gathered evidence that hoppers are a particularly efficient mode 
of transportation in low gravity.

 Robotic hoppers first appeared in the late 1970s. They were built by 
scientists interested in both robotics and new ways to study how people and 
animals walk and run. Those researchers built machines with sophisticated 
mechanisms and controllers that mimicked the ways animals balance and propel 
themselves.

 Until this work, self-propelled robots were "like tables with moving legs," 
says Marc Raibert, a pioneer of hopping and running robots who now heads a 
company called Boston Dynamics in Cambridge, Mass. During the 1980s and 1990s, 
Raibert and other scientists at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and elsewhere developed a zoo of robots 
that hopped, ran, and even did flips.

 The machines now under development in California and New Mexico represent a 
new type of hopping robot because they don't maintain continuous motion or 
balance. Practical considerations ruled out that kind of sophistication. Says 
Robinett, "We've tried to make them as cheap, as dumb, and as simple as 
possible."

 Neither machine has yet debuted in a field application, but each one's 
performance to date suggests where it might excel.

 The Sandia researchers have, so far, created the faster jumper-leaping every 
15 seconds or so. Their machine also lasts through many more hops on its stored 
energy.

 The California design, however, may prove to be the more capable navigator 
because of two new features in its latest version. The frogbot now can control 
its jumping angle and can drive the last centimeters to its target on recently 
added wheels, Burdick says.

 Compared with Sojourner, which roamed within only a few meters of its lander, 
the new generation of hopping machines looks toward much broader horizons-in 
space or on Earth.

"There is nowhere [this technology] can't reach," Marzwell declares. "The 
question is how many leaps will it take."

 Hoppers may keep minefields lethal

 Antivehicle mines scattered from aircraft form an effective barrier against 
tanks and other military vehicles. However, if enemy troops blow up just one 
lane of the devices, a dangerous force can rumble through the breach.

 Clearing a lane would become much harder if the remaining mines immediately 
flowed into the gap, much as water on a table, if you draw your finger through 
it, says condensed-matter physicist Thomas W. Altshuler of the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in Arlington, Va. He heads the agency's 
program to develop a "self-healing minefield."

 The program is exploring the possibility of mounting 2-kilogram mines-shaped 
like half a coffee can-on the hopping robots invented by Sandia National 
Laboratories of Albuquerque. Alternatively, tiny rocket thrusters built into 
the mines' rims might flip neighboring mines into the breach "like 
tiddlywinks," Altshuler says. Whichever propulsion method is eventually chosen, 
the mobile mines will also require rudimentary intelligence and the ability to 
communicate with each other.

 By fall 2002, DARPA aims to field-test systems of 50 such mines. Scientists 
are developing algorithms for determining how mines can efficiently move to 
fill gaps. "Those are very hard questions" that become even more challenging in 
actual minefields with hundreds or thousands of mines, Altshuler says.

 Current U.S. military tactics call for sprinkling antipersonnel mines among 
antivehicle mines to deter enemy troops from clearing the antivehicle weapons. 
Because of those tactics, the United States has not signed the 1997 Ottawa 
Convention banning mines designed specifically to kill or maim people.

 Following a directive from then-President Clinton, DARPA is developing the 
fluidlike minefield plan and other technologies to "obviate the need for the 
antipersonnel mine" and clear the way for U.S. endorsement of the treaty, 
Althshuler says.


