Statins Take On the Brain: Science News Online, Feb. 10, 2001

 Statins Take On the Brain

 Cholesterol-lowering drugs may also treat or prevent Alzheimer's disease

 John Travis

 They make up one of the most often prescribed classes of pharmaceuticals. Some 
enthusiastic physicians call them "wonder drugs." In recent years, these 
cholesterol-lowering drugs, known as statins, have revolutionized the treatment 
of cardiovascular disease.

 Studies over the past decade have shown that people who have had a heart 
attack dramatically lower their risk of having a second one by taking statins. 
Recent data indicate that statins can even lower a person's chances of 
suffering an initial heart attack, and the drugs may also prevent strokes. As a 
result of these findings, statins-which go by such brand names as Lipitor and 
Zocor-reap enormous profits for the firms selling them.

 The fortunes of those companies may just keep on growing.

 Scientists are finding that statins may have other unexpected health benefits. 
They seem to stimulate bone growth, making statins a potential new treatment 
for osteoporosis and other bone disorders (SN: 1/15/00, p. 41).

 Even more provocative, two recent studies looking at the medical outcomes of 
people who had taken statins for heart disease found hints that the drugs may 
also have prevented or delayed Alzheimer's disease. While retrospective studies 
like these often suggest spurious connections, researchers are excited because 
they already had indications that blood cholesterol concentrations, or levels, 
influence the course of the memory-robbing illness.

"Over the years, there's been a lot of clinical, epidemiological, and more 
recently, laboratory data that support a link between cholesterol . . . and 
susceptibility to Alzheimer's disease," says Lorenzo Refolo of the Nathan S. 
Kline Institute for Dementia Research in Orangeburg, N.Y. In statins, "we may 
have, right at our fingertips, very good drugs for preventing or treating 
Alzheimer's disease."

 Statins lower cholesterol by binding to and inhibiting the activity of an 
enzyme involved in its synthesis, but researchers remain unsure of how statins 
may thwart Alzheimer's disease. That uncertainty hasn't stopped them from 
pushing ahead. Last fall, Larry Sparks of the Arizona Health Sciences Center in 
Sun City and his colleagues started a small trial to examine whether a statin 
arrests progression of the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease.

 Many scientists credit Sparks with first linking cholesterol and Alzheimer's 
disease. "Fifteen years ago, I was out, standing in my field, yelling into the 
darkness. I was alone. In the last 2 years, a lot of people have come around," 
notes Sparks.

 Sparks might have continued his lonely yelling if not for the two studies last 
year that associated statin therapy with a reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease. 
The first one, spearheaded by Benjamin Wolozin, a cell biologist at the Loyola 
University Medical Center in Maywood, Ill., appeared in the October 2000 
Archives of Neurology.

 In analyzing more than 60,000 medical records from three hospitals, Wolozin 
and his colleagues documented the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease among 
elderly patients in general and among the subgroups who had taken statins or 
other drugs used to treat heart disease or high blood pressure. The 
investigators found that the prevalence of dementia in patients who took either 
of two statins-lovastatin or pravastatin-was 30 to 40 percent of that observed 
in the other patients. Those who had taken another statin called simvastatin, 
however, showed no anti-Alzheimer's benefit.

 Wolozin's study "could represent an important breakthrough in the search for a 
medication that could prevent or arrest the most common form of dementia," says 
Robert W. Haley of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in 
Dallas in the same journal.

 The second retrospective study linking statins to a lower risk of Alzheimer's 
disease showed up in the Nov. 11, 2000 Lancet. This one, a collaborative effort 
by David A. Drachman of the University of Massachusetts Medical School in 
Worcester and Hershel Jick of Boston University Medical School, was what 
scientists call a case-control study.

 Using a database of several million patients from 368 medical practices in the 
United Kingdom, the researchers identified more than 24,000 people with high 
cholesterol levels who had taken statins or other cholesterol-lowering drugs, 
more than 11,000 similar people who took no such drugs, and 25,000 people with 
normal cholesterol levels and no history of taking cholesterol-lowering drugs.

 In those groups, British physicians had diagnosed 284 individuals with 
dementia. The study didn't distinguish between different types of dementia, but 
Alzheimer's disease is the most common form. Drachman and Jick's team next 
identified more than 1,000 control subjects, other people in the study who had 
no dementia but matched the people with dementia-the cases-in age, sex, and 
other characteristics.

 When the investigators compared the cases and the controls, they found that 
people who had taken statins faced only about 30 percent the risk of developing 
dementia as did people with normal cholesterol levels or untreated high 
cholesterol.

"It looks as if statins may be effective in preventing a very large proportion 
of dementia," says Drachman.

 The first hints of a connection between cholesterol and Alzheimer's disease 
emerged more than a decade ago, when Sparks began examining brain tissue of 
people who had died with coronary artery disease. He unexpectedly found that 
deposits of proteins known as amyloids frequently marred these brains, much as 
these so-called plaques riddle the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. 
Compared with people free of heart disease, people with the illness had four 
times as much brain amyloid, says Sparks.

 Many researchers hold that plaques consisting of an amyloid known as 
beta-amyloid kill brain cells and thereby cause Alzheimer's disease. So, Sparks 
became curious whether some of the established risk factors for heart disease 
might also lead to the brain disorder.

 In an experiment about 8 years ago, he fed rabbits a cholesterol-enriched diet 
known to cause coronary artery disease in the animals. The diet also increased 
the amount of brain beta-amyloid, Sparks demonstrated.

 What most excited him, however, was finding that returning rabbits to a normal 
diet reduced the brain beta-amyloid. "If you take the cholesterol away, the 
[beta-amyloid] goes away," says Sparks.

 Scientists envision several ways that blood cholesterol could influence the 
amyloid produced by cells in the brain. Consider that the amount of cholesterol 
in a cell's membrane governs its thickness and rigidity. The protein from which 
beta-amyloid originates sits within such cell membranes. Therefore, the 
cholesterol content of the membrane may make that precursor protein more or 
less accessible to the enzymes that carve it into beta-amyloid.

 Because these enzymes are also membrane-bound, the membrane's cholesterol 
content could also govern their activity.

 Moreover, cholesterol appears to influence the production of a protein called 
apolipoprotein E (APOE), one form of which is a risk factor for both heart 
disease and Alzheimer's disease. Feeding mice a cholesterol-rich diet increases 
the amount of APOE in their brains, notes Refolo. While APOE's role in 
Alzheimer's disease remains unclear, scientists suspect that the various forms 
of the protein have different efficiencies in clearing beta-amyloid from the 
brain.

 Confirming a connection between cholesterol and beta-amyloid, Refolo recently 
extended Sparks' work on rabbits to genetically engineered mice that are widely 
used as an animal model of Alzheimer's disease. Last summer, Refolo and his 
colleagues reported in the August 2000 Neurobiology of Disease that a 
cholesterol-rich diet increased the size and number of beta-amyloid plaques in 
the rodents' brains.

 According to unpublished work he presented last summer at the World's 
Alzheimer's Congress in Washington, D.C., Refolo also found that a 
cholesterol-lowering drug dramatically reduced formation of beta-amyloid in 
mouse brains. Refolo used a drug that's not a statin but binds to and inhibits 
the activity of an enzyme for cholesterol synthesis. He now plans to repeat the 
study using a statin.

 Refolo's work suggests a direct correlation between the concentration of 
cholesterol in the blood and the amount of beta-amyloid littering the brain. 
Yet it's far from settled that statins protect the brain by lowering a person's 
cholesterol level. In Drachman's study, for example, people taking 
cholesterol-lowering drugs other than statins didn't enjoy a significantly 
reduced risk of dementia.

"It might very well be that statins do not work totally by their 
cholesterol-lowering ability," acknowledges Refolo.

 Indeed, the issue of what else statins do in the body is drawing new 
attention. "There's a lot of discussion on the mechanisms underlying statins' 
effects," says Gerard J. Blauw of the Leiden University Medical Center in the 
Netherlands, who's studied how statins may prevent strokes.

 A few reports hint that the drugs modulate immune responses, perhaps by 
dampening inflammation. A large body of research implicates inflammation in the 
brain-and in the vasculature that supplies it with blood-as a contributing 
factor in Alzheimer's disease, notes Michael J. Mullan of the University of 
South Florida in South Tampa. In inflamed brain areas, for example, the 
abnormal activation of brain immune cells called microglia may play an 
important role in the disorder.

 Mullan's colleague Daniel Paris has shown that both beta-amyloid and 
cholesterol can, in test-tube experiments, stimulate an inflammatory response 
within blood vessels and cause them to constrict. Statins block both those 
effects and do so independently of the drug's inhibition of cholesterol 
synthesis, says Paris.

 When it comes to stopping Alzheimer's disease, suggests Mullan, "statins may 
have a dual role. They may be able to oppose the immediate effects of both 
[beta-amyloid] and cholesterol in stimulating inflammation in the vasculature . 
. . and they may be able to block the inflammatory role of [beta-amyloid] and 
cholesterol on microglia."

 Statins "could simply be improving cerebral vasculature," agrees Drachman, who 
notes that the drugs can directly enhance the function of endothelial cells, 
which make up the lining of blood vessels.

 While the statins' actions beyond their effects on cholesterol do intrigue 
investigators, research into those effects is in its infancy. "There's no 
evidence that these effects are clinically important," cautions Blauw.

 Some scientists argue that they don't need to know potential mechanisms before 
they try to confirm that statins thwart Alzheimer's disease. Since the statins 
have a well-established safety record, only rarely causing serious side 
effects, these researchers are ready to test the drugs against Alzheimer's 
disease.

 In a trial that started last fall, 60 people with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's 
disease will take a dose of statin every day for 3 years, and 60 similar people 
will take a placebo pill.

 Sparks and his team have taken a stand with their choice of a statin for the 
trial. They're administering one called atorvastatin, largely because, unlike 
some other statins, it doesn't seem to cross from the bloodstream into the 
brain. Sparks argues that lowering cholesterol concentrations in blood alone 
permits excess brain cholesterol to seep back into the blood.

 In his view, a statin that enters the brain could stop needed cholesterol 
synthesis there and harm nerve cells. "It's ill-advised to treat an Alzheimer's 
patient with a statin that crosses the blood-brain barrier," contends Sparks.

 Not all scientists agree. If statins work by reducing inflammation and not by 
lowering cholesterol levels, for example, a statin that gets into the brain 
might be key to success against Alzheimer's.

 Even if the results of the new trial prove disappointing in stopping the 
progress of dementia that won't rule out atorvastatin or other statins for 
preventing Alzheimer's disease, notes Sparks. The patients enrolled in the 
current study may already be too advanced in their dementia for the drugs to 
help, he explains.

 Sparks' study may also prove too small to produce statistically convincing 
results, suggest some scientists. Another statin study under way in Europe, 
will monitor nearly 6,000 people's responses to pravastatin or a placebo pill 
given daily for more than 3 years.

 This effort, known as the Prospective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at 
Risk study (PROSPER), follows up a finding several years ago by Blauw and his 
colleagues suggesting that pravastatin may prevent strokes. The main goal of 
PROSPER is to confirm that result. But since a series of small, undetected 
strokes may be the cause of many cases of dementia, PROSPER investigators will 
also monitor the cognitive function of their study's participants. All are 70 
or older and have coronary artery disease or are at high risk for it.

 If a statin does forestall decline in mental function in some volunteers, the 
researchers will look to see whether the drug prevented minor strokes or 
reduced inflammation in the brain.

 In contrast to Spark's therapeutic trial, PROSPER should offer the first 
evidence from a prospective trial indicating whether statins can prevent mental 
decline, says Blauw. He cautions that the study won't resolve whether 
physicians should prescribe the drugs to avert Alzheimer's disease.

 Even if PROSPER reveals that statins reduce dementia, investigators will need 
to conduct additional trials to address Alzheimer's disease specifically and to 
see whether the drugs work in patient populations that are younger and not at 
high risk for heart disease.

 Summarizing current data on statins and Alzheimer's disease, Drachman recalls 
the first hints that aspirin taken regularly could protect against heart 
disease.

 It took more than a decade to confirm aspirin's effect, he notes, and 
investigators continue to debate how much aspirin a person should take. While 
statins clearly represent a promising lead for preventing Alzheimer's disease, 
it will take some years to confirm that benefit, says Drachman.


