Infection divides two wasp species: Science News Online, Feb. 10, 2001

 Infection divides two wasp species

 Susan Milius

 Giving antibiotics to tiny wasps to cure them of a sex-related disease reveals 
the best evidence yet that infections can help make new species, say 
researchers in New York.

 Each of two closely related species of wasps in the genus Nasonia carries two 
separate strains of Wolbachia bacteria, notorious saboteurs of insect 
reproduction, report Seth Brodenstein and his colleagues at the University of 
Rochester. The wasps live in separate parts of the United States, laying eggs 
in pupae of flies. But when wasps of the two species meet in the lab, they 
don't hybridize well. However, cure them of their Wolbachia infections, and the 
wasps turn out hybrids as viable and fertile as same-species crosses do.

 These healthy offspring add new support to speculations that 
reproductive-system infections helped splinter insect lineages into today's 
millions of species, the team argues in the Feb. 8 Nature.

 Eleven years ago, John H. Werren, a coauthor of the current paper, revitalized 
this old speculation. He reported a case in which an infection may have 
contributed to the speciation that separated two Nasonia wasps.

 Both of these species carry Wolbachia. When Werren's team cured those 
infections, hybridization improved considerably, but other genetic factors 
prevented full viability and fertility of offspring. So, it was hard to tell 
whether the bacteria had played a role in the split or had just infected the 
wasps later.

 Since then, researchers have discovered Wolbachia in all orders of insects 
plus spiders, mites, pillbugs, and nematodes. Recent estimates put that 
bacterium in 75 percent of insects. Insects inherit Wolbachia through their 
cytoplasm-rich eggs but not through the stripped-down sperm.

 To power their female-transported spread, various Wolbachia manipulate their 
hosts so that male offspring die, virgins bear only daughters, and certain 
matings prove infertile (SN: 11/16/96, p. 318).

 Werren's team examined whether such disruptions could create reproductive 
barriers. The researchers compared one of the species he studied earlier, the 
northeastern Nasonia giraulti, with the western Nasonia longicornis. In lab 
matings, male N. giraulti and female N. longicornis produced no viable 
offspring. Switching species for moms and dads permitted about 30 percent of 
the offspring to live. However, after three generations were treated with 
antibiotics, the species mated with each other as successfully as they did 
among themselves.

 Werren speculates that geography separated ancestors of these species and each 
caught a different strain of Wolbachia. "This is the first clear-cut 
demonstration that Wolbachia can be an early barrier between species," he says.

 Ary Hoffmann of La Trobe University outside Melbourne, Australia, points out 
that geography separates the wasp species, too. Hoffmann adds that he doesn't 
think the bacteria can split a local population. His work suggests that in a 
population, the more common Wolbachia infection crowds out a rare one. "It's 
not as simple as, 'You get the bug, you get new species,'" he says.

 Werren agrees that the main role for the disease is probably to keep already 
divided populations separate.

 That's not a trivial role, notes Michael J. Wade of Indiana University in 
Bloomington. He points out that in one case of the 50 or so studied so far, 
Wolbachia contributed to insect speciation. If the bacterium factors into the 
creation of 2 percent of the world's 5 million or so insect species, Wade says, 
" Wolbachia could play a big role."


