Science Talent Search announces finalists: Science News Online, Feb. 3, 2001

 Science Talent Search announces finalists

 Jessica Gorman

 For decades, leaders in science and technology have kicked off their careers 
with high school research projects for the Science Talent Search. This week, 
judges announced the finalists for the national competition's 60th anniversary 
year.

 Chosen from a field of 300 semifinalists, the 40 high school seniors represent 
just 2.5 percent of those who entered the 2001 Intel Science Talent Search. The 
finalists' projects cover topics in the social sciences, biology, chemistry, 
computer science, physics, math, and engineering.

 Science Service, the publisher of Science News, and the Westinghouse 
Foundation established the Science Talent Search in 1942 to recognize and 
encourage precollege students who have an extraordinary flair for science, 
mathematics, and engineering. In March 1998, Intel Corp. of Santa Clara, 
Calif., became the program's corporate sponsor.

"Science and technology skills have become basic skills-like reading, writing, 
and arithmetic-necessary to be competitive in today's economy," says Craig R. 
Barrett, president and chief executive officer of Intel. "The next innovations 
and ideas will come from these Intel STS students and other young people who 
are comfortable with technology and have a solid grounding in science and math."

 The finalists range in age from 15 to 18 and include 15 girls and 25 boys. 
They represent 32 schools in 17 states, with nearly one-third of them-13 
students-hailing from New York State. California has the second highest number 
of finalists with four.

 In March, the students will travel to Washington, D.C., to compete for 
$530,000 in scholarships, including a $100,000 first prize. Each finalist will 
receive a personal computer and a scholarship of at least $5,000. The awards 
will be presented on March 12.

 The 40 finalists are California: Michael Richard Areen, Mira Loma H.S., 
Sacramento; Gabriel Drew Carroll, Oakland Technical H.S., Oakland; Nathaniel 
Jay Craig, Mira Loma H.S., Sacramento; Hans Christiansen Lee, The York School, 
Monterey. Connecticut: Heather Charlotte Higgins, Academy of Our Lady of Mercy, 
Milford; Mariangela Lisanti, Staples H.S., Westport. Florida: Linda Jeanette 
Arnade, Palm Bay H.S., Melbourne; Michael Theprathan Hasper, Maclay H.S., 
Tallahassee. Georgia: Aditya Vikram Sunderam, Chamblee H.S., Chamblee; Rishi 
Sahai Vasudeva, Roswell H.S., Roswell. Indiana: Sarah Adeline Kessans, Eastern 
H.S., Pekin. Louisiana: Cambrian Yangshao Liu, Baton Rouge Senior H.S., Baton 
Rouge. Maryland: Alan Mark Dunn, Montgomery Blair H.S., Silver Spring; William 
Abraham Pastor, Montgomery Blair H.S., Silver Spring. Massachusetts: Michael 
Zheng-Shee Chiu, Belmont H.S., Belmont. Minnesota: Neil Ratna Mehrotra, Hopkins 
H.S., Hopkins. Missouri: Abdur Rasheed Sabar, Parkway West H.S., Ballwin. New 
York: Meredith Ashley Arfa, Byram Hills H.S., Armonk; Dmitriy Aronov, 
Stuyvesant H.S., New York; Hayley Bay Barna, Byram Hills H.S., Armonk; Craig 
Joshua Berman, Ward Melville H.S., East Setauket; Jerry Moy Chow, Stuyvesant 
H.S., New York; Eve Ariel Henry, Byram Hills H.S., Armonk; Kimberly Ann 
Kempadoo, Ramapo Senior H.S., Spring Valley; David Nejad Khalil, Great Neck 
North H.S., Great Neck; Nelson Moussazadeh, Great Neck North H.S., Great Neck; 
Vinod Easwaran Nambudiri, Blind Brook H.S., Rye Brook; Caroline Minh-Phuong 
Nguyen, Stuyvesant H.S., New York; Monika Paroder, Brooklyn Technical H.S., 
Brooklyn; Johanna Beth Waldman, Roslyn H.S., Roslyn Heights. Ohio: Aaron Louis 
Iverson, Buckeye Valley H.S., Delaware; Ann Lai, Hathaway Brown School, Shaker 
Heights. Oregon: Melissa Ann Radecki, Oregon Episcopal School, Portland. 
Pennsylvania: Christina Rose Crabtree, Central Bucks H.S. West, Doylestown; 
Atalie Carina Young, Keystone Oaks H.S., Pittsburgh. Texas: Ashvin Kumar Dewan, 
Hightower H.S., Missouri City; Robert Adam Horch, Texas Academy of Mathematics 
and Science, Denton. Virginia: Parimalram Achintya Madduri, Thomas Jefferson 
H.S. for Science and Technology, Alexandria; Vladimir Sergei Novakovski, Thomas 
Jefferson H.S. for Science and Technology, Alexandria. Wyoming: Jason Wah Lone 
Chiu, Laramie Senior H.S., Laramie.


