A Nation Aflame: Science News Online, Feb. 24, 2001

 A Nation Aflame

 After last year's conflagrations, can we learn to live with wildfire?

 Sid Perkins

 Last year's wildfire season, one of the worst in the past half-century, didn't 
waste any time getting started.

 On Jan. 1, 2000, Florida chalked up the year's first fire--a small blaze that 
was under control before it could spread more than an acre. Come late summer, 
firefighters were faced with a string of hot, dry days in which hundreds of 
thousands of acres were ablaze across more than a dozen states. Fire fighting 
resources were stretched to their limit. At the peak of the season, more than 
500 new wildfires broke out each day.

 The National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, estimates the cost of 
suppressing fires in the United States last year at more than $1.6 billion, a 
figure that surpassed the amount spent in the previous 3 years combined. 
Despite the efforts of firefighters, including volunteers from other nations 
and military units assigned to battle blazes, more than 850 homes and other 
structures were lost. As people move out of cities and into rural areas 
susceptible to wildfire, such losses are likely to grow.

 Some researchers are developing ways to better forecast regional fire risk, 
while others are constructing detailed computer models to simulate the behavior 
of a fire once it's been ignited. The collective aim: to decrease the 
devastation to people and property wrought by fire and simultaneously trim the 
taxpayer's fire fighting bill.

 Staggering statistics

 The statistics are staggering. More than 92,000 fires scorched a total of 
about 7.4 million acres in the United States last year. A number of factors 
coincided to fan the flames.

 Snow cover across the United States in the spring, which followed North 
America's warmest winter on record (SN: 8/5/00, p. 87), was much less extensive 
than normal. This helped dry out living trees and underbrush, as well as the 
dead needles, leaves, and limbs on the ground beneath the trees. A waning La 
Nina--in which sea-surface temperatures along the equatorial Pacific Ocean are 
cooler than normal--brought hot, dry weather to much of the United States. The 
resulting powder keg exploded when lightning from summer thunderstorms provided 
the sparks.

 Although unusual for recent times, last year's statistics don't approach the 
long-term averages tallied during the early part of the last century. Each year 
between 1919 and 1949, more than 142,000 fires claimed more than 29 million 
acres. During the past 40 years, those yearly averages dropped to about 136,000 
fires and 3.9 million acres burned. Despite the fall in the fire-swept acreage, 
the blazes' economic consequences have been increasing.

 Spurred by last year's spate of fires, a panel assembled at the National 
Academy of Sciences (NAS) in Washington, D.C., last month to discuss a type of 
fire called the intermix fire. It looms as one of the most vexing problems on 
the national fire scene. Unintended consequences of suburban sprawl, intermix 
fires occur where subdivisions or clusters of individual homes encroach upon 
realms naturally prone to wildfires.

 Although intermix fires have become a focus of recent attention, the 
phenomenon isn't new, says Stephen J. Pyne, a biologist at Arizona State 
University in Tempe and a member of last month's NAS discussion.

 A century ago, he notes, new residents of U.S. rural regions were susceptible 
to wildfires because they were moving into tinder-rich areas yet to be cleared 
for agriculture. Today, urbanites who are recolonizing the rural landscape 
without modifying the land find themselves in a similar situation. Because they 
typically don't cut, weed, graze, or prune more than a small area surrounding 
their homes, they live within the natural buildup of combustible material.

 Plopping wood-frame homes down near, or even in the midst of, such a tinderbox 
is simply asking for trouble. "The wild and the urban next to each other are 
like matter and antimatter, needing only a spark to set them off," Pyne says.

 One technique used to reduce the risk to people and property in such fuel-rich 
environments is the so-called prescribed fire. In theory, these fires are a 
preemptive strike to remove flammable material that could otherwise fuel 
uncontrollable blazes.

 But in practice, prescribed fires don't always succeed. One of last year's 
most damaging fires, a 46,000-acre conflagration that led to the evacuation of 
Los Alamos, N.M., and burned more than 200 structures there, started out as a 
prescribed fire (SN: 5/20/00, p. 324).

 Although prescribed fires do serve their purpose in specific areas, William A. 
Patterson III, a fire scientist at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst 
and another panel member, questions their ultimate effectiveness when 
considering the landscape as a whole. "There's going to be more fires, and 
there's nothing we can do about it," he says.

 Patterson teaches fire managers and others how to conduct prescribed fires, 
but he says their potential benefits are limited. These deliberately set fires 
substitute for only 10 percent of the fires that an ecosystem normally 
experiences, and Patterson holds that prescribed fires' main benefit is to 
train people how to fight wildfires.

 Furthermore, he notes, prescribed fires have a stigma like that attached to 
landfills, airports, and power stations: Many people acknowledge the need but 
don't want them close to home.

"Even people who understand the need for prescribed burning don't like it if it 
interferes with their trip to the Grand Canyon or their daughter's outdoor 
wedding, or if the one fire that's set to protect them actually gets away and 
burns their home," Patterson says.

 Minimizing damage

 So, how do we protect people if they insist on moving out into fire country 
and placing themselves in harm's way? Researchers believe one way to minimize 
the damage is to get better at predicting the risk of fire.

 For example, correlations between aspects of climate and the size and number 
of fires might help scientists project the probability of fire in a certain 
region several weeks to several months in advance. Among other benefits, such 
information could help determine well in advance where firefighters and 
equipment will be needed.

 Some of the downward trend in numbers of wildfires across the decades may stem 
from changes in population distribution and fire fighting policy. Analysis of 
lake sediments in the American West, however, points to another possible driver 
behind these trends: climate change.

 Cathy Whitlock, a geographer at the University of Oregon in Eugene, has 
studied sediment cores taken from lakes in the Pacific Northwest and the 
northern Rocky Mountains. By counting the layers of charcoal particles trapped 
in each centimeter-thick section of the cores, Whitlock and her colleagues can 
estimate the frequency of major fires in the area surrounding the lake. 
Typically, only fires that roar through a forest and kill all 
trees--stand-replacement fires--are intense enough to widely distribute the 
100-micron particles of charcoal that Whitlock seeks.

 Whitlock is careful to avoid experimental pitfalls. For example, by taking 
cores exclusively from small, deep lakes, the researchers get a complete record 
of sediments from bodies of water that would not have completely dried up 
during an extended drought. Also, by choosing lakes that aren't stream-fed, the 
scientists count only the charcoal that drops directly onto the lake or washes 
down from nearby hills.

 Although the frequency of fires varies from place to place, Whitlock says the 
overall trends are consistent. Yellowstone National Park provides a good 
example, she notes. Cores taken from the park's Cygnet Lake in Wyoming reveal 
that major fires don't occur at regular intervals.

 However, Whitlock looked at the averages. During the late stages of the last 
ice age, from about 17,000 to 11,000 years ago, there were four major fires 
every 1,000 years or so. In a subsequent warmer and drier period, between 
11,000 and 7,000 years ago, more than 10 big fires occurred every millennium. 
In the past 2,000 years, fewer than three large charcoal-forming blazes have 
occurred per millennium.

 Combine these findings with climate data, and something telling emerges, says 
Whitlock. The trends in fire frequency in a particular region closely track 
year-to-year and decade-to-decade variations of precipitation. Major fires tend 
to occur more often during periods of low precipitation.

 These long-term trends, discovered from the lake sediments, are backed up by 
government data compiled over the past 20 years. A research team led by Anthony 
L. Westerling, a climate researcher at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
in La Jolla, Calif., analyzed data collected by several of the government 
agencies responsible for monitoring fires. These include the Bureau of Land 
Management, the Department of Agriculture's Forest Service, and the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs.

 Westerling's team considered both straightforward factors, such as the 
precipitation that a region received, and more complicated parameters, such as 
the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI). This measure combines precipitation, 
temperature, soil-moisture conditions, and other factors. The PDSI is positive 
when soil moisture is above normal for a particular area, and it's negative 
when the soil is drier than normal.

 In the dry shrubby areas and grasslands in Nevada and in central Oregon and 
Washington, the researchers found that fire risk at the peak of fire season is 
only weakly related to current climate conditions. It's more strongly linked to 
conditions 10 to 18 months before, they note.

 In California's Sierra Nevada range, the fire season is generally more severe 
when the PDSI was positive the summer before than when the PDSI was negative. 
Also, as expected, there's a higher fire risk when the current PDSI is negative 
than when it's positive. Westerling suggests an explanation: Wet conditions in 
a region during the previous year contribute to an accumulation of fuel, while 
dry conditions in the current year increase risk of fires.

 Computer model predictions

 Predictions such as these can be supplemented with computer models that 
forecast the spread of a wildfire once it's ignited. At Los Alamos (N.M.) 
National Laboratory, Jon M. Reisner and his colleagues are refining a 
simulation that combines chemical and physical descriptions of fire behavior 
with computational fluid dynamics--the techniques used to model the flow of air 
around aircraft and missiles.

 To simulate an environment, the programmers assemble computerized cubic 
elements that are 1 meter on a side. For example, a tall stack of single 
elements made of wood could simulate a tree, and large clumps of elements might 
represent buildings.

 Other factors that influence fire behavior--such as temperature, wind speed, 
the moisture content of fuel, and the presence of clouds--can be included, too, 
Reisner says. As elements burn and produce heat, the simulation's complicated 
aerodynamic equations help show how fast and in which directions the fire will 
spread to other simulation elements.

 The Los Alamos researchers have successfully modeled several real fires, 
Reisner says--including, after the fact, portions of the one that led to the 
evacuation of their own lab last May.

 While computer programs like this one could provide an early warning for 
communities at risk from a known fire or help firefighters develop a strategy 
for battling a blaze, the models might be most useful for determining when and 
where it's prudent to light a prescribed fire.

 As the Los Alamos calamity illustrates, fire experts could use such help.

 Warmth from a distant fire

 While it's obvious that climatic conditions can affect the extent and 
frequency of wildfire, the converse is true as well. As major wildfires burn, 
they send huge amounts of carbon dioxide and other planet-warming greenhouse 
gases into the atmosphere. Fires can rapidly oxidize the carbon slowly 
sequestered by vegetation from atmospheric carbon dioxide and send it right 
back into the air.

 Trees in the United States stockpile about 288 million tons of carbon dioxide 
each year. However, the U.S. Forest Service estimates that last year's 
wildfires emitted about 100 million tons of the gas, more than a third of a 
typical year's sequestration (SN: 12/16/00, p. 396).

 Although media attention last year focused on conflagrations in the western 
states, far beyond their northern horizon even larger fires raged almost 
unnoticed.

 In a typical year, the boreal forests that stretch across Alaska and Canada 
lose about three times the acreage that's lost in the lower 48 states. For 
example, the 351 fires that raced across portions of Alaska last year amounted 
to less than one-third of 1 percent of the nation's total number of fires. But 
they blackened in excess of 750,000 acres, accounting for more than 10 percent 
of the nation's fire-stricken land.

 In a fire-heavy year, fires in the boreal forests of North America, Russia, 
and Mongolia contribute up to 10 percent of the carbon dioxide returned to the 
atmosphere from fires worldwide, says fire ecologist Eric S. Kasischke of the 
University of Maryland in College Park. This is no small amount, he told an 
audience at the American Geophysical Union annual meeting in San Francisco last 
December. In North America, from May to August in a typical year, the quantity 
of fire-spawned carbon dioxide equals fully 50 percent of the amount of the gas 
spewing from vehicle tailpipes, he says. The full scope of the fire problem in 
Russia is unknown.

 Kasischke notes that about a third of the boreal forest in Siberia isn't 
protected against fire or monitored because the region is so sparsely populated.

 Boreal forest fires can affect Earth's climate in other ways, too. Many of 
these ecosystems grow in a thin, seasonally thawed surface atop permanently 
frozen soil. Layers of lichens grow among the needles, leaves, and branches 
that have fallen from the trees to the ground. This thick mat of organic 
matter, or duff, acts just like a layer of thermal insulation, says Kasischke.

 During intense blazes, about half the carbon burned comes from the duff. After 
this layer burns away, the exposed soil--no longer shaded by trees, because 
they've burned, too--can absorb sunlight, warm up, and dry out. This increases 
the oxygen in the soil, which oxidizes the carbon sequestered there and returns 
it to the atmosphere.

 In areas where the climate has warmed considerably since the last fire, the 
permafrost may never recover, Kasischke says. In such cases, a different set of 
species can move in to replace those burned out. These species often sequester 
carbon less effectively than the earlier residents did.

 The long-term effects of such ecosystem shifts may aggravate global warming, 
says Kasischke.


