Some police see through killer's lies: Science News Online, March 3, 2001

 Some police see through killer's lies

 Bruce Bower

 Murderers brought in for questioning by the police have plenty of reasons to 
feign innocence. What's worse, according to several studies over the past 
decade, is that people, including police, are quite likely to be duped by such 
liars.

 But some cops can't be fooled, according to a new study. Shown videotapes of 
an interrogation of a murder suspect speaking a language they didn't 
understand, some British police officers consistently knew when the man was 
lying and when he was telling the truth. Other officers detected lies and 
truths about as well as if they had guessed, and some detected lies less often 
than if they had guessed, report Aldert Vrij and Samantha Mann, both 
psychologists at the University of Portsmouth in England.

 Their study, published in the March-April Applied Cognitive Psychology, 
assesses, for the first time, people's ability to size up a highly motivated 
liar. Earlier deception studies had used people who lied at the behest of 
experimenters. With little to lose by getting caught, laboratory liars are 
better able to obscure their falsehoods, Vrij and Mann say.

"[Volunteers] holding popular stereotypical views about deceptive behavior, 
such as 'liars look away' and 'liars fidget,' were the worst lie catchers," the 
researchers observe. The best lie catchers noted that the suspect spoke much 
more slowly and with more pauses between words during lies.

 For their study, Vrij and Mann obtained a videotape of two police officers 
interviewing a murder suspect. Although the suspect denied knowing and killing 
the victim, evidence later showed that he was lying. The suspect then confessed 
in a second videotaped police interview and was convicted of murder.

 The researchers selected six segments from the interviews. Three showed the 
suspect lying about his activities on the day of the murder. The remaining 
segments featured truthful statements.

 Of 65 police officers shown the segments, 18 made no more than one error in 
detecting lies and truths. Another 36 judged three or four segments correctly, 
and the remaining 11 identified only one or two segments correctly. Because the 
words were unrecognizable, they had to detect lies using nonverbal cues and 
speech intonations.

 Individuals use a variety of deceptive tactics in high-stakes situations, 
remarks psychologist Mark G. Frank of Rutgers- The State University of New 
Jersey in New Brunswick. In lab studies, some people betray lies through brief 
changes in facial expression while maintaining a constant speech rate, he says. 
In contrast, psychopaths give away their lies only through inconsistencies in 
speech content, in his view.

"This is the first good look at lie detection with a liar in a do-or-die 
situation," Frank says. "But there's no way to know if [the murder suspect] was 
a good liar or not."


