Run-of-the-mill compound becomes superstar: Science News Online, March 3, 2001

 Run-of-the-mill compound becomes superstar

 Peter Weiss

 Physicists in Japan have found superconductivity at a surprisingly high 
temperature in the simple, readily available metallic compound magnesium 
diboride.

 The discovery that the material can carry electric current with no resistance, 
reported in the March 1 Nature by Jun Akimitsu and his coworkers at 
Aoyama-Gakuin University in Tokyo, has startled scientists. Investigators 
worldwide are racing to measure the chemical's properties. One group has even 
formed the compound into tiny wires.

 Scientists are also testing ways of boosting the compound's so-called critical 
temperature, below which superconductivity kicks in. The Japanese team measured 
it at 39 kelvins.

 Researchers have long dreamed of superconductors that would operate at room 
temperature, or 300 K. Such substances would revolutionize industry and other 
sectors of society by slashing the energy required to run machines while 
bettering their performance.

 Conventional superconductors, such as certain metal alloys, are used in 
commercial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines and in research magnets. 
Decades of research have yielded no conventional superconductors with a 
critical temperature higher than 23 K.

 Since the late 1980s, the discovery of so-called ceramic high-temperature 
superconductors has diverted attention from conventional compounds. Some of the 
ceramic materials proved to have critical temperatures higher than 160 K, 
fanning hopes that room-temperature superconductivity was within reach.

 But it wasn't. What's more, the materials have turned out to be complex, 
difficult to work with, and expensive. Only now are ceramic superconductors 
showing up in equipment prototypes, such as power cables and motors (SN: 
11/18/00, p. 330: ). Also, conventional theory can't explain their 
superconductivity.

 Akimitsu first described his group's findings regarding magnesium diboride on 
Jan. 10 at a scientific meeting in Sendai, Japan. Initially, researchers 
wondered if the material might be displaying a new type of superconductivity. 
However, mounting evidence suggests that the compound-although breaking 
records-obeys conventional theory.

 Evidence for this is described in the Feb. 26 Physical Review Letters by 
Sergey L. Bud'ko and his colleagues at Iowa State University in Ames and the 
Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory there. The scientists, who formed 
magnesium diboride wires, observed the isotope effect typical of conventional 
superconductors. When they made magnesium diboride containing a light form, or 
isotope, of boron, its critical temperature rose 1 K.

 The prospect that magnesium diboride may be the first of a line of 
inexpensive, easily processed superconductors with yet higher critical 
temperatures is fueling the excitement. Finding one such material that 
superconducts at 77 K, the temperature at which cooling with relatively cheap 
liquid nitrogen is possible, would be a huge advance, scientists say.

 That mark is probably still out of reach, comments Paul M. Grant of the 
Electric Power Research Institute in Palo Alto, Calif. He notes that theorists 
more than 30 years ago predicted a 40 K maximum for conventional 
superconductors.

 Nonetheless, new reports on magnesium diboride are pouring in to scientific 
journals and the on-line physics preprint server on the Internet (). In one 
preprint, Robert J. Cava and his colleagues at Princeton University describe a 
failed attempt to raise the compound's critical temperature by adding aluminum 
().

 Prospects for finding superconducting cousins of magnesium diboride remain 
bright, researchers say. "Never in the history of superconductivity has there 
been a single, solitary example of a superconductor that works in a [unique] 
way," Cava claims. "There's always more than one."


