Into the Mystic: Science News Online, Feb. 17, 2001

 Into the Mystic

 Scientists confront the hazy realm of spiritual enlightenment

 Bruce Bower

 After spending 8 years training in the meditative practices of Zen Buddhism, 
neurologist James H. Austin spent a sabbatical year from 1981 to 1982 at the 
London Zen Center. On a pleasant March morning, while waiting for a subway 
train on a surface platform and idly glancing down the tracks toward the Thames 
River, Austin got his first taste of spiritual enlightenment.

 Instantly, the panorama of sky, buildings, and water acquired a sense of what 
he calls "absolute reality, intrinsic rightness, and ultimate perfection." He 
suddenly shed his formerly unshakable assumption that he was an individual, 
separated from the rest of the world by a skin suit. The sky and river remained 
just as blue, the buildings just as gray and dingy, yet the loss of an 
"I-me-mine" perspective imbued the view with an extraordinary emptiness, he 
says.

 Within seconds, other insights dawned. These included the notion that Austin 
had experienced an eternal state of affairs, had nothing more to fear, couldn't 
possibly articulate what had happened, and felt a rush of mental release that 
impelled him to take himself less seriously.

 In Zen and the Brain (1998, MIT Press), Austin described how this brief 
experience spurred him to investigate brain processes that underlie spiritual 
or mystical encounters.

 Austin's fellow neurologists haven't taken his approach either to heart or to 
brain. The harsh reality of science is that those who study mysticism and 
meditation rarely hear the sound of even one hand clapping among their 
colleagues, to paraphrase a Zen saying.

 Austin's Zen instructor told him that although many people attain what she 
called "moments of no-I," such experiences seem incomprehensible to those who 
haven't had them. For scientists, creatures of the rational thinking embraced 
by the 17th-century Enlightenment, claims of mystical enlightenment have long 
smacked of self-deception, gullibility, mental disorder, charlatanism, or all 
of the above.

 However, a small band of researchers has begun to probe the nature of mystical 
experiences and other extraordinary psychological happenings. They've issued a 
manifesto of sorts in Varieties of Anomalous Experience (2000, American 
Psychological Association). The book explores scientific evidence on altered 
states of consciousness associated with mystical experiences, near-death 
incidents, alien-abduction reports, and other so-called anomalous events.

 The new book-edited by Etzel Cardena of the University of Texas Pan American 
in Edinburg, Steven J. Lynn of the State University of New York at Binghamton, 
and Stanley Krippner of the Saybrook Graduate School in San Francisco-doesn't 
take an X-Files approach to this material. The three psychologists see no 
reason to assume that supernatural worlds and people-nabbing extraterrestrials 
exist outside the minds of people who report them.

 Instead, the three academics want to launch a science to study the 
characteristics of human consciousness that make mystical experience possible. 
Their focus on a spectrum of conscious states defies the 
mainstream-neuroscience notion that there's a single type of awareness, which 
is either on or off, as if controlled by a light switch. Conscious experience 
instead comes with a dimmer switch that varies in sweep and intensity from one 
person to another and gets wired up mainly by cultural forces, in their view.

 Psychologist William James said much the same in The Varieties of Religious 
Experience, first published in 1902. The title of the new volume pays homage to 
James' book.

"Anomalous experiences aren't just reported by people on the fringe [of 
society] or who have mental or neurological disorders," Cardena says. "Let's 
not renounce mystical experience as inherently impossible to study 
scientifically."

 Mystical experiences

 Although mystical experiences can't easily be diced up and quantified, they 
affect a surprisingly large number of people. National surveys in the United 
States and England find that roughly one-third of adults say that they've had, 
for example, a moment of sudden religious awakening or felt close to a 
powerful, spiritual force that seemed to lift them out of themselves.

 Such experiences may extend far back into human prehistory. According to 
archaeologists, cave and rock art from Africa to Australia depicts shamans' 
supernatural encounters, which occurred during conscious states achieved 
through chanting, dancing, hallucinogenic drugs, or other means (SN: 10/5/96, 
p. 216). In traditional societies, shamans act as spiritual leaders and healers.

"Mystical experiences occur on a continuum," says psychologist David M. Wulff 
of Wheaton College in Norton, Mass. "Even if they're not religiously inspired, 
they can be striking, such as the transcendent feelings musicians sometimes get 
while they perform. I have colleagues who say they've had mystical experiences, 
although they have various ways of explaining them."

 In Varieties of Anomalous Experience, Wulff reviews current scientific 
evidence and theories about mystical experience. He defines such events as 
those that deviate sharply from a person's ordinary state of awareness and 
leave the person with an impression of having encountered a higher reality. 
Mystical encounters are rare and fleeting, yet they stand out as defining 
moments in the lives of those who have them, Wulff says.

 They can include a sense of existing in a unitary place outside of space and 
time or feeling immersed in a kind of objective or ultimate reality that eludes 
verbal description. For many people having mystical experiences, physical 
objects recede from view in the wake of feelings of peace, joy, and having 
encountered the sacred or divine, Wulff reports.

 The most systematic scientific study of how mystical experience alters 
people's lives will probably never be replicated. In 1966, Berkeley, Calif., 
physician Walter Pahnke randomly selected half of a group of 20 Protestant 
seminarians and gave them the hallucinogenic drug psilocybin before the entire 
group listened to a radio broadcast of a Good Friday service. Those who didn't 
receive psilocybin got a B vitamin that caused the skin to flush, thus serving 
as a placebo.

 After the service, those who ingested psilocybin reported having had 
experiences resembling those of classic mystics, such as a feeling of oneness 
with God or ecstatic visions. The B vitamin group recalled more mundane 
reactions. Immediately afterward, participants learned whether they had 
received drug or placebo.

 Six months later, the researcher surveyed the participants. After 25 years, 
another researcher contacted seven of those who had received psilocybin and 
nine who had gotten the placebo. In both follow-ups, members of the psilocybin 
group cited many more positive changes in their attitudes and behavior that 
they attributed to the Good Friday broadcast than placebo-group members did.

 Pahnke's work suggests that healthy people who are open to mystical 
experiences and have them in supportive situations enjoy lasting, positive 
aftereffects, Wulff notes.

 In other situations, he points out, mystical encounters can turn sour. For 
example, in Varieties of Religious Experience, James cited the writings of 
English poet John Addington Symonds in which he described periodic "moods" 
resembling mystical experiences, complete with loss of a sense of self and 
obliteration of space and time. But the poet reported dreading these moods.

 In contrast, some people stage mystical states for their own ends. James 
characterized most self-proclaimed mystics as superficial and petty but thought 
that a small number of people possess mind-altering qualities "indispensable to 
the world's welfare."

 In the past 20 years, investigations of epilepsy patients have linked reports 
of mystical and paranormal experience and religious preoccupation to bursts of 
electrical activity in the brain's temporal lobes. A novel written by Mark 
Salzman, Lying Awake (2000, Knopf), revolves around a nun who fears that 
medical treatment for her temporal lobe epilepsy will also wipe out her vivid 
religious visions.

 In How We Believe (2000, W.H. Freeman and Co.), Michael Shermer of Occidental 
College in Los Angeles speculates that many religious visionaries and founders 
of major religions may have had temporal-lobe seizures that jump-started their 
mystical journeys.

 Whatever happened inside the skulls of the ancient mystics, most people today 
who report mystical and so-called peak experiences don't have brain or mental 
ailments, Austin says.

 Some people consider the hallucinations and altered thinking of schizophrenia 
as akin to mystical visions. But this mental disorder exhibits only a 
superficial similarity to mystical experiences, Austin contends. Consider that 
schizophrenia lasts for decades, disrupts psychological development, heightens 
one's sense of self and isolation, and often includes the torment of being 
berated by imaginary voices-opposite extremes of mystics' reports of their 
transcendence.

 Neither schizophrenia nor mystical experience has been comprehensively 
explained, Wulff maintains, although theories abound. Sigmund Freud viewed 
mystical reports as a sign of a person's regression to an earlier stage of 
development. Freud's psychoanalytic disciple Carl Jung described mystical 
experience as a positive process springing from a shared, unconscious reservoir 
of human experiences and themes.

 In the 1960s, humanistic psychologist Abraham Maslow proposed a hierarchy of 
"self-actualization" that was topped off by having peak experiences of ecstatic 
fusion with the world. Lower in the hierarchy are experiences that 
psychologists now refer to as "flow" and attribute to creativity.

 Some researchers argue that mystical experiences, from Zen enlightenment to 
born-again religious conversions, sprout from the types of mental errors that 
people commit in experiments that probe logical thinking. Examples include 
seeing what one expects to see and assuming that random events are connected 
and have meaning.

 These theories don't attempt to explain why some individuals have more 
mystical experiences than others do or how culture and ritual behavior shape 
such events, Wulff says. "There does seem to be an innate capacity in the human 
brain for having mystical experiences that needs to be explored," he remarks.

 Deep hypnosis

 People who enter deep hypnotic states with great ease offer valuable 
opportunities for studying mystical experiences, in Cardena's view. Deep 
hypnosis typically triggers sensations of merging with a bright light, becoming 
one with the world, and other responses that correspond with those in 
descriptions of near-death experiences and of shamans' activities in 
traditional societies, the Texas psychologist says.

 Hypnosis inspires much controversy in scientific circles. Some psychologists 
argue that during hypnosis, a person simply tries to please the hypnotist by 
responding to his or her suggestions but doesn't enter a new conscious state.

 Only a portion of hypnotized people appear to manage their responses in this 
way, Cardena argues. Using in-depth interviews and self-report questionnaires, 
psychologist Ronald J. Pekala of Coatesville Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical 
Center in West Chester, Penn., has distinguished between people who mainly 
react to a hypnotist's suggestions and those who rapidly enter deep hypnotic 
states on their own.

 Some individuals in the latter group are especially fantasy-prone and generate 
vivid visual images that they can partially control and remember later. Others, 
dubbed dissociaters, experience hypnosis in a different way. Their sense of 
self or personality changes in ways that are profoundly meaningful, they say 
during hypnosis, but that they forget immediately afterward.

 In a study of 12 highly hypnotizable college students, Cardena told each of 
them to go into a deep hypnotic state as he counted from 1 to 30. Within about 
15 minutes, they all began to report altered states of awareness that included 
sensations of floating, flying, and becoming separate from their physical 
bodies. They recalled encountering a limitless sea or other unusual worlds, 
experiencing sounds as colors or other strange sensory mixes, existing outside 
time and space, uniting with a bright light, and reaching enormous mental calm.

 Their descriptions of deep hypnosis contain many of the themes found in 
shamans' "soul journeys," Cardena asserts. Shamans' soul journeys typically 
include vivid flights or falls through openings in the earth. The shaman then 
reaches a culturally defined supernatural world where he contacts spiritual 
allies for various purposes.

 In traditional societies, people often prize personal reflection in 
semiconscious states. Shamans represent a small minority of people best able to 
enter and control altered states of consciousness (SN: 9/25/99, p. 205).

 However, the experiences of highly hypnotizable dissociaters more closely 
resemble what happens in spirit possessions, as experienced by shamans and 
others in traditional cultures, Cardena says. Spirit possessions usually don't 
include vivid sights. Instead, the practitioner feels dizzy, overcome by a 
perceived change of body or self, and pressed down by a weight on the shoulders 
frequently interpreted as a spirit's presence. The visited person remembers 
little of what transpired during a possession.

"The parallels between shamanic and deep hypnotic phenomena strongly suggest 
that there is a universal disposition to having extraordinary experiences," 
Cardena contends.

 Dismissing the mystical

 Cognitive and brain scientists appear more inclined to dismiss the mystical 
realm than to study it. "There's nothing in our conception of what a human is 
that allows this stuff to fit in," comments psychologist Eleanor Rosch of the 
University of California, Berkeley.

 Austin suspects that a better understanding of brain areas that contribute to 
the individual notion of self will lead to insights about spiritual 
enlightenment. Parts of the cortex and the inner brain, including the thalamus 
and the amygdala, work together to generate each person's sense of "I-me-mine," 
he theorizes. During mystical or spiritual episodes, transmission of chemical 
messengers, including consciousness-altering opioids, within this brain system 
might undergo dramatic changes.

 Rosch, who has studied Buddhist meditation traditions since 1977, takes a more 
radical stance. She rejects the popular scientific assumption that the brain 
somehow weaves together perceptual information emanating from objects and 
events that exist independently of perceivers and of each other.

 Along with neuroscientist Christine A. Skarda, Rosch turns that theory on its 
head. People initially perceive the world through their sensory organs as a 
seamless whole with no separation of self from surroundings, Rosch and Skarda 
say. In a series of operations, the brain combines contrasting elements, such 
as different wavelength frequencies of light, into perceptions, such as color, 
that inform behavior.

 As people employ the perceptions that the brain wrests out of a web of 
interconnected sensations, they become conscious of looking at the world as 
separate beings. That's an eminently handy ability, Skarda contends, but it's a 
creation of the perceptual system rather than a reflection of an absolute state 
of affairs.

 Much evidence on how brain cells operate can be interpreted within this 
framework, according to Skarda, who had worked at the University of California, 
Berkeley and now studies meditation practices at a Buddhist institute in India.

 Skarda's approach suggests that the brain cultivates concepts that can be 
tailored flexibly to different situations, Rosch asserts. For instance, the 
concept of big takes on a different implication when applied to fleas, as 
opposed to elephants. And the concept of great, as expressed in the exclamation 
"Great!" can involve feelings ranging from excitement to disgust, depending on 
the situation. A set of conceptual definitions, or representations, in the 
brain couldn't keep its balance on this shifting terrain of meaning, Rosch 
argues.

 Moreover, people form these kinds of concepts over a background of 
nonconceptual thought, she says. Nonconceptual thinking is often hard to 
describe in words. Still, it fires up intuition, artistic experiences, and the 
indescribable feelings attached to phenomena such as doing complex mathematics, 
feeling love or grief, and finding spiritual enlightenment.

 In fact, Rosch notes, if the brain indeed fashions a sense of self and of 
external objects from a seamless fabric of sensations, then the moments of 
"no-I" that meditators such as Austin ascribe to enlightenment may signal the 
recovery of a larger reality, as it's initially picked up by our senses. As Zen 
practitioners have long held, everyday perception-even when brokered by tens of 
billions of brain cells-may be a useful fiction.

 Still, even far less provocative approaches to mystical experience draw blank 
stares from many scientists, Wulff notes. "I don't think this is likely to 
become a popular area of research," he says.

 Seeds of mystical research, however, may flower as researchers increasingly 
turn to examine positive aspects of mental life, such as the nature of 
happiness, Cardena remarks.

"Psychologists haven't really entered into the study of mystical experience, 
but they're parked just outside the door," he says.


