Extinctions Tied to Impact from Space: Science News Online, Feb. 24, 2001

 Extinctions Tied to Impact from Space

 Sid Perkins

 The massive wave of extinctions on Earth 250 million years ago appears to have 
been triggered by an impact from space, according to an analysis of rocks from 
Japan and China.

 The die-offs at the end of the Permian period exterminated almost 95 percent 
of the species in the ancient oceans, as well as many land animals, and set the 
stage for the rise of the dinosaurs. Scientists have proposed varying causes 
for the widespread extinctions, including changes in ocean chemistry and 
widespread volcanic activity (SN: 2/1/97, p. 74). Although recent studies 
hadn't identified a specific cause, they suggested the deaths occurred suddenly 
on the geologic time scale--possibly in as little as 8,000 years (SN: 7/15/00, 
p. 39).

 Now, researchers say they've found a high concentration of 
fullerenes--soccer-ball-shape molecules of carbon also known as buckyballs--in 
sediments laid down at the so-called P-T boundary, the point in time between 
the Permian and Triassic periods. Analysis of the gas atoms trapped within the 
fullerenes confirms their extraterrestrial origin, says Luann Becker, a 
geochemist at the University of Washington in Seattle. Becker and her 
colleagues describe their findings in the Feb. 23 Science.

"There have been many explanations suggested for the P-T extinctions, but none 
has been compelling," says Richard A. Muller, a physicist at the University of 
California, Berkeley. "This is potentially a fantastic discovery, and the 
presence of fullerenes will be a key to interpreting what happened."

 Although scientists say fire and lightning can produce fullerenes, buckyballs 
have been found in meteorites, too. Becker also found fullerenes in rocks at 
the so-called Cretaceous-Tertiary, or K-T, boundary (SN: 3/25/00, p. 196). That 
boundary has been associated with an asteroid impact that wiped out the 
dinosaurs about 65 million years ago.

 In their new work, Becker and her colleagues cracked open the P-T-boundary 
buckyballs and studied the gas atoms trapped inside. The isotope ratios of 
helium and argon were much different from those found on Earth and mirrored the 
isotope ratios previously found in meteorites and the K-T boundary fullerenes.

"It takes an extraterrestrial environment for these fullerenes to form and to 
trap isotopes in these ratios," Becker told Science News. "There's no question 
that this points to an extraterrestrial impactor."

"This is the first really strong bit of evidence that this mass extinction [at 
the end of the Permian] was associated with an extraterrestrial impact," says 
Kenneth A. Farley, a geochemist at the California Institute of Technology in 
Pasadena. In particular, Farley notes, the ratio of argon isotopes within the 
fullerenes is much different from that found anywhere on Earth. Most of the 
argon in the atmosphere comes from radioactive decay of the potassium in 
Earth's crust.

 Becker's team estimates that the object that struck Earth 250 million years 
ago was about 9 kilometers across. This is about the size of the asteroid that 
scientists believe struck Earth about 65 million years ago, Becker says. 
Material kicked up by that iridium-rich asteroid, which slammed into relatively 
shallow water off Mexico's Yucatan peninsula, formed the layer that scientists 
say marks the death of the dinosaurs. This band of clay at the K-T boundary 
contains shocked quartz minerals, which typically form only in extraterrestrial 
impacts.

 The relative lack of iridium and shocked quartz in layers marking the P-T 
boundary has caused many scientists to doubt that mass extinctions then were 
triggered by a killer space rock. But Richard K. Bambach, a paleontologist at 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in Blacksburg, says these 
differences might be explained by the composition of the object that struck 
Earth or by the location of the impact.

 About 250 million years ago, what are today's continents were in one big 
landmass. That means there was one big ocean, Bambach notes. If the object 
slammed into the basalt-rich crust underneath the ocean, there wouldn't be much 
shocked quartz to be found. He says an ocean strike would also complicate the 
search for the point of impact, because all of the seafloor from that time has 
been recycled back into Earth's mantle.

"If [the object] didn't hit a block of continental crust, then you cannot and 
will not find an impact site," Bambach says.

 The lack of iridium and shocked quartz could also indicate that the object 
that struck Earth 250 million years ago was not an asteroid but a comet. "This 
was clearly a different type of object" from the one that struck Earth 65 
million years ago, Becker says. The presence of fullerenes could become a new 
hallmark for layers marking extraterrestrial impacts, she adds.


