Scientists develop self-healing composites: Science News Online, Feb. 17, 2001

 Scientists develop self-healing composites

 Sid Perkins

 Technology hasn't reached the point where a mechanic can walk up to a 
deteriorating airplane and urge: "Wing, heal thyself!" But that exhortation now 
comes to mind. Researchers have developed a composite material that has the 
ability to repair small cracks within itself.

 The new material incorporates microcapsules that contain a liquid healing 
agent. The engineers and chemists who developed the composite say it could be 
used to extend the reliability and the service life of electronic and aerospace 
components. They describe their research in the Feb. 15 Nature.

 Structural composites are typically made up of high-strength fibers embedded 
within a polymer matrix, says Scott R. White, an aeronautical engineer at the 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and codeveloper of the new material. 
Although lighter than metals, these high-tech materials can fall victim to many 
of the same threats, he notes. These include the aptly named phenomenon of 
fatigue--the gradual loss of strength and eventual failure of a material caused 
by stress-driven cracking.

 White and his colleagues sought to stem fatigue damage by embedding 
microcapsules of dicyclopentadiene (DCPD), a polymer precursor, into a 
composite's matrix material. When a growing crack ruptures one of the 
100-micrometer capsules, the DCPD flows into the fissure and comes into contact 
with a catalyst in the matrix. Within minutes at room temperature, the DCPD 
forms a new polymer that bonds the surfaces of the crack together.

 Laboratory experiments showed that samples of the self-healed composite 
material can take up to 75 percent of the maximum tension that the intact 
composite can take, White says.

 If microcracks are healed before they connect or grow into larger fissures, 
structures made of composites can have longer functional lifetimes with less 
maintenance, says Richard P. Wool, a materials scientist at the University of 
Delaware in Newark. "Having a built-in system to slow crack growth makes great 
sense," he says.

 On the microscopic scale, the small capsules of DCPD provide weak spots that 
cracks grow toward. However, that can be an advantage if cracks find and burst 
these balloons of healing fluid, Wool notes.

 Despite the microcapsules' slight weakening effect on the material immediately 
around them, White says, the rounded shape of the burst capsule reduces the 
stress at the formerly sharp tip of a crack. This slows the growth of the crack 
and extends the life of the component.

 White says that one of the biggest challenges to this research was developing 
microcapsules that were weak enough to be ruptured by a growing crack but 
strong enough to withstand the curing step of the composite's manufacturing 
process. The scientists eventually used capsules with 1-micrometer-thick walls 
made of a hardened polymerized blend of urea and formaldehyde.

 In the long term, self-healing composites show potential for addressing the 
problem of large cracks in load-bearing structural components, says H. Thomas 
Hahn, a program manager at the Air Force Office of Scientific Research in 
Arlington, Va. Early applications of such materials could include vessels 
designed to hold liquids or gases under pressure. According to Hahn, whose 
agency partially funded White's work, these containers are susceptible to 
microcracks, which can eventually grow to produce leaks.

 Manufacturers could build this self-healing capability into many types of 
composites, Wool notes. It would be particularly useful for applications for 
which repair is either impossible or impractical, such as electronic circuit 
boards or other components of deep-space probes or implanted medical devices.


