Muon orbits may defy main physics theory: Science News Online, Feb. 17, 2001

 Muon orbits may defy main physics theory

 Peter Weiss

 By measuring a magnetic trait of electronlike muon particles, scientists have 
uncovered evidence of a possible crack in the prevailing theory of physics.

 For 30 years, the theory called the standard model has withstood all 
challenges to its predictions of the properties and interactions of elementary 
particles (SN: 7/1/95, p. 10). Despite the theory's successes, physicists have 
long suspected that it is an incomplete picture of the subatomic world.

 In the dogma-rocking experiment at Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, 
N.Y., an international team of researchers detected a minuscule deviation from 
the standard model's prediction for the muon's magnetic strength. The findings 
were announced during a colloquium at the lab on Feb. 8.

 Research team member James P. Miller of Boston University says the difference 
between the standard model's prediction and the new measurement is akin to a 
pair of kilometer-long strings differing by the length of a bacterium.

 Nonetheless, says research leader Vernon W. Hughes of Yale University, "any 
deviation indicates either there is something missing in the experiment or in 
the standard theory. . . . One possible explanation is that the deviation 
indicates some new physics."

 Although a cousin to the electron, the muon is about 200 times as heavy. 
Accelerators and cosmic-ray collisions produce muons, but the particles quickly 
decay. That makes muons rare in nature.

 Muons possess a quantum mechanical property called spin, analogous to the 
twirling of a top. Because of this trait, muons behave like tiny bar magnets. 
Their spin also makes them into minute gyroscopes, responding to upward or 
downward forces by swinging the axes of spin around horizontally.

 To measure muon properties, the researchers at Brookhaven fired an intense 
muon beam into an extraordinarily uniform magnetic field. Because muons are 
electrically charged, the field made them travel in a circle. As speeding muons 
entered the magnetic field, the axes of their spins had initially pointed in 
the direction of the particles' overall motion. These axes then veered away 
from dead ahead. In fact, during every 29 muon orbits around the accelerator, 
the particles' spin axes swept through 360@.

 A quantum phenomenon causes this precession, which is related to the muon's 
magnetic strength, physicists say. As the muons circle the accelerator, they 
repeatedly transform into heavier, so-called virtual particles, and back again. 
This cycling influences measurements of the muon, so the results differ from 
those expected if the muon remained stable throughout.

 The standard model predicts the influences of known virtual particles on the 
muon's magnetic strength. Indeed, in the late 1970s, experimenters found a 
value of the muon's magnetic strength close to the theoretical prediction. The 
Brookhaven team has redone the measurement with six times the precision. The 
result "is not the value that we think it would be based on the particles we 
know and the forces as we understand them," Miller says.

 So far, the researchers have evaluated magnetic measurements of 1 billion 
muons. Until they can analyze the remaining 4 billion muon measurements in 
their raw data, they can't rule out that the deviation is a statistical fluke, 
they say. What's more, there's a slim chance that new data from experiments 
elsewhere will shift the standard model's theoretical prediction so that it 
actually matches the Brookhaven result.

"A certain amount of caution is certainly in order. It's a difficult 
experiment," comments Frank Wilczek of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. Still, he says, the results are "exciting to everyone who's 
thinking about fundamental physics."

 The experiment hints that something hitherto unknown may be out there. Many 
physicists regard the new finding as a possible sign of a theory known as 
supersymmetry, which predicts the existence of a partner particle for every 
known particle. Virtual forms of these particles could arise from the muons and 
explain the Brookhaven findings.

 Gordon L. Kane of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, and his colleagues 
have used the new results to calculate maximum masses for supersymmetric 
particles and have found some to be comparable to the masses of known 
particles. The size of the discrepancy in the Brookhaven experiments suggests 
that any new influence that may have shown itself has a mass similar to the 
masses of already known particles, he says.

 Supersymmetry, however, is only one possible explanation for the discrepancy, 
Hughes cautions. In another, the muon may be composed of smaller subunits 
rather than being a fundamental particle, as now believed.


