The Goodtrans Fat: Science News Online, March 3, 2001 

 The Good trans Fat

 Will one family of animal fats become a medicine?

 Janet Raloff

 Over the past 4 years, a new and surprising dietary supplement has been edging 
its way onto the shelves of health-food stores. Known as CLA, 
it's a mixture of trans fats, compounds usually associated with raising the 
concentration of cholesterol in people's blood. The acronym, for 
conjugated linoleic acid, signifies that the fats in CLA are unusual forms of 
the essential nutrient linoleic acid.

 Though manufacturers of CLA can't legally make health claims for their 
products, they often point to recent scientific articles--which they 
occasionally post next to their products--indicating a growing list of possible 
health benefits from CLA. These include fighting cancer, 
enhancing immunity, and ridding the body of fatty, artery-clogging plaque.

 The first potential health effect of CLA emerged 17 years ago, when Michael W. 
Pariza of the University of Wisconsin-Madison announced that 
he had isolated an unidentified agent in hamburger that reduced the incidence 
of cancer in mice (SN: 12/22&29/84, p. 390). Four years later, 
his team unmasked the mystery agent: one chemical form, or isomer, of linoleic 
acid.

 Pariza and other researchers soon found that dairy products also contain a 
mixture of isomers that they began calling CLA. Some 
concentrations of CLA in dairy products were similar to those in ground beef. 
Indeed, Pariza's research temporarily became the butt of more 
than a few jokes when it identified the richest dairy source of CLA as none 
other than Cheez Whiz (r) (SN: 2/11/89, p. 87).

 But nobody's laughing about it now. Several hundred published studies of CLA's 
effects in animals and a few preliminary experiments with 
people have since suggested an array of health benefits from the unusual trans 
fats.

 David Kritchevsky of the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia sees more than a 
little irony here. In recent years, animal fats have been scorned 
as promoters of chronic disease. The possibility that the trans fats in CLA 
offer health benefits and are naturally "only found in animal fat 
is proof God has a sense of humor," he says.

 A kinked molecule

 Linoleic acid is a kinked molecule built around a chain of 18 carbon atoms. 
Most of the links coupling each carbon to its neighbors are known 
as single bonds. Two of the links in the chain are the more rigid double bonds.

 Various chemical reactions can induce one of the double bonds to shift so that 
it is separated from the other by only one single bond. The 
molecule that results is called a conjugated fatty acid. There are several 
dozen of these CLA isomers that differ in the placement of the 
double bonds and the kinks in the chain. Their names indicate where the double 
bonds lie along the molecule and whether there's a kink at that 
spot (a cis double bond) or no kink (a trans double bond).

 Of the different CLA isomers that can form, just two have been linked to 
health effects. One's called cis-9, trans-11 (c9-t11), and the 
other, trans-10, cis-12 (t10-c12). Isolating each of these isomers is difficult 
and expensive. Most tests therefore use a mixture of the two 
that's commercially produced from a vegetable oil.

 Experiments in animals have revealed the mystery cancer fighter that Pariza 
discovered in hamburger 17 years ago to be c9-t11. It continues 
to be the most frequently studied of CLA's isomers.

 Potential health value

 While there haven't yet been trials of CLA's cancer-fighting potential in 
people, scientists have begun human trials to investigate the fats' 
potential value in other health applications. For instance, at an American 
Chemical Society (ACS) meeting last fall in Washington, D.C., 
Pariza presented encouraging, albeit preliminary, findings from a study aimed 
at helping people battle the bulge.

 His team gave 3-grams of off-the-shelf CLA supplements daily to half of the 80 
clinically obese men and women enrolled in a weight-reduction 
trial. The remaining volunteers received identical capsules filled with 
sunflower oil. Animal studies had shown that only the t10-c12 alters 
fat accumulation, but to keep costs down the researchers used a 50:50 
supplement of it and the C9-t11. Both dieting groups also received 
advice on cutting calories and upping their exercise.

 By the end of 6 months, all the participants had lost weight--on average about 
5 pounds each. However, one-third of those taking the CLA, but 
only one-sixth of the others, increased muscle mass. CLA caused the dieter's 
bodies to partition more of the energy from food into lean 
tissue, not fat, says Pariza.

"Every fat cell in the body wants to get big," he explains. "What the t10-c12 
CLA does is force that fat cell to stay little by affecting a 
number of the enzymes that are ordinarily responsible for filling it with 
lipids."

 So, while this isomer doesn't seem to help dieters shed fat, he speculates 
that it could help prevent their regaining fat lost by dieting or 
exercise.

 Ola Gudmundsen of Scandinavian Clinical Research AS in Kjeller, Norway, and 
his colleagues reported similar data on 60 overweight or obese 
volunteers in a 3-month dieting trial. Groups of 12 men and women, 40 to 50 
years old, received daily capsules containing either 9 g of olive 
oil or a dose of 1.7 to 6.8 g of CLA. As in Pariza's trial, the CLA supplement 
was roughly a 50:50 mix of the c9-t11 and t10-c12 isomers.

 Even in this short trial, people getting 3.4 g or more of CLA per day ended up 
weighing 2 to 3 pounds less than the others, Gudmundsen says. 
Dieters reaped no extra benefits from downing more than 3.4 g of CLA per day, 
his team reports in the December 2000 Journal of Nutrition. The 
group receiving the highest dose of CLA did, however, develop slightly more 
lean tissue than the other groups did.

 Diabetes and large doses

 Larger doses of the 50:50 CLA formulation hold out tantalizing prospects for 
helping people with type II diabetes, according to another trial 
reported at the ACS meeting. Martha Belury of Northwest Hospital in Seattle and 
her colleagues at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind., 
tested nine people who have this adult-onset form of diabetes. The researchers 
gave them daily capsules containing either 6 g of safflower oil 
or CLA daily for 8 weeks.

 As in the other human trials reported at the meeting, neither the volunteers 
nor the researchers knew who got CLA until the study ended. "But 
when we broke the code [identifying the CLA group]," Belury recalls, "our data 
screamed at us."

 Fasting blood sugar, or glucose, was moderately improved in people getting the 
CLA supplements but not in those getting the safflower oil. 
Similarly, only the CLA group experienced a significant lowering in blood 
concentration of triglycerides, which are groups of fats known to 
increase the risk of heart disease. "We also saw this beneficial triglyceride 
lowering" in a study with diabetic rats, Belury notes.

"Most exciting and definitely the most significant, statistically," she says, 
was the finding that people taking the CLA supplement had lower 
blood concentrations of the hormone leptin compared with the volunteers taking 
safflower oil. Other researchers have associated elevations in 
blood leptin concentrations with obesity. To Belury, her provocative leptin 
data "suggest CLA may act on type II diabetes via some mechanism 
affecting [body-]fat accumulation."

 Observes Belury, "Most diabetes drugs today are so potent that they literally 
have toxic side effects." If CLA offers pharmaceutical benefits 
without the toxicity, she argues, it may provide some individuals with an 
alternative to these drugs--or at least a way to ratchet down their 
drug doses.

 Why did Belury consider studying CLA's effects on diabetes? Her team's 
molecular studies several years ago showed that CLA shares properties 
with some drugs. "We think CLA binds to a [cellular] receptor that is similar 
to one that some antidiabetes drugs target," Belury explains.

 Wondering whether the nutritional supplement would act similarly to these 
drugs, she and her colleagues administered the fat supplements to 
rats predisposed to developing diabetes. To her surprise, Belury notes, "CLA 
actually delayed the onset of diabetes."

 Slowing plaque buildup

 Some other potential benefits of CLA have turned up in animal experiments. 
Kritchevsky, for example, recently reported evidence of CLA 
targeting atherosclerotic plaque.

 In studies with rabbits, he had been looking for agents that don't just slow a 
potentially deadly buildup of plaque along artery walls but 
actually make these fatty deposits regress. With other chemical agents, he 
says, "if you find something that gives you a few percent 
regression, you do handsprings. In our studies with [a 50:50 formulation of] 
CLA, we saw a 30 percent reduction [in existing plaque]--which is 
nothing less than phenomenal."

 Figuring that such a result was too good to be true, Kritchevsky repeated the 
experiments. Again, he fed the rabbits plaque-forming diets for 
3 months. He then killed one-third of the animals to measure their plaque 
buildup. Over the next 3 months, the surviving animals ate either a 
normal diet or one containing from 0.1 to 1 percent CLA, by weight of food. 
When compared with the unsupplemented animals, rabbits getting the 
0.1 percent-CLA diets had a little less plaque. However, those getting chow 
that was 1 percent CLA had 30 percent less plaque, he reported in 
an April 2000 supplement of the Journal of The American College of Nutrition.

"In animal experiments, nobody has ever reported anything like this," 
emphasizes Kritchevsky. "This stuff is just amazing."

 In this application, Kritchevsky doesn't know which isomer is active.

 A feed supplement

 A little more than a decade ago, while looking for a low-cost feed supplement, 
animal scientist Mark E. Cook and his colleagues at the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison stumbled onto CLA's immune-enhancing attributes.

 Poultry producers typically vaccinate young chickens to ward off epidemics. 
However, "you lose about a day's growth every time you vaccinate 
a chicken," notes Cook. Worldwide, he estimates, this seemingly small extension 
in the time it takes to get chickens to market "probably costs 
growers $1 billion a year."

 Although they didn't know how to avoid it, Cook and others knew what causes 
the growth halt in the chickens. When a vaccine stimulates the 
animals' immune system, it triggers an inflammatory action, which produces 
proteins that induce muscle wasting. Some of these same cytokines, 
such as tumor necrosis factor, cause wasting in cancer patients.

"We were hoping to find something to cut the inflammatory reaction that led to 
wasting," Cook says. Since compounds fashioned from linoleic 
acid participate in the chain of signals that induce wasting, he wondered 
whether CLA--as altered linoleic acids--might somehow mute the 
vaccine's inflammatory effect.

 So, he fed animals either a normal diet or one supplemented with the 50:50 CLA 
mix and then injected each with an immunity stimulant. "It 
worked," Cook crows. "CLA totally blocked the [temporary] wasting" in rats, 
mice, chicks, and pigs, without reducing their ability to fight 
disease.

 While that looked like a possible boon to meat producers, the earlier findings 
had prompted Cook to worry whether people taking CLA 
supplements might compromise their immunity.

 So, he encouraged his colleagues to probe how the mixture of trans fats 
perturbs an animal's immune system. In a series of patent 
applications, his team reports that CLA dramatically increases several families 
of infection-fighting white blood cells, including a type 
known as natural killer cells. When the body isn't under assault, however, CLA 
appears to dampen down the natural background level of immune 
stimulation. Such a dampening, Cook notes, is usually a good thing.

 Findings in several other animal studies, soon to be published, indicate that 
CLA supplements may control allergies. In one experiment, 
Cook's group sensitized guinea pigs to allergens to serve as models of allergic 
asthma. When the researchers exposed the animals' airways to 
the allergens, dramatically less airway constriction occurred if the animals 
had been fed CLA.

 Most recently, Cook's team has shown that CLA appears to derail allergic 
reactions by selectively dampening--as several drugs do--the 
activity of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), an enzyme that triggers many types of 
inflammation. Indeed, Cook told Science News, "we're quite excited 
and have just patented CLA as a COX-2 inhibitor."

 Animal studies

 Data from animal studies have consistently shown CLA's anticancer promise. For 
example, Clement Ip of the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in 
Buffalo, N.Y., recently showed that butter enriched in c9-t11 cut the risk of 
mammary cancer in rats that ate it (SN: 12/11/99, p. 375).

 Researchers don't know whether CLA isomers other than c9-t11 have anticancer 
effects. Right now, Ip says, "we have almost no [animal] data on 
the t10-c12, in terms of cancer protection."

 Is it now time to begin studies to see if CLA supplements can prevent cancer 
in people? "Not quite," Ip says emphatically.

 Human cancer trials of CLA will be difficult, he explains, because researchers 
don't know how to measure the isomers' immediate effects. 
Because malignancies typically take decades to develop, tracking cancer 
incidence in people taking a nutritional supplement is impractical.

 Instead, most human trials monitor the relatively rapid development of 
precancerous biomarkers, such as elevated concentrations of enzymes, 
cell changes, or activation of certain genes. Right now, Ip points out, "we 
don't have good information on what biomarkers will respond to CLA 
in humans, so we wouldn't know what to look for."

 He also points out that the animal work hasn't indicated what types of human 
cancers might be most responsive.

 Boosting natural concentrations

 At doses achievable in an ordinary diet, CLA doesn't appear to have the power 
to bring about any of the reported health benefits. Several 
research teams have undertaken major programs to boost natural concentrations 
of c9-t11 in meat and dairy products. But even enriched foods 
may not contain enough CLA to offer a potent barrier to disease.

 Hence, the rush by many supplement makers to market megadose formulations. 
Capsules now on sale contain about 1 g of CLA. However, most 
researchers argue that while these pricey supplements probably aren't harmful, 
they may not deliver desired benefits.

 Not only have few trials confirmed that CLA works in people as it does in 
animals, but currently marketed CLA recipes may not be appropriate 
to deliver the hoped-for benefits. At present, manufacturers base their recipes 
mostly on what's least expensive to make.

 Manufacturers typically synthesize CLA from linoleic acid, or from oleic acid, 
the principal fat in olive oil, notes Gerald P. McNeill, 
technical director for Loders Croklaan North America in Channahon, Ill. Its 
Dutch parent company is a leading producer of CLA.

 In the early days, manufacturers relied on toxic solvents and aggressive 
catalysts to affordably produce CLA, McNeill explains. However, the 
processes were so harsh that they typically yielded "about 25 different [CLA] 
isomers in significant quantities," he notes.

"We changed to a gentler methodology," he told Science News. With it, his 
company has been able to make 95 percent of its CLA as a roughly 
equal mix of c9-t11 and t10-c12.

 In theory, he says, it's possible to separate the two isomers. "We've even 
done it on a pilot scale," he acknowledges. "But it cost us a 
wagon-load of money." As in any separation process, the expense of the first 
couple kilograms was more than that of an equal weight of 
platinum.

 If a demand for pure isomers develops, McNeill says, it might be possible to 
bring costs down. For now, even researchers usually just settle 
for the best that they can afford: a 50:50 mix.

 However, getting even a 50:50 mix of the two target isomers can depend on the 
manufacturer, which isn't always noted on the label. Pariza 
points out that he conducts studies using CLA only from Loders Croklaan and 
Natural Inc. of Sandvika, Norway. These two manufacturers 
routinely submit their products to his tests to ensure they're a 50:50 mix of 
c9-t11 and t10-c12 isomers.

 Several years ago, similar tests on CLA by Peter Yurawecz of the Food and Drug 
Administration in Washington, D.C., showed some off-the-shelf 
health-store products wanting. He sampled 15 bottles.

"One was a bogus product" containing no CLA, he says. Several others contained 
about 90 percent CLA in the intended 50:50 mix. However, he 
says, a lot of the remaining products showed different proportions and included 
isomers "with various cis-trans configurations."

 Warns Pariza , "Buyer beware" remains a prudent policy.



