Arsenic Pollution Disrupts Hormones: Science News Online, March 17, 2001

 Arsenic Pollution Disrupts Hormones

 Linda Wang

 Chronic exposure to small amounts of arsenic in drinking water increases a 
person's risk of cancer and other diseases. Researchers believe they're now 
onto an explanation for the process.

 Arsenic acts as an endocrine disrupter, upsetting the action of hormones by 
blocking or mimicking them, say Joshua W. Hamilton of Dartmouth College in 
Hanover, N.H., and his colleagues. Previously identified endocrine disrupters 
have included many pesticides, industrial chemicals, and pollutants including 
dioxin. This is the first time that a metal has joined the list, says Hamilton.

 The researchers suggest that arsenic interferes with the action of 
glucocorticoids, hormones never known before to be vulnerable to endocrine 
disruption by pollution. Glucocorticoids belong to the same family of steroid 
hormones as estrogen and testosterone. Glucocorticoids are responsible for 
turning on many genes that may suppress cancer and regulate blood sugar. Other 
researchers have identified estrogens, thyroid hormones, androgens, and 
melatonin as types of hormones that pollutants can affect (SN: 1/6/01, p. 8).

 To test arsenic's effect on the glucocorticoid system, Hamilton and his 
coworkers treated rat tumor cells with a solution containing water and a 
synthetic glucocorticoid, arsenic and the glucocorticoid, or water alone. They 
then measured the activity of a gene normally switched on by glucocorticoids. 
The hormone alone activated the gene, but the glucocorticoid-arsenic mix caused 
no more gene activity than the water solution did. Arsenic blocked the 
hormone's action, the researchers report in the March Environmental Health 
Perspectives.

 Ordinarily, hormones bind to a receptor in a cell, and the hormone-receptor 
complex then turns on genes. While other endocrine disrupters interfere with 
the binding process, arsenic alters the complex so it can't turn on genes, says 
Hamilton. This may be the way some other endocrine disrupters work as well, he 
speculates. The new finding may help explain how arsenic triggers cancer, 
diabetes, and other chronic diseases such as hypertension, Hamilton adds.

 Although arsenic at high doses kills cells immediately, this study shows that 
arsenic can be harmful even in low concentrations, says Alan R. Parrish of 
Texas A&M University in College Station. Hamilton's team observed 
hormone-disrupting effects using arsenic concentrations comparable to 10 parts 
per billion (ppb) in water. "These are concentrations that people might be 
getting," says Parrish.

 Large geologic deposits of arsenic exist in Asia, South America, and several 
U.S. states, as well.

 In January, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency lowered the limit of 
arsenic in drinking water from 50 ppb to 10 ppb. "There's a growing 
appreciation that arsenic has health effects at much lower doses than we 
originally thought," says Hamilton.

 The new finding suggests that arsenic affects hormones, but the work needs to 
be confirmed, says Stephen H. Safe of Texas A&M University. The researchers 
must show that arsenic acts similarly in other types of cells and in whole 
animals. "It's not the end of the story, but it's a nice lead," says Safe.


