Making Sense of Centenarians: Science News Online, March 10, 2001

 Making Sense of Centenarians

 Genes and lifestyle help people live through a century

 Damaris Christensen

 My great-grandmother was born in 1897. She did most of her cooking on a 
wood-burning stove in her farmhouse in Cable, Wis. When I knew her, she slept 
on a cotton mattress that she had made herself in the 1940s and kept handmade 
lace doilies on the arms of all the chairs and sofas.

 When I asked her to tell me what it was like living in the Roaring '20s and 
the Depression, I expected her to regale me with stories of wild dancing and 
ruined investors jumping from skyscrapers. Instead, Elizabeth Morey told me of 
logging, raising chickens, and cooking on a wood stove--stories typical of 
people living in rural Wisconsin during those times.

 What wasn't typical about my great-grandmother was just how long she was able 
to tell her stories: She died in 1999, just shy of her 102nd birthday.

 Although only about 1 in 10,000 people in developed countries live to be a 
hundred or more, these centenarians constitute one of the fastest-growing age 
groups in the United States. As sociologists, gerontologists, and other 
investigators collect centenarians' stories--and analyze their genes--these 
oldest old are transforming the way people think about aging.

 An increasing life span

 The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that there were between 69,000 and 81,000 
centenarians living in the United States in 2000. With current population 
trends in developed countries, the number of centenarians should double every 
10 years, says John R. Wilmoth of the University of California, Berkeley.

 Over the past 150 years, the average life span--and correspondingly, the 
maximum life span--has been steadily increasing, Wilmoth says. Since 1969, the 
estimated maximum age that people reach has increased by about a year every 
decade, he and his colleagues reported in the Sept. 29, 2000 Science. The team 
based its findings on data from Swedish populations from 1861 to 1999. The 
maximum estimated life span in that country is now about 108 years. (The 
longest documented human life was of Jeanne Calment, a Frenchwoman who died at 
age 122.)

 Much of the rise in average and maximum life span is attributable to the 
increased life expectancy for healthy people over 70, Wilmoth says. "It's very 
important for people who are older and healthy to realize that their life 
expectancy is probably going to be longer than the rest of their peers and 
prepare accordingly," Wilmoth notes.

 What lifestyle can these people expect?

 Researchers divide centenarians into three roughly equal-size groups, based on 
how well they function and the severity of illness or disability they have, 
says Peter Martin of Iowa State University in Ames. Perhaps 30 percent of 
centenarians are both mentally and physically impaired by the time they reach 
100. Another 40 percent have limitations to their vision, hearing, or 
mobility--and perhaps some mental impairment--but are able to function 
reasonably well. And another 30 percent--the population segment that fascinates 
both researchers and the public--show few signs of mental or physical 
impairment and are often still living independently.

 An independent life

 Like most people who live to be 100 or older, my great-grandmother was ill 
only in the last few years of her life. Among centenarians in a New England 
study, almost 90 percent had been living independently when they were 92 years 
old. About 73 percent of the group had been independent when they were 97, and 
almost 35 percent of them were still independent when they were surveyed.

"People are ingrained with the idea that the older you get, the sicker you 
get," says Thomas Perls of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston and 
director of the New England Centenarian Study. "It's rather the older you get, 
the healthier you've been . . . . Compared with others in the older population, 
centenarians seem to either markedly delay, or in some cases, escape 
life-threatening diseases such as cancer and Alzheimer's disease."

 Although male centenarians are fewer, they're often less likely to have 
significant mental or physical disabilities than are women who reach 100 are, 
says Margery Silver, also of Beth Israel Deaconess. She interviewed 177 people 
between 100 and 109--most just over 100--to determine their mental functioning 
and their ability to manage daily tasks. Among those with mental impairment, 
women were able to live independently and live longer than men were, she says. 
Researchers still don't know why some people are better able than others to 
adapt to cognitive and functional impairment.

 In his studies of about 100 centenarians in Iowa, Martin observed similar 
health in those living independently and those in nursing homes. But 
centenarians living in nursing homes are slightly more likely to have some 
cognitive impairment.

 Martin and his colleagues also have found that about 25 to 30 percent of 
centenarians no longer have any siblings or childern still living. These 
centenarians generally rely on nieces or nephews or on long-time friends who 
have become as close as family. Many studies of centenarians ignore the role of 
family support, Martin says, though he believes it plays an important role in 
keeping the oldest old alive and well.

 Lifestyle factors

 Why do some people live longer than others? And why do some people function 
better than others at very old ages?

 Probably the most important factors can be found in people's lifestyle: what 
they eat, how much they exercise, what social networks they have, how well they 
handle stress. About 70 percent of the survival differences between elderly 
twins is due to such factors, according to several studies. They indicate that 
no more than 30 percent of the variation in life span between centenarians and 
the rest of us is due to genetic differences.

 Perls, however, suggests that after age 80, genetics plays an increasingly 
important role in determining which people survive to 100. We can all maximize 
the potential in our genes by eating right and having a healthy lifestyle, he 
says. But "to get to 100, to go the extra 20 years or so, I'd say you need 
these special genes, these genetic booster rockets," says Perls.

"This is a plausible hypothesis," says Martin, but probably "all factors, 
including personality factors and social support, become more important as 
people survive longer. If you don't have the inner strength and physical 
strength to survive adversity, you are not going to survive."

 Because longevity seems to run in families, centenarians are an ideal group in 
which to search for longevity genes, says Perls. The problem is that their 
compatriots of average lifespan are no longer around.

 So, Perls and other researchers have compared siblings of centenarians with 
siblings of people born in the same years as the centenarians but who died at 
73, the average life expectancy for people born in the late 1800s. The 
centenarians' siblings are about 3.5 times as likely to live to age 80, and 
about 4 times as likely to live to 90 as the siblings of people who died at 73 
are, Perls says.

 Several research groups have begun collecting data on the children of 
centenarians in order to compare this group with the children of people who 
were born around the same time as the centenarians but died at age 73.

 In Perls' study, the 88 children of centenarians and 118 children of 
septuagenarians are currently about age 71. The centenarians' children weigh 
markedly less and are less likely to be taking multiple medications or to have 
high blood pressure or heart disease. The children of centenarians might have 
better genes, or they might have learned better eating and exercise habits from 
their parents or take better care of themselves because they expect to live 
longer.

 Longevity genes

 Some researchers are beginning to look for longevity genes in the confined 
gene pool of a population already extensively studied for various genetic 
disorders. Nir Barzilai of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York 
suspects longevity genes might be detectable among Ashkenazi Jews, who 
originated in central and eastern Europe and typically marry within the group.

 However, says Barzilai, it may not be easy to detect physiological clues to 
underlying age-related genes. "When we get to centenarians, their health is 
already on the way down," he says. "They may not have simple biological markers 
for their longevity, but differences between [the centenarians'] children and 
their spouses may point to such markers," which then may point to genes.

 Therefore, he and his colleagues identified 100 centenarians who are Ashkenazi 
Jews and have at least one child living in the United States or Europe. To 
learn how people in such long-lived families differ from others, the team 
compared health characteristics and family histories of the centenarians' 
children with those of the children's spouses. In support of the idea that old 
age runs in families, Barzilai found that the parents of the centenarians 
typically lived into their mid-80s, while the grandparents of the children's 
spouses died, on average, in their early 70s. Children of centenarians were 
more than nine time as likely as the spouses to have a grandparent who lived to 
90 .

 Last November at the Gerontological Society of America's annual meeting in 
Washington, D.C., Barzilai reported that the centenarians themselves are of 
average weight for their height. The children of centenarians tend to be 
slightly heavier than their parents but still more slender than their spouses. 
Compared with the group of spouses, children of centenarians showed other 
characteristics that indicate a lower risk of developing diabetes and 
cardiovascular disease.

 Worldwide studies

"The hunt for longevity genes in humans is not new," but more and more people 
are looking these days, says Giovanni B. Frisoni of the National Institute for 
Research and Care at San Giovanni del Dio-Fatebenefratelli in Brescia, Italy. 
He notes that studies across the world have tentatively linked aging to several 
factors: variants of genes for cholesterol transport, protein tags that enable 
the immune system to recognize blood cells as part of oneself, and an enzyme 
for a protein that regulates blood pressure.

 Frisoni studies Alzheimer's disease, a condition whose likelihood increases 
with age and is linked to a common variant in a gene that produces a 
cholesterol-carrying protein called apolipoprotein E. The high-risk gene is 
known as APO-E4. Another variant of the same gene, called APO-E2, is much 
rarer--found in just 5 to 10 percent of the population--and is associated with 
lower-than-normal blood cholesterol concentrations and lower risk of 
cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer's.

 In a study published in the February Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, 
Frisoni and his colleagues show that among 179 centenarians living in Finland 
in 1991, 10 (9 percent) of the 117 people ages 100 to 101 had the APO-E2 
allele, compared with 9 (21 percent) of the 42 people ages 102 to 103 and 5 (25 
percent) of the 20 people 104 years and older. The gene variant clearly isn't 
required for longevity, says Frisoni, but the finding that it's more prevalent 
among the oldest centenarians indicates that it can play an important role.

 Giovanna De Benedictis of the University of Calabria in Italy and her 
colleagues are comparing genes of high-functioning centenarians with those of 
healthy young people. "Our aim is to understand the key to successful aging, 
not just [of] living for a long time," she says.

 De Benedictis and her team are also looking at the role that immune function 
might play in aging. "With aging there is an increase in inflammation," which 
may cause health problems, says Claudio Franceschi of the Italian National 
Institute on Aging and the University of Bologna. At the November gerontology 
meeting in Washington, D.C., he presented "very preliminary data" suggesting 
that centenarians show fewer signs of immune-function decline and inflammation 
than most people do as they age.

 Complex questions

"The questions to ask are much more complicated and complex than we thought 
when we met our first centenarians in the 1980s," says Martin. Besides genetic, 
environmental, and social factors that contribute to both long lives and 
healthy aging, researchers are pursuing a variety of other topics.

 Teams in the United States, Europe, and Japan are collaborating to study 
whether cultural factors and living conditions affect which centenarians are in 
relatively good health and living independently, while others are physically or 
mentally impaired. They also plan to assemble genetic databases of centenarians 
in several countries.

"Down the road, my hope is that we can make some genetic discoveries so that we 
can understand why some people age so differently than others," Perls says. "My 
hope is that we will actually see the development [from genetic research] of 
medications within the next 10 years or so that would allow people to age more 
slowly and either markedly delay or escape some of these terrible diseases like 
Alzheimer's."

 Perls joins other gerontologists in saying it's important for young and old 
people alike to have an optimistic view of aging. Researchers hope not only to 
identify factors that help people reach very old ages, but also to identify 
people who will age well and others who will age poorly so physicians can 
target treatments appropriately.

 The details of this research might not have meant much to my 
great-grandmother, who'd had only a second-grade education. But she surely 
would have supported the quest for longer, healthier, and more independent 
lives.


