Jiggling the Cosmic Ooze: Science News Online, March 10, 2001

 Jiggling the Cosmic Ooze

 A new blueprint for all the universe's mass and energy may be just around the 
corner

 Peter Weiss

 Only rarely do scientists make a discovery requiring textbooks to be 
rewritten. Yet physicists say they now may be on the verge of a "Eureka!" of 
that magnitude.

 Within just a few years, clear signs of a never-before-seen subatomic particle 
known as the Higgs boson are expected to show up in the world's most powerful 
accelerators, where the energy of particle collisions can form new particles. 
Although physicists have found many other exotic fundamental particles since 
the 1930s-some so important that their discovery earned Nobel prizes-finding 
this particle would be different.

"All the discoveries in the last century, in a sense, were finding more of 
things like those already found-until this. The Higgs is a completely new kind 
of object never known to exist before," says Gordon L. Kane of the University 
of Michigan in Ann Arbor. Indeed, if it weren't for the Higgs boson, all matter 
would be on the left side of Albert Einstein's famous formula, E = mc2. Without 
the Higgs, nothing-not molecules, this magazine, you, Earth, the sun, or 
anything else-would exist as matter. Everything would always be in the form of 
energy dashing along at the speed of light.

 The Higgs plays such a crucial role in shaping the universe as we know it that 
it was dubbed the God particle by Leon M. Lederman, who won the 1988 Nobel 
Prize in Physics for codiscovering the muon. Lederman is now at the Illinois 
Math and Science Academy in Aurora.

 To find this legendary particle, researchers must bash together a billion 
trillion of more familiar subatomic particles, such as protons, at energies 
higher than those ever achieved before in any laboratory. Only then, 
theoretically, will a Higgs boson occasionally pop out of a dramatic fireball. 
The price tag for the undertaking, not to mention the technical challenge, is 
enormous. A single accelerator being built for this work will cost $4 billion.

 The scientific stakes are also colossal. Prestige, fame, and, probably, a 
Nobel prize are in store for those researchers who find the Higgs first. 
Consequently, the top high-energy physics laboratories of the United States and 
Europe are pitted against each other in a race to the goal.

 At Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in Batavia, Ill., 
physicists restarted on March 1 a rebuilt collider (SN: 6/19/99, p. 399), the 
Tevatron, with the search for the Higgs as its top priority. "We'd do anything 
possible to be able to find the Higgs," says Fermilab Director Michael S. 
Witherell. "Everyone agrees it's the discovery our field needs to move to its 
next level of understanding."

 As Tevatron research gets underway, heavy equipment will be busy near Geneva, 
Switzerland, constructing an entirely new accelerator, called the Large Hadron 
Collider (LHC), at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN).

 If the Tevatron hasn't nailed the Higgs by some time between 2006 and 2008, 
the then-completed LHC may grab the prize from under Fermilab's nose. An 
international team of researchers has designed the LHC to generate collisions 
seven times as energetic as the Tevatron's collisions and to create a more 
plentiful stream of particles to analyze. At Fermilab, "everyone here is 
nervous and excited. . . . Either we find the Higgs before the LHC is finished, 
or forget it," says Joseph Lykken, a Fermilab theorist.

 Despite all the sound and fury, physicists concede that this race may 
ultimately have no winner. Although well-examined and widely accepted theory 
declares that the Higgs is out there, it may not actually exist.

 The standard model

 The standard model of physics describes with remarkable precision all the 
known particles of the universe and the interactions that occur between them 
(SN: 7/1/95, p. 10; 7/29/00, p. 68). Only gravity has yet to be integrated into 
the model. The standard model identifies a dozen fundamental fermions, or 
matter particles, which come in two families known as quarks and leptons. The 
model also specifies five force-carrying particles, collectively known as 
bosons.

 For all its successes, however, the theory omits a rather pivotal trait of 
particles-their mass. "The major question in particle physics is why any 
elemental particle would have any mass at all. The most natural theory would 
have all the particles with no mass, just like the photon," says Melvin J. 
Shochet of the University of Chicago and Fermilab. But there's plenty of mass 
in the universe, making such a theory obviously wrong.

 To patch these flaws in the standard model, theorists proposed the existence 
of some sort of influence that permeates all of space, weighing down particles 
passing through it. This cosmic molasses is called the Higgs field.

 A sufficient jolt, like an extremely powerful particle collision, can set the 
molasses quivering. Such a vibration amounts to a particlelike manifestation of 
the field-a Higgs boson. Theorists predict that there's also a second, even 
thicker molasses that only affects quarks-the constituents of protons and 
neutrons-and gives them much more of their mass than the Higgs field does. But 
the Higgs is the only source of mass shared by all particles that have mass.

 The Higgs boson, however, is not a form of matter. And, although it's called a 
boson, it doesn't carry force, as do the other bosons. For example, photons and 
gluons provide the forces that hold atoms together.

 Unlike other standard-model particles, the Higgs boson interacts with another 
particle in proportion to the particle's rest mass-its mass when standing 
still. Yet at least part of that mass only exists because of the interaction 
between the particle and the Higgs boson.

 Finally, of all fundamental particles in the theory, the Higgs is the only one 
devoid of spin, which is a quantum mechanical property analogous to the 
whirling of a top. Particles with spin have some intrinsic magnetism, but not 
the Higgs.

 The Higgs boson

 If physicists do find the Higgs boson, they'll want to study the particle in 
detail to help them understand the mass-giving mechanism. But that's not the 
only tantalizing secret of physics they'll want to pursue.

 The Higgs boson has become a doorway to the future of physics. Whatever new, 
more comprehensive picture of the universe lies ahead depends in large measure 
on what the mass of the Higgs turns out to be.

"The standard model shows us very well how the universe works. The Higgs will 
be the first discovery that tells us why the universe works the way it does," 
Kane says. "It narrows the possibilities and points us in certain directions."

 Might the universe be filled with yet-unseen particles that are partners to 
all the ones already known? If the Higgs boson's own mass turns out to be 
relatively small, it would bolster so-called supersymmetry theories that 
include such a mirror world of particles (SN: 4/13/96, p. 231). Moreover, if 
supersymmetry turns out to be the correct model of the universe, that 
lightweight Higgs would be only the first of five increasingly heavy forms of 
the particle.

 Alternatively, could the standard model-made yet more comprehensive with some 
still-to-be devised theory of gravity-continue on as the best, most complete 
description of the particle universe? That would be possible if the Higgs 
boson's mass is light or middle-weight, theorists predict. If there's no Higgs 
in that mass range, calculations within the standard model lead to weird 
predictions, such as certain interactions among particles taking place with 
probabilities greater than 100 percent.

 Other Higgs masses lead to their own far-out consequences. For example, 
suppose the Higgs boson turns out to be heavier than the standard model 
predicts and is not just one particle, but a pair. Then, the universe could be 
the stomping ground for a host of very heavy particles proposed by a set of 
alternative models of particle physics, including one called Technicolor.

 A very heavy Higgs, even beyond what Technicolor would require, may even have 
implications for the number of dimensions in the universe. However, theories of 
extra dimensions remain too rudimentary to predict a Higgs mass, says Michael 
Dine of the University of California, Santa Cruz.

 Linking forces

 The concepts of the Higgs field and the Higgs boson arose in the 1960s. 
Physicists then were trying to understand the relationship between the 
electromagnetic force, which includes the attraction between electrically 
charged particles, and the weak force, which causes nuclear decay.

 They knew that the carrier of the electromagnetic force is the photon, the 
most familiar massless boson. Theorists then postulated that one or more other 
bosons mediate the weak force. Because the weak force acts only over short 
distances, scientists inferred that those bosons had to have lots of mass. But 
no one could explain what would make them so heavy, while the photon has no 
heft at all.

 In 1964, theorists in Belgium and Scotland concluded independently that there 
must be a pervasive field in the universe that is responsible for the mass in 
these weak-force bosons. Further work showed that this field could bestow mass 
on all fundamental particles that have mass. Researchers have dubbed the 
mass-giving field the Higgs field, after the Scottish physicist Peter W. Higgs 
of the University of Edinburgh.

 While theorists have had a heyday with Higgs physics ever since, 
experimentalists have run into brick walls for nearly 30 years. Since no one 
knows how much the Higgs weighs, experimenters have been colliding particles at 
greater and greater energies, which, in turn, produce heavier and heavier 
clouds of particles. The scientists keep hoping that one of those particle will 
turn out to be a Higgs. The Superconducting Super Collider in Texas was to be 
dedicated to the Higgs quest, but Congress considered it too expensive to see 
to completion (SN: 10/30/93, p. 276).

 Just last fall, however, experimenters at CERN thought they may have caught 
the very first signs of the Higgs boson, in debris from particle smashups at 
the Large Electron Positron (LEP) collider.

 After a distinguished 11-year career, LEP was scheduled for dismantling last 
September to make way for the Large Hadron Collider. In a last-ditch effort to 
urge the Higgs boson out of the LEP, researchers pushed the machine to its 
energy limit and won a monthlong extension of life for their accelerator last 
fall. At that extreme, two of the LEP detectors recorded five collisions 
harboring tantalizing hints that the coveted Higgs had formed and then 
instantly disappeared (SN: 12/9/00, p. 381). There were also a dozen other less 
convincing events. The mass of these fleeting particles-expressed in energy 
units-was almost 115 billion electron volts (GeV), or about the mass of an 
antimony atom.

 Although the findings electrified the particle-physics community, confirming 
or disproving them would have required keeping the accelerator open yet another 
year. That would have delayed construction of the more powerful LHC, while 
adding millions to its cost. Although the decision rankled and disappointed 
many LEP scientists, CERN's director-general opted on Nov. 8 to shut down LEP 
and to push forward with the LHC as quickly as possible.

 With that decision, CERN passed the baton to Fermilab, at least until 2006, 
when the LHC might begin taking data.

 Protons and antiprotons

 Fermilab's Tevatron pushes protons and antiprotons to the highest energies in 
the research world. Traveling in opposite directions around a 6.5-kilometer 
ring at nearly the speed of light, the particles collide and annihilate each 
other at two locations. There, detectors as large as three-story houses track 
the subatomic debris that spews from the submicroscopic fireballs.

 What's more, the newly upgraded Tevatron is expected soon to generate 
collisions at a rate 20 times as high as it did before. Fermilab plans to make 
further improvements in about 2 years that would boost the collision rate 
another sevenfold. To handle the tremendous jump in collisions and the 
increased amount of debris to be tracked, analyzed, and recorded, experimenters 
have rebuilt both of the Tevatron's huge detectors.

 Although LEP researchers may not have found the Higgs, they did show that the 
particle, if it exists, can't have a mass smaller than 113 GeV. Within the 
still unexplored higher masses, physicists estimate that a supersymmetric, 
light Higgs would fall below 130 GeV and a standard-model Higgs below 170 GeV, 
and a Technicolor Higgs would weigh no less than 160 GeV.

 If the Higgs mass actually is 115 GeV, as the LEP results suggest, the 
Tevatron will require 2 to 3 years of operation to pile up evidence as 
convincing as that from the defunct European collider. And it will take 5 years 
or more to accrue enough data to make a truly convincing case that Fermilab 
scientists have discovered the particle, according to some researchers.

 Others are betting a discovery will be in hand sooner.

 Hendrik J. Weerts, a physicist from Michigan State University in East Lansing 
and a Tevatron researcher, for instance, expects the hot prospect of discovery 
to speed up the pace of research. The information acquired during LEP's last 
days is like a newly discovered dinosaur bone, Weerts says. "Once you have a 
bone, the excitement is much higher than if you're just looking." If the Higgs 
really exists at 115 GeV, it will be in hand by 2004, he predicts.

 Gordon Kane, an architect of supersymmetry theory, is even more optimistic, 
predicting the announcement of a Higgs discovery within 2 years. He says if 
signs of a 115-GeV Higgs start to pile up early at the Tevatron, the physics 
community will quickly consider it a confirmation that the LEP data were 
actually due to Higgs bosons. Kane also notes that the lightest particles that 
are supersymmetric partners to known particles may show up at the Tevatron 
before the Higgs.

 If the Higgs is heavier than 115 GeV, however, then the chances for a Tevatron 
discovery go down. Physicists associated with Fermilab maintain, however, that 
they can convincingly snag the Higgs even if its mass is up to 130 GeV as long 
as the Tevatron's collision rate meets expectations.

 Adding to the fervor, a new analysis by scientists at Fermilab and the 
University of California, Davis suggests that the Tevatron may have a better 
chance than scientists previously believed of discovering the Higgs boson-at 
any energy. That's because, the Illinois and California researchers say, the 
collider is capable of creating the Higgs in the company of very massive 
fundamental particles, called top quarks-a combination that no prior 
accelerator had the energy to create. Physicists had previously ignored this 
production mode, however, because it yields only a few Higgs, says Fermilab's 
Joel Goldstein.

"Our argument is that these events are so spectacular that even if you have 
only a handful, they should really stick out of your data," Goldstein says. He 
and his colleagues present their findings in the Feb. 26 Physical Review 
Letters.

 Others outside of Fermilab aren't so optimistic.

"If it's heavier than 115 GeV, my conviction is that the Tevatron is out of the 
game," says CERN's Patrick Janot, who was physics coordinator for LEP's Higgs 
search.

 It's easier to rule out particular masses for a Higgs boson than it is to 
establish the particle's reality. Even if the Tevatron's Higgs search does come 
up empty-handed, Fermilab experimenters will have acquired valuable 
information. They'll have shown that the particle doesn't exist at masses up to 
about 190 GeV. It would then be left to CERN and the LHC to find a heavier 
Higgs.

 Then there's that other nagging possibility: that there is no Higgs. That's 
the premise of a recent science fiction book called White Mars (2000, St. 
Martin's Press) by veteran sci-fi author Brian W. Aldiss and Oxford University 
mathematician and theoretical physicist Roger Penrose.

 In their tale, the LHC becomes 100 times as powerful as currently expected but 
finds no trace of the Higgs. Instead, by 2009, hints show up of another 
mass-bestowing entity called the Omega Smudge. In pursuit of it, researchers 
build an accelerator circling the moon, but it, too, fails. The book ends in 
the 22nd century, with scientists out beyond the solar system still looking for 
the source of mass. By then, they're working on a detector as big around as the 
rings of Saturn.

 Physicists on the front lines of the Higgs search today acknowledge that their 
coveted particle may not exist. But if it isn't a Higgs that's the basis of 
mass in the universe, then something else-call it a smudge, if you like-has to 
be the answer.

"There's no boring way out of this," Witherell insists. If something other than 
the Higgs is there, he says, then "that even goes beyond our past experience, 
and it is almost certainly more exciting."


