Sedentary Off-hours Link to Alzheimer's: Science News Online, March 10, 2001

 Sedentary Off-hours Link to Alzheimer's

 Nathan Seppa

 The cause of Alzheimer's disease is unknown, but various studies suggest that 
its risk factors extend beyond genetics. Some studies have associated the 
disease with a dearth of physical activity. Others have linked Alzheimer's 
disease to a lack of stimulating brainwork-fitting a use-it-or-lose-it scenario 
of cognitive decline.

 A new study bolsters the view that both kinds of inactivity pose risks. People 
who have the memory loss, confusion, and disorientation of Alzheimer's disease 
in old age were generally less active physically and intellectually between the 
ages of 20 and 60 than were people who don't have the disease, according to 
study coauthor Robert P. Friedland, a neurologist at Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine in Cleveland, and his colleagues.

 The researchers collected lifestyle histories of 193 Alzheimer's patients with 
an average age of 73. The scientists compared these with data on a control 
group of 358 people, average age 71, without Alzheimer's.

 The team then calculated the amount of leisure time each participant had spent 
between ages 20 and 60 on each of three types of activities. Passive activities 
included watching television, talking on the phone, and going to church. The 
scientists also tallied time spent on intellectual activities, such as reading, 
knitting, and playing a musical instrument, and on physical activities that 
included gardening, walking, and competitive sports.

 The researchers tabulated how many different passive, intellectual, or 
physical pursuits each person performed, hours spent on them, and the 
percentage of leisure time devoted to each.

 After establishing an average overall activity level for all the study's 
participants, the researchers discovered that the Alzheimer's patients were 
nearly four times as likely as the people without Alzheimer's to fall below 
that average. In particular, the non-Alzheimer's volunteers had devoted more 
time on average between ages 40 and 60 to intellectual activities and less to 
passive ones than had those who developed the disease. The researchers report 
their findings in the March 13 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 The only single activity in which Alzheimer's patients on average 
significantly outperformed their counterparts was watching television, 
Friedland says.

 While certain genetic factors seem to influence the brain deterioration 
associated with Alzheimer's, these don't account for all cases of the disease. 
Indeed, studies of genetically similar people living in separate countries show 
divergent rates of Alzheimer's disease.

 The new study accounted for differences in education and income but not 
occupation. It doesn't point to a cause of Alzheimer's or even predict who 
might develop the disease, but it does reinforce the value of remaining 
physically and mentally active, Friedland says. From an evolutionary 
standpoint, people are still physically designed to be active hunters and 
gatherers. "Being a couch potato," he says, "is not our natural state."

 Intellectual stimulation may work the same way, he says. Studies indicate that 
a higher educational level makes a person less likely to develop Alzheimer's 
disease. Some researchers suggest that challenging the brain builds reserves of 
functional brain tissue that protect people against the disease.

"This is a very intriguing study" built on "extremely rigorous" data collection 
and tabulation, says Mary S. Mittelman, an epidemiologist at New York 
University School of Medicine. However, she wonders why some people are active 
during their middle years while others aren't. Could it be that a sedentary 
lifestyle really contributes to the development of Alzheimer's, or does the 
ailment begin early in life and subtly steer a person toward such a lifestyle?

"It could be a combination of both," Friedland says.


