Fossil Skull Diversifies Family Tree: Science News Online, March 24, 2001

 Fossil Skull Diversifies Family Tree

 Bruce Bower

 Anthropologists have long held that the earliest members of the human 
evolutionary family consisted of a group of closely related species known as 
australopithecines. A 3.5-million-year-old skull unearthed in Kenya now 
suggests that the australopithecines had a set of evolutionary companions.

 The nearly complete skull represents a new genus and species of early 
hominids, according to a report in the March 22 Nature. The team that excavated 
and analyzed the specimen, led by anthropologist Meave G. Leakey of the 
National Museums of Kenya in Nairobi, dubs it Kenyanthropus platyops.

 Of more than 30 skull and tooth fragments found with the skull, the 
researchers have assigned two to K. platyops.

 If anthropologists accept Kenyanthropus into the evolutionary fold, it will 
change their thinking about early hominids. Consider the new skull's unusual 
anatomy. Like Australopithecus afarensis--a species that existed from 4 million 
to 3 million years ago and includes the partial skeleton named Lucy-- K. 
platyops has a small brain and thickly enameled cheek teeth. Moreover, its 
small ear holes resemble those of both chimpanzees and an earlier hominid, 
Australopithecus anamensis.

 In other respects, though, K. platyops looks like a 2-million-year-old skull 
previously found in Kenya. Many researchers attribute that specimen to Homo 
rudolfensis, an extinct species in our own genus. Leakey's group reassigns the 
skull to Kenyanthropus based on such shared traits as a flat, sloping lower 
face, raised cheeks, and flattened brow ridges.

 If K. platyops had deeper evolutionary roots than A. afarensis, as well as a 
unique relationship to H. rudolfensis, a species that emerged much later, it 
raises doubts about Lucy's legacy, Leakey's team contends. Contrary to the most 
influential current view, her kind might not have given rise to all ensuing 
hominids, the team says.

 Whether or not the new skull represents a unique genus, it indicates that a 
distinct line of hominids existed alongside A. afarensis, remarks William H. 
Kimbel of the Institute of Human Origins in Tempe, Ariz. Further study of 
Leakey's finds may resolve whether A. afarensis truly served as an ancestor to 
all later hominids, says Kimbel, who directs A. afarensis excavations in 
Ethiopia.

 Leakey and her colleagues unearthed the new skull and associated fossil 
fragments in August 1999 at a site located just west of Kenya's Lake Turkana. 
Dating of volcanic rock from below and above the finds--based on measures of 
potassium and argon isotopes in the rock--places them at about 3.5 million 
years old.

 K. platyops and A. afarensis may have evolved in substantially different 
habitats, the investigators theorize. Other ancient animals whose remains have 
been found at the Kenyan site appear to have been suited to a wetter, more 
vegetated habitat than that frequented by Lucy's kind, the researchers say.

 The new find's surprising mix of anatomical features indicates that some parts 
of the skull can change in striking ways without affecting the shape of nearby 
areas, Leakey's group adds. For example, K. platyops combined a forwardly 
positioned cheekbone with small cheek teeth. However, Paranthropus--a hominid 
genus that lived from around 2 million to 1 million years ago--blended a 
comparable cheek bone with large, peglike molars.

"Many of the skeletal features of early hominids may have been acquired 
piecemeal, not as large anatomical complexes," Kimbel proposes.

 Another approach holds that the evolution of crucial parts of the skeleton in 
various hominids triggered many other bony alterations (SN: 11/25/00, p. 346).

 The position of K. platyops in the human evolutionary tree will remain 
uncertain for some time, according to Daniel E. Lieberman of George Washington 
University in Washington, D.C. "There's no simple way to figure out who's 
related to whom," he says.


