Science Talent Search winners shine bright: Science News Online, March 17, 2001

 Science Talent Search winners shine bright

 Jessica Gorman

 Even as the NASDAQ stock market slumped last Monday, the future of high 
technology never looked so strong.

 At a gala black-tie reception in Washington, D.C.'s Union Station, the Intel 
Science Talent Search--which has been administered for 60 years by Science 
Service, the publisher of Science News--handed out the top awards in its 2001 
competition for high school seniors. Leading the winners were students with 
projects in physics, math, and computer science.

"You are our long-term planning," NASDAQ vice chairman Alfred R. Berkeley III 
told the 40 finalists shortly before the top 10 awards were announced.

 The first-place winner, 17-year-old Mariangela Lisanti of Westport, Conn., 
looked shocked as her name was announced. "I didn't expect this at all," she 
said.

 Lisanti, who won a $100,000 scholarship, studied electron transport in gold 
nanowires using a new measurement technique that collects data more swiftly, 
cheaply, and easily than do methods currently in wide use by established 
scientists. Lisanti says she also made observations with her apparatus of 
phenomena never previously reported.

 This kind of basic research helps scientists understand how objects only a few 
atoms or molecules across might one day constitute nanoscale electronic devices 
much smaller than any microelectronic systems in existence today. The field of 
nanotechnology is "blossoming right now," says Lisanti, who hopes her work will 
have applications for computing, robotics, and biomedicine.

 Second place and a $75,000 scholarship went to Nathaniel Jay Craig, 18, of 
Sacramento, Calif., for his mathematical research into the properties of 
supercooled polymeric liquids, which remain fluid even below their freezing 
points. Studies of such liquids could apply to nuclear-waste storage, biology, 
and electronics, says Craig, adding that the project has "also been a lot of 
fun theoretically."

 Gabriel Drew Carroll, 18, of Oakland, Calif., took home the third prize and a 
$50,000 scholarship for a fundamentalmath entry in which he studied the 
geometry related to so-called partially ordered sets, or posets.

 Fourth through sixth places, along with $25,000 scholarships, were awarded, 
respectively, to: Alan Mark Dunn, 17, of Potomac, Md., for his encryption 
research; Michael Theprathan Hasper, 18, of Tallahassee, Fla., who tested the 
physical properties of various violin bridges, the part on which strings rest; 
and Vinod Easwaran Nambudiri, 17, of Rye Brook, N.Y., who examined how 
teenagers sleep after they have light shown on the back of their knees.

 The seventh-through-tenth finishers each won a $20,000 scholarship. The 
recipients, in order, are: Johanna Beth Waldman, 17, of Roslyn, N.Y., for her 
investigation of factors that affect academic dishonesty; Hans Christiansen 
Lee, 18, of Carmel, Calif., who built and tested a system for improving a car's 
handling; Robert Adam Horch, 18, of Weatherford, Texas, who used a new method 
to make precisely oriented arrays of molecules; and David Nejad Khalil, 18, of 
Great Neck, N.Y., who used functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify 
areas of the brain associated with perceiving ambiguous images.

 Each of the 30 other finalists won a $5,000 scholarship and a computer. Before 
the awards banquet, Vice President Richard Cheney addressed the finalists. 
"Doing well in this competition is a strong indicator of future achievement," 
he said. "The sun is just now rising over your professional lives."


