Lifestyles of the bright and toxic overlap: Science News Online, April 14, 2001

 Lifestyles of the bright and toxic overlap

 Susan Milius

 They're bright, beautiful, and dangerous to eat. But until now, no one has 
known about the home lives of Madagascar's toxic frogs. Now, a researcher has 
observed these domestic dramas in the wild.

 The behavior of the frogs-in the Mantella genus-appears strangely familiar, 
reports Heather Heying of the Museum of Zoology at the University of Michigan 
in Ann Arbor. Her observations reveal a pattern of social and sexual habits 
rarely seen in frogs, that is, except among poison-dart frogs on the other side 
of the globe. Yet the poison frogs of Madagascar and the Americas don't seem 
closely related, Heying says.

 Apparently, the two toxic groups independently evolved a bold daytime 
lifestyle defined by elaborate courtships, the defense of territories, and a 
form of parental care not often seen in amphibians, Heying says.

 Also, some 100 species of the poison-dart frogs, in the family Dendrobatidae, 
pick up toxins or their precursors from the environment and release the poisons 
when disturbed. The 13 or so Mantella species ooze some of the same defensive 
compounds from their skin, albeit the milder ones. "If you've been handling a 
frog and touch your lips, they'll go numb," says Heying.

 In two seasons, she clocked nearly 1,000 hours watching Mantella laevigata on 
the Madagascan island of Nosy Mangabe. As the first scientist to study the 
species in the wild, she had to develop basic techniques, including the use of 
a portable tattooing machine to mark individual animals. Also, she says, "it 
took a long time to figure who was male and who was female."

 Unlike most frogs, the poisonous Mantella hop about during the day, Heying 
reports in the March Animal Behaviour, which is the current issue. The animals 
also have bright warning colors, as do poison-dart frogs and other toxic 
animals.

 The Mantella frogs cluster in bamboo stands, and their lives revolve around 
the tribulations of real estate. Heying found that males often violently defend 
territories of up to 2 square meters around a well, such as a rain-filled stalk 
of broken bamboo. When a female answers the call of a chirping male, she hops 
toward him. Then he closes the distance, shifting to a quieter one-note call. 
When they are together, he rests his chin against her. "Then he leads her, 
calling her softly, to a well," Heying says.

 If she accepts the site-by staying in the water-the male clasps her and 
fertilizes the sole egg she attaches to the side of the well above the water 
line. This species represents only the third frog known to lay eggs singly, 
Heying reports.

 If the female hops out of the well, however, the male leads her to another 
one. A male without a well on his territory, or with a well that doesn't appeal 
to the female, invades the territory of another male.

 If rains don't drown the egg, it hatches in about 10 days and the larva plunks 
into the well's water. About 10 times, Heying saw females visit a well with a 
tadpole and provide the little occupant with lunch in the form of an 
unfertilized egg.

 She also often noticed Mantella males leading females to pools harboring 
tadpoles. The resulting embryo either develops into a new tadpole or becomes 
food for the older ones. Either way, the male wins because the effort supports 
his offspring, Heying explains.

 These details give "a remarkable example of convergence," says dart-frog 
specialist Kyle Summers of East Carolina University in Greenville, N.C. As both 
groups of frogs have evolved to accumulate toxins, they've also been freed to 
explore pools, flirt, and fight in daylight.


