Ancient tree rings reveal past climate: Science News Online, March 31, 2001

 Ancient tree rings reveal past climate

 Linda Wang

 Fifty millennia ago, volcanic ash and mud buried a forest of conifers along a 
Pacific shoreline in what is now southern Chile. In 1960, an earthquake 
loosened these sediments, and erosion then exposed the long-entombed trees. 
Now, by examining the tree rings of the remaining stumps, an international team 
of scientists has reconstructed the earliest year-to-year record yet of climate 
variation.

 The stumps of the tree species Fitzroya cupressoides are roughly 50,000 years 
old, says lead scientist Fidel A. Roig of the Laboratory of Dendrochronology at 
IANIGLA-CONICET, an earth-sciences research center in Mendoza, Argentina. Roig 
notes that there's a virtual forest of these stumps, which are still woody and 
well preserved.

 Data from these trees "provides a year-by-year indication of general climate 
variability for a period before there was anything even approaching that sort 
of resolution," says research team member Keith R. Briffa of the University of 
East Anglia in Norwich, England.

 Scientists have looked at past climate patterns-some going back hundreds of 
thousands of years-by studying layers in ocean sediments and ice cores. But 
older layers often become too compressed to reveal year-to-year differences, 
explains team member Hakan Grudd of Stockholm University.

 However, using annual growth-ring patterns in trees, some researchers have 
inferred temperatures dating back about 10,000 years, or to the end of the last 
ice age. More ancient records have been difficult to re-create because the 
trees needed for such studies have either rotted away or been destroyed by 
glaciers, according to the researchers.

 In the new analysis, which appears in the March 29 Nature, Roig and his 
coworkers took cross sections of 28 of the ancient stumps and measured the 
width of each tree ring. By averaging the data, they produced a growth record 
of the 1,229 years before the trees were buried, the researchers say. They then 
developed a similar chronology for modern F. cupressoides trees growing nearby.

 The team discovered strikingly similar growth-ring patterns in both 
chronologies, indicating that climate patterns 50,000 years ago resemble those 
of roughly the past 1,000 years, says Briffa. For instance, the researchers 
found patterns in the ancient trees that match year-to-year changes in the 
modern trees due to El Nino, the periodic spike in tropical Pacific Ocean 
temperatures that dramatically affects the weather.

 If the same factors that affected climate 50 millennia ago remain operative 
today, then it's likely that those factors will determine the climate in the 
coming millennia, says Gordon C. Jacoby, a dendrochronologist at the 
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University in Palisades, N.Y. This 
could be helpful information for researchers trying to model future climate 
conditions, he adds.

 Connie A. Woodhouse, a paleoclimatologist at the National Geophysical Data 
Center in Boulder, Colo., cautions that the new data provide only a "snapshot" 
of an ancient climate. She says she hopes researchers will uncover more trees 
that can bridge the gap between old and new climate records.


