A comet's odd orbit hints at hidden planet: Science News Online, April 7, 2001

 A comet's odd orbit hints at hidden planet

 Ron Cowen

 Far beyond the solar system's nine known planets, a body as massive as Mars 
may once have been part of our planetary system-and it might still be there.

 Although the proposed planet would lie too far away to be seen from Earth, its 
gravitational tug could account for the oddball orbit of a large comet spotted 
in the outer solar system a year ago.

 Known as 2000 CR105, the comet moves about the sun in a much more elongated 
pathway than originally thought, astronomers now find. Observations over the 
past year by Brett Gladman of the Observatoire de la Cote d'Azur in Nice, 
France, and his colleagues show that the comet's orbit takes it further than 
200 astronomical units (AU) from the sun and as close as 44 AU. One AU equals 
the Earth-sun distance of about 150 million kilometers.

 Such an oblong orbit is usually a sign that an object has come under the 
gravitational influence of a massive body. But 2000 CR105, which may be an 
escapee from the distant reservoir of comets known as the Kuiper belt, never 
gets anywhere near any of the solar system's familiar team of nine planets. 
Even at its closest approach to the sun, the approximately 400-km-wide ball of 
ice comes no closer than 14 AU to Neptune, the nearest known candidate for a 
significant gravitational interaction.

 The astronomers concede that feeble and random pushes from Neptune could have 
slowly nudged 2000 CR105 into its current orbit. However, preliminary analysis 
suggests this scenario isn't likely, note Gladman, Matthew Holman of the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., and their 
collaborators.

 In an article the researchers recently posted on the Internet 
(0103435>http://arXiv.org/ abs/astro-ph/0103435), they suggest that a massive 
body lurking among the tiny, frozen residents of the Kuiper belt could have 
been the culprit.

 That object could have been Neptune itself. According to one theory, Neptune 
and Uranus first formed between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn and were then 
flung out to greater distances from the sun.

 If that kick propelled Neptune into the Kuiper belt before the planet settled 
into its current nearly circular orbit, its gravity could have caused the 
orbits of several objects like 2000 CR105 to stretch into elongated 
trajectories.

 Alternatively, the comet's orbit could be the handiwork of an as-yet-unseen 
planet whose mass lies somewhere between that of Earth's moon and Mars, the 
researchers say. It's likely that such an object would have coalesced in the 
outer solar system from the same debris that formed Neptune, Uranus, and the 
cores of Jupiter and Saturn, Holman notes.

 There's only a 1 percent chance that a planet could have survived in the 
Kuiper belt or its surroundings over the 4.5-billion-year age of the solar 
system, says Holman. If the planet found a secluded nook of the belt, however, 
it could remain intact today.

 If the proposed planet is as massive as Mars, it would have to lie some 200 AU 
from the sun-about 7 times Neptune's distance-Holman calculates. Were it 
closer, observers would have spotted it.

 A planet lurking in the Kuiper belt now or in the past might also explain why 
many members of the belt have orbits that angle away from the plane in which 
the nine known planets orbit the sun.

"Undoubtedly, something [massive] knocked the hell out of the belt," says 
Harold F. Levison of the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colo. "The 
question is whether it's there now."

 The stability of the orbit of 2000 CR105 suggests that any planet that 
influenced the comet's path has long since departed. If astronomers find a 
family of objects similar to 2000 CR105, the nature of their orbits could 
indicate whether the hidden planet is in fact still there, Levison says.


