Oceans of Electricity: Science News Online, April 14, 2001

 Oceans of Electricity

 New technologies convert the motion of waves into watts

 Peter Weiss

 When the steel shell called Osprey confronted the sea, it was David facing 
Goliath. This time, Goliath won.

 Osprey was an experiment in renewable energy production that challenged the 
power of the sea in 1995. A 750-metric ton structure the size of a small 
apartment house, it was designed to squat on the seabed, half submerged in 14 
meters of water. Placed 100 m from shore at Dounreay, Scotland, it was to 
convert the energy in the waves striking it into electricity. This David was 
supposed to shrug off the worst that the oceanic Goliath could throw at it and 
keep powering the lights of Dounreay with a steady stream of environmentally 
"green" electricity.

 Instead, Goliath caught David off guard before the challenger could even take 
a stand. One day in early August, before the construction crew had finished 
installing Osprey, huge waves rolled in and smashed open the structure's giant 
ballast tanks. Although Osprey's builders had time to rescue valuable 
equipment, the sea eventually tore the device apart.

"It was not the best day I've had," recalls Allan Thomson, head of the company 
that built Osprey. "But we learned a lot from it," he maintains.

 For instance, they learned that they had better go ashore to build their next 
wave-power plant-which they did. Now Thomson and his colleagues at Wavegen, a 
company in Inverness, Scotland, are celebrating. In November, they commissioned 
as the world's first commercial wave-power station a device they built into the 
rocky west coast of the Scottish island Islay. It generates a peak power of 500 
kilowatts (kW), enough to run about 400 island homes.

 The opening of the plant, named Limpet, stems from a dream that dates back at 
least 2 centuries. That's when two French inventors filed the first known 
patent for a scheme to harness ocean waves to run a machine. Even Thomson and 
others at Wavegen admit, however, that the small power plant they've built is 
far from the ultimate realization of that dream.

 Indeed, wave-power developers worldwide are devising many potentially more 
effective technologies that they anticipate could compete with other power 
sources and contribute to more electric grids within the next few years. 
Ironically, these innovations in renewable energy build upon the achievements 
of a decidedly nonrenewable branch of the energy business: offshore oil and gas 
drilling.

 If the spin-offs from that industry had been available to wave-power 
researchers in the 1970s, ocean power plants might already be common. Without 
such a head start, however, Stephen Salter of the University of Edinburgh and 
other researchers, mainly in the United Kingdom, devoted about a decade to the 
goal of building large-scale, 2,000-megawatt wave-energy plants. The collapse 
of that program-whether because of inadequate support or overly ambitious 
goals-left wave energy with a credibility problem and scared off investors. 
Now, wave energy is riding a new surge.

 Wave energy

 Waves are ultimately a form of solar energy. The sun heats up Earth's surface, 
causing winds that, in turn, drive waves. The best wave-energy regions tend to 
be on seacoasts at the receiving end of waves driven by the wind across long 
fetches of water. As the waves travel-say across the North Atlantic to the west 
coasts of Europe-the winds continually pump energy into them. By the time the 
waves hit the coast, they're brimming with power.

 Wave-energy specialists have estimated the power content of waves off coasts 
all over the world. They rank the areas in terms of their waves' average rate 
of energy production, or power, in kilowatts per meter (kW/m) of shoreline. The 
ratings of the most power-rich areas, such as the west coasts of Scotland, 
northern Canada, the U.S. northwest and northeast seaboards, southern Africa, 
and Australia, range from about 40 to 70 kW/m. A typical American home, without 
electric heat, draws around 1 kilowatt on average and 3 to 4 kW during peak 
summertime use, says Steve Rosenstock of the Edison Electric Institute in 
Washington, D.C.

 Wave-power-poor areas include the coasts of the southeastern United States, 
northeastern South America, and southern Japan, where waves deliver only 10 to 
20 kW/m. Power ratings vary seasonally. The most potent winds and waves appear 
in winter, when greater atmospheric temperature differences-and therefore 
greater atmospheric pressure differences-give rise to stronger winds.

 Although variable from place to place and season to season, ocean waves stack 
up globally as a vast energy reserve. Renewable-energy-markets analyst Thomas 
W. Thorpe of AEA Technology in Harwell, England, has calculated wave power's 
potential worldwide contribution. If the technologies being developed today 
become widely used, wave energy could amount to nearly 16 percent of the 
world's current total electricity output, says Thorpe.

 That would be nearly 2,000 terawatt-hours (TWh) annually, or as much as the 
world's large-scale hydroelectric plants produce, Thorpe reported last December 
at the Fourth European Wave Energy Conference in Aalborg, Denmark.

 Helping spur the technology toward those goals, Europe's central government, 
the European Union, is aiming to double to 12 percent by 2010 the contribution 
of renewable sources, including waves, to the region's energy supply. 
Meanwhile, the United Kingdom recently passed legislation covering the same 
time period. It will require power companies to boost the renewable portion of 
their total power output to 10 percent.

 On this side of the Atlantic, however, the U.S. government has made little 
effort to develop wave energy, despite what some researchers say is great 
potential for the technology along some U.S. coasts. For instance, the 
Department of Energy sponsors no wave-power research, according to spokesman 
Christopher Powers of the agency's National Renewable Energy Laboratory in 
Golden, Colo.

 Wave harnessers

 To convert wave action into useful energy, a power plant must provide a way 
for the waves to drive something-such as turbine blades or pistons. The 
apparatus might briefly store the waves' energy, or it might apply the waves' 
momentum immediately to some mechanism.

 The first wave-power patent was for a 1799 proposal by a Parisian named 
Monsieur Girard and his son to use direct mechanical action to drive pumps, 
saws, mills, or other heavy machinery. These French inventors envisioned 
attaching heavy wooden beams to docked battleships and taking advantage of 
their vessels' bobbing to operate the beams as levers against fulcrums on 
shore. However, there is no evidence that the men ever carried out their plan.

 Nowadays, a wave harnesser's objective is typically electricity from a 
generator. Within such a device, the converted wave momentum spins coils of 
wire inside ring-shaped magnets to produce a current.

 Wavegen's Limpet plant, as well as prototypes built in Scotland, Australia, 
India, China, and elsewhere during the past 15 years, use what's known as an 
oscillating water column to turn wave energy into electricity. Engineers are 
preparing to power up soon, another 400-kW oscillating-water-column plant 
sponsored mainly by the European Union on Pico Island in Portugal's Azores. It 
is expected to supply some 10 percent of the electricity for the island's 
15,000 inhabitants.

 These onshore systems trap waves in a partially submerged, artificial cavern 
with a hole in one wall above the water line. The hole leads to an air-driven 
turbine. As the crest of a wave enters the cavern, it raises the water level 
quickly, pushing the air above the wave through the hole and spinning the 
turbine's blades. The turbines are designed to turn the same way no matter 
which way the air flows through them, so the machine also runs as the 
retreating wave sucks air back into the chamber. When the waves become too 
rough, a valve closes to protect the turbine.

 Although Limpet now supplies power to the local electric grid, it can't yet 
beat the prices of other renewable or conventional energy sources. Wavegen 
expects to generate a kilowatt-hour of electricity for 7 to 8 cents, whereas 
fossil fuel and nuclear plants yield the same energy for about 5 cents. 
Nonetheless, wave-energy developers take heart that their projected generation 
cost has already dropped to about half of what it was for wind energy at an 
equivalent developmental stage.

 For now, being onshore is an advantage for wave-power generators. The relative 
simplicity of onshore plants, compared with devices meant for deep water, is 
helping researchers and builders get the Limpet and the Azores plants up and 
running. However, such shoreline plants also face an insurmountable obstacle 
that will soon end their dominance within the field, wave-power developers say.

 No matter how potent the waves off a particular stretch of coast may be, "in 
shallower water, the wave energy is absorbed by the seabed," notes George W. 
Taylor of Ocean Power Technologies in Pennington, N.J. "By the time a wave is 
breaking on a reef or sand bar, it has lost most of its energy."

 Taylor is cofounder of a company that is creating buoys that generate 20 kW of 
electricity each for recharging U.S. Navy robot submarines. The devices, 
developed with funding from the Office of Naval Research, could also supply 
electricity to offshore desalination plants or, in arrays, produce municipal 
power-the company's main goal, he says. The buoys generate additional power 
from streamers of an innovative piezoelectric plastic (SN: 11/18/89, p. 328). A 
piezoelectric substance creates electricity when deformed by an outside force. 
The streamers hang below the waves, and their flexing captures energy from the 
passing tidal currents, says Taylor.

 The optimal location for harvesting wave energy is in water about 50 to 100 m 
deep, says wave-power developer Richard Yemm of Ocean Power Delivery Systems in 
Edinburgh. There, waves retain nearly all the power they've gathered while 
crossing the ocean, but the sea bottom is near enough that anchoring wave-power 
equipment is easier and cheaper than in deeper waters.

 Yemm's company is developing a sinuous device made up of interconnected 
floating tanks meant to wriggle along the wave tops. Named Pelamis after a 
genus of sea snakes, the 120-m-long sea serpent pushes pistons with its flexing 
motion. That action pressurizes oil, which then runs electric generators.

 As a former wind-power developer, Yemm argues that placing a wave-power plant 
onshore is akin to "building a wind turbine behind a tall building."

 Offshore devices

 The names of many of the offshore devices now being developed sound as jolly 
as carnival rides. There are the Mighty Whale, Wave Dragon, Archimedes Wave 
Swing, WavePlane, Pendulor, and Salter's Nodding Duck, to name just a few.

 In addition to Pelamis and Taylor's buoy, the menagerie includes a bewildering 
variety of designs using floating tanks-singly or in groups. The devices bob, 
flex, or wiggle on or under the water's surface.

 However, as the fate of the Osprey illustrates, even wading a little way out 
to sea may prove to be anything but fun. Offshore wave-power plants are 
operating in "a very hostile environment," says Antonio F. de O. Falcao of the 
Lisbon Institute of Technology in Portugal.

 Although offshore is the way to go, he says, "you have problems of getting 
electricity to land and also of anchoring. In stormy weather, you have very 
large forces, and you have the problem of maintenance if you are very far from 
the coast, especially in winter." There's also the tendency of seawater to 
short-circuit and corrode equipment. Falcao is the leader of the Pico Island 
project.

 Offshore-wave-power developers are moving ahead with some trepidation. Yemm, 
for instance, is concerned that one of the new offshore devices might pull 
loose of its moorings and drift into a ship's path or wash up on a beach. The 
demise of the Osprey didn't help wave-power public relations. "We can't afford 
a screw-up," says Salter.

 Fortunately, wave-power developers say, many solutions to the problems Falcao 
notes already exist, thanks to the offshore oil and gas industry. The 
fossil-fuel industry has developed better ways to anchor equipment, more 
durable and corrosion-resistant materials, and improved cables for carrying 
electric current underwater. For instance, electrical connectors that are 
easily mated and unmated underwater are proving vital to modular wave-energy 
designs. Because of the know-how and technology of oil-rig builders, says Yemm, 
"wave energy is now [becoming] not only practical but inevitable."

--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . . . ..


