Boosting Boron Could Be Healthful: Science News Online, April 14, 2001

 Boosting Boron Could Be Healthful

 Janet Raloff

 It's hard to ignore the body's need for major nutrients-proteins, vitamins, 
and even fats-but most people give no thought to the diet's large cast of bit 
players. These include trace minerals, such as boron. Last week, scientists 
reported why U.S. diets tend to have relatively little boron and described 
health risks-including cancer-that may stem from overlooking this micronutrient.

 Several years ago, Charlene J. Rainey of Food Research in Costa Mesa, Calif., 
conducted a six-nation comparison of dietary boron for the World Health 
Organization. Consuming a little over 1 milligram per day, U.S. adults took in 
7 to 10 percent less boron, on average, than did people in Britain and Egypt 
and between 32 and 41 percent less than Germans, Kenyans, and Mexicans did.

 Zuo-Fen Zhang of the School of Public Health at the University of California, 
Los Angeles was curious about whether the low U.S. boron intake might have 
health effects. He decided to mine data collected from thousands of men and 
women during a National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).

 Zhang's team grouped participants according to the amount of boron in their 
diets. Key to discerning that amount, explains team member Curtis D. Eckhert of 
UCLA, was Rainey's new database on boron in foods. The team applied it to what 
each NHANES participant had eaten over a 24-hour period.

 What "unexpectedly popped out" of the analysis, Eckhert says, was a finding 
that risk of prostate cancer falls as boron intake climbs.

 By comparing the diets of 7,651 older men without prostate cancer with the 
diets of 76 men who had the disease, a strong dose-response trend emerged, 
Zhang reported last week in Orlando, Fla., at Experimental Biology 2001. The 
prostate cancer risk for men eating the most boron, at least 1.8 mg/day, was 
less than a third that of men eating under 0.9 mg/day.

 Relatively high quantities of boron offered no protection against other 
malignancies or chronic diseases tracked, "so the association we observed is 
very specific to prostate cancer," Zhang says.

 At the same meeting, Curtiss D. Hunt and Joseph P. Idso of the Agriculture 
Department's Human Nutrition Research Center in Grand Forks, N.D., offered 
animal data showing immune benefits from diets supplying the equivalent of 2 mg 
of boron in a person's diet per day.

"Inflammation is important in fighting many diseases," Hunt says. But 
uncontrolled, it "can trigger an immune chain reaction." In autoimmune 
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, the body can't shut down such a chain 
reaction, which leads to tissue destruction.

 Hunt's group had shown that rats were more susceptible to laboratory-induced 
autoimmunity if their diets were low in boron. The new data show that adequate 
boron prevents the activation of T-suppressor and T-helper cells, both of which 
are important in autoimmune chain reactions. Boron "appears to keep them in a 
[background] state," says Hunt.

 His group has begun a 6-month study of the effect of dietary boron on pain in 
people with rheumatoid arthritis. During half the trial, people with the 
disease will eat 2 mg boron/day, an amount routinely consumed by only about 5 
percent of U.S. adults. For the other half of the trial, participants will eat 
0.2 mg/day.

 Because large amounts of boron can be toxic, Hunt recommends aiming for no 
more than 2 to 3 mg/day. A glass of wine, a handful of peanuts, and a serving 
of noncitrus fruit-each offers close to 0.5 mg boron, Rainey says. In fact, her 
data show, it's because U.S. adults eat so few fruits and nuts that their boron 
intake tends to be low.


