A Dark Force in the Universe: Science News Online, April 7, 2001

 A Dark Force in the Universe

 Scientists try to determine what's revving up the cosmos

 Ron Cowen

 Three years ago, observations of distant, exploding stars blew to smithereens 
some of astronomers' most cherished ideas about the universe. To piece together 
an updated theory, they're now thinking dark thoughts about what sort of 
mystery force may be contorting the cosmos.

 According to the standard view of cosmology, the once infinitesimal universe 
has ballooned in volume ever since its fiery birth in the Big Bang, but the 
mutual gravitational tug of all the matter in the cosmos has gradually slowed 
that expansion.

 In 1998, however, scientists reported that a group of distant supernovas were 
dimmer, and therefore farther from Earth, than the standard theory indicated. 
It was as if, in the billion or so years it took for the light from these 
exploded stars to arrive at Earth, the space between the stars and our planet 
had stretched out more than expected. That would mean that cosmic expansion has 
somehow sped up, not slowed down. Recent evidence has only firmed up that 
bizarre result (SN: 3/31/01, p. 196).

 In 1929, Edwin P. Hubble discovered that distant galaxies are fleeing from one 
another as if the entire universe is swelling in size. Ever since, astronomers 
have been hoping to answer a key question: Will the expansion of the universe, 
slowed by gravity, go on forever, or will the cosmos eventually collapse into a 
Big Crunch?

 Despite decades of effort and countless studies devoted to the ballooning of 
the universe, the recent findings stunned astronomers. Few suspected that all 
along they were asking the wrong question.

"For 70 years, we've been trying to measure the rate at which the universe 
slows down. We finally do it, and we find out it's speeding up," says Michael 
S. Turner of the University of Chicago.

 An accelerated expansion would seem to contradict all common sense, says 
Andreas J. Albrecht of the University of California, Davis. Throw a ball into 
the sky, and after it reaches a certain height, it will come back down, he 
notes. Now imagine throwing another ball upward and finding that instead of it 
falling back down, it somehow keeps moving up faster and faster. For that to 
happen, there would have to be some force pushing upward on the ball strongly 
enough to overcome gravity's downward tug.

 Astronomers have come to believe that just such a force is stretching the very 
fabric of space.

 What is this mystery force?

 Cosmologists have proposed that it derives from dark energy-a substance whose 
properties and origin scientists have only begun to explore. At stake is more 
than just a better understanding of the fate of the universe: The very presence 
of dark energy may enable scientists to explain the fundamental forces of the 
universe and tease out the hidden connections among them.

 Says Albrecht: "This is the most exciting endeavor going on in physics right 
now."

 Dark matter

 Astronomers have dark imaginations. They're already obsessed with another 
phenomenon that they call dark matter, which is entirely separate from dark 
energy. Dark matter is the invisible material that theorists say makes up 95 
percent of the mass of the universe. It gathers into vast clumps and exerts an 
ordinary gravitational tug on its surroundings. The proposed dark energy, in 
contrast, would inhabit empty space and would be evenly distributed throughout 
the universe.

 Moreover, dark energy would exert a repulsive force-what might be called 
antigravity. More accurately, dark energy would be the flip side of ordinary 
gravity because it would possess a strange property called negative pressure. 
Something with negative pressure resists being stretched, as a coiled spring 
does: Pull on the spring and it pulls back.

 To understand what pressure-negative or positive-has to do with gravity, take 
a look at Einstein's general theory of relativity. According to that theory, 
matter isn't the only source of gravity. There are two other sources: energy, 
which is interchangeable with mass according to Einstein's famous equation E = 
mc2, and pressure.

 A familiar example of pressure is an inflated balloon. In this everyday 
experience, pressure within the balloon has a negligible effect on its gravity. 
At physical extremes, however, pressure can dominate. When that occurs, some 
strange things can happen, such as the formation of black holes.

 Pressure prevents a star as massive as the sun from imploding under its own 
gravity. That's because the radiation emitted by the star exerts a gaslike 
pressure outward.

 Stars more massive than the sun must exert an even stronger pressure to 
counterbalance their gravity. For a star greater than about four times the 
sun's mass, the counterbalancing pressure becomes as strong as the density of 
the star. When this happens, pressure contributes as much as mass does to the 
gravitational force, Einstein's theory says. In effect, the gravitational pull 
inward drastically increases.

 The more the star contracts, the greater its pressure and density, and thus 
the stronger the gravity. Unable to resist, the star undergoes a runaway 
collapse, and its gravity becoming so strong that not even light can escape its 
grasp. A black hole is born.

 The contribution of pressure is "an aspect of gravity that was there all 
along," notes Turner. He says that anyone who accepts the reality of black 
holes has implicitly accepted the notion that pressure can be a key source of 
gravity.

 According to Einstein's theory, pressure has another mind-bending property: It 
can be negative. An object having negative pressure resists being stretched. 
"Think of negative pressure as silly putty or a rubber sheet. The atoms don't 
want to be drawn apart; there's a force that pulls them together," says Turner. 
Negative pressure, he notes, would impart a springiness or elasticity to space.

 It's counterintuitive to think that a material such as rubber, which draws 
itself inward when stretched, could push objects outward. Yet if dark energy's 
antigravity effect-it's ability to exert negative pressure-were strong enough, 
it could swing the gravity meter from the plus side to the minus side, 
Einstein's theory dictates.

 Gravity normally pulls matter together. Instead of pulling, dark energy would 
cause gravity to push. Instead of tugging and slowing the expansion of the 
universe, dark energy would rev it up.

 As bizarre as dark energy may seem, it's the only theory to explain the 
accelerating cosmos that is compatible with Einstein's general theory of 
relativity, says Turner.

 Dark energy

 In its simplest version, dark energy would be a true constant, equally 
distributed throughout the universe and continuously exerting the same amount 
of force as the universe expands. In 1917, Einstein posited a version of this 
energy, which he called the cosmological constant. Physicists have sporadically 
been returning to that idea ever since. Because the cosmological constant would 
exist even in the absence of matter or radiation, its origins might lie within 
empty space itself.

 This property could tie dark energy to one of the stranger properties of 
quantum mechanics. Quantum theory dictates that empty space-what physicists 
call the vacuum-seethes with energy as pairs of particles and antiparticles pop 
in and out of existence.

 This vacuum energy has some subtle but measurable effects. For example, it 
shifts the energy levels of atoms slightly and exerts a force between closely 
spaced metal plates (SN: 2/10/01, p. 86). In 1967, the Russian astrophysicist 
Yakov B. Zeldovich showed that vacuum energy has an intriguing property. The 
energy associated with this nothingness has negative pressure.

 That means vacuum energy could push galaxies apart at ever-increasing speeds, 
making it an ideal candidate for being the dark energy.

 Alas, there appears to be a huge problem. Calculations reveal that the energy 
stored in the vacuum is 120 orders of magnitude larger than the dark energy 
that cosmologists are positing.

"If the vacuum energy density really is so enormous, it would cause an 
exponentially rapid expansion of the universe that would rip apart all the 
electrostatic and nuclear bonds that hold atoms and molecules together," note 
Paul J. Steinhardt of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia and Robert 
R. Caldwell of Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., in a recent review article. 
"There would be no galaxies, stars, or life."

 It's likely, physicists admit, that they don't really know how to calculate 
vacuum energy. That complication may have to do with their limited knowledge 
about the nature of gravity. Einstein's theory holds that gravity curves empty 
space-the vacuum-but scientists don't yet know how gravity does so on a quantum 
mechanical scale.

 Thus, scientists have yet to unify quantum theory with gravity. Some hold out 
the hope that when they do, they'll miraculously find that the 120 orders of 
magnitude drop to zero-almost. There might be just enough vacuum energy left 
over to account for the amount harbored by dark energy.

 Many researchers think that's a forlorn hope, however. They believe that a 
better understanding of the vacuum energy will reveal it to be exactly zero.

 In that case, dark energy would have to be something else. Several theorists 
believe this something else blankets the universe and varies with time and 
place. Steinhardt, his University of Pennsylvania colleague Rahul Dave, and 
their collaborators call this variable form of dark energy "quintessence."

 Quintessence takes on a different form and strength depending on what time it 
is in the universe. Scientists have established that just after the Big Bang, 
high-energy radiation filled the universe and was the dominant form of energy. 
Matter contributed very little to the cosmic-energy budget. In that era, 
quintessence would have mimicked the properties of radiation, Steinhardt says. 
Like radiation, it would have exerted positive pressure.

 As the universe cooled and particles slowed, the energy balance shifted in 
favor of matter. Material started to clump together to form larger structures. 
Steinhardt proposes that at the onset of that era, some 50,000 years after the 
Big Bang, quintessence changed. As he and his colleagues see it, 
quintessence-dark energy-settled down to a fixed value and began exerting a 
negative pressure throughout the cosmos.

 In this vision, the dark-energy density initially paled in comparison with the 
density of matter. Gravity thus acted in its familiar fashion, slowing the 
expansion of the universe. But as the volume of the universe continued to 
expand, its matter density decreased. As matter density dwindled, the energy 
density associated with quintessence remained constant-or nearly so. 
Consequently, quintessence became gravity's new boss. The expansion of the 
cosmos would then have gone into overdrive.

 It's no coincidence that humans are living at a time when it's possible to 
observe cosmic acceleration, says Steinhardt. The same shift in the mass-energy 
balance that gave rise to stars, galaxies, planets, and life also transformed 
quintessence into a cosmic accelerator.

 Steinhardt admits he hasn't come up with any fundamental explanation of why 
the quintessence field would change in this way. The answer, he says, could lie 
in new physics, perhaps in a new elementary particle implied by quintessence. 
The explanation could also provide a hint about how physicists might tackle one 
of their thorniest and most intriguing challenges-explaining the existence of 
the fundamental forces and how they intertwine. Quintessence, or dark energy, 
could be a linchpin that holds together both old and new physics.

 In a version of quintessence proposed by Albrecht and his University of 
California, Davis colleague Constantinos Skordis, the repulsive force may come 
from other, unseen dimensions or even from other universes beyond our own. That 
dovetails with a theory from elementary particle physics, which posits that our 
three dimensions plus time are but a tiny part of a much broader, 
multidimensional canvas.

 The extra dimensions wouldn't have a direct influence on our own 
four-dimensional space-time. But because gravity exerts itself by distorting 
space, the gravitational field associated with the extra dimensions might 
affect our own. Albrecht suggests that gravity's ability to repel as well as 
attract could stem from the existence of those other dimensions. Those 
dimensions in turn could provide additional hints about another deep puzzle of 
physics-the quantum nature of gravity, he notes.

 Albrecht says his theory offers another advantage. It describes quintessence 
by using only simple constants of nature, such as the speed of light, the 
gravitational constant, and Planck's constant of quantum mechanics. The 
quintessence field that he and Skordis construct from these constants could 
indeed have become dominant long after the Big Bang, prompting the current 
phase of accelerated expansion.

 Albrecht acknowledges the ad hoc nature of quintessence theories, which are 
still in their infancy. "We each have our own angles," he notes. "They all have 
a lot of weaknesses."

 Cosmic expansion

 Several studies now in the works may enable astronomers to confirm whether or 
not cosmic expansion is accelerating. Moreover, the studies could also reveal 
which of the two proposed forms of dark energy-quintessence or vacuum energy-is 
driving that acceleration. Astronomers think they can distinguish the two types 
of dark energy because quintessence would give the universe a smaller push.

 If vacuum energy really is the dark energy, then the universe will expand 
forever at an accelerating rate.

 If quintessence proves correct, then the amount by which space has stretched 
over the past few billion years is less than if dark energy is the vacuum 
energy. Because the volume of the cosmos is smaller in a quintessential 
universe, supernovas up to a few billion light-years from Earth would appear 
somewhat brighter and fewer galaxies would exist within a given span of cosmic 
time. Under the quintessence theory, the dark energy varies in time and space, 
so determining the fate of the cosmos isn't so straightforward.

 Indeed, dark energy might even be a fleeting phenomenon that gives the 
universe an extra kick for several billion years and then disappears. In that 
case, it could resemble an extended replay of inflation-the brief, mysterious 
epoch of hyperexpansion that is thought to have occurred during the earliest 
moments of the universe (SN: 12/19 & 26/98, p. 392).

 Dark energy "is involved in very fundamental issues," says Turner. "This could 
be a key to understanding the forces of nature, including the quantum theory of 
gravity."

 Strange as dark energy seems, Turner notes, "I guarantee you it's not going 
away."


