New device opens next chapter on E-paper: Science News Online, April 28, 2001

 New device opens next chapter on E-paper

 Jessica Gorman

 Imagine folding up today's newspaper only to unroll it tomorrow and find 
tomorrow's news. Now, researchers have made a plastic electronic material that 
could make such fantasies come true.

 With the debut of electronic ink a few years ago, researchers took a step 
toward meshing the data-handling power of electronics with the flexibility and 
convenience of paper. Such inks, developed independently by teams at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Cambridge and Xerox's Palo Alto 
Research Center in California, contain particles that change a pixel's 
color-say, from black to white-when exposed to an electric current (SN: 
6/20/98, p. 396).

 Among the early uses of electronic ink were large, low-resolution store signs 
for promoting sales. But creating paper-thin, high-resolution displays for 
electronic newspapers, books, and even cereal boxes requires circuitry much 
more sophisticated than that needed for store displays, says John A. Rogers of 
Lucent Technologies in Murray Hill, N.J.

 In the April 24 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Rogers' team 
from Lucent and E Ink Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., reports its use of simple, 
inexpensive printing techniques to make the most capable E-paper yet.

"I think this is extraordinarily significant," comments Joseph Jacobson, who 
led the development of MIT's electronic ink. "The real dream has been to have 
electronic newspapers or electronic books that are manufactured in the way that 
you would manufacture a regular book. . . . This is the first time that anybody 
has manufactured all of the elements-meaning both the electronics and the 
display itself-by printing."

 Conventional methods for patterning circuitry onto silicon wafers don't work 
well for creating complex circuits on flexible plastic. Instead, Rogers' group 
used a technique called microcontact printing to create arrays of transistors 
that control the E-paper's pixels.

 The first step is to etch a desired circuitry pattern into a master stamp, 
which the scientists then use to make the several reusable plastic stamps 
required for production of the E-paper. Next, these stamps are "inked" with a 
sulfur-containing organic compound, Rogers explains.

 The researchers then press a stamp onto a plastic sheet coated in gold. The 
transferred organic ink shields part of the gold film from an etching process 
that removes the exposed gold. The researchers then remove the organic ink and 
add a carbon-based semiconductor to the remaining gold. The semiconductor thus 
creates an array of transistors in the pattern that was originally etched onto 
the master stamp.

 To Rogers, E-paper's most powerful impact could be to supplant paper 
newspapers and books. "You could imagine making an electronic version of a 
newspaper that would consist of a single sheet of this electronic paper 
connected to the wireless Internet," says Rogers. "You could download 
information content, view it, interact with it, and roll it up or fold it in 
the same way you can a conventional newspaper, but you don't have all the waste 
associated with a newspaper."


