Back from the Brink: Science News Online, April 28, 2001

 Back from the Brink

 Psychological treatments for schizophrenia attract renewed interest

 Bruce Bower

 Leslie Greenblat learned she had schizophrenia long after she had begun to 
hear, in her words, "thought-voices." She heard them all the time, whether she 
was driving, reading, shopping, or talking with friends. The disembodied 
remarks seemed to come from someone whose intimidating and demoralizing 
pronouncements couldn't be ignored.

 Greenblat's condition first landed her in a psychiatric hospital in 1990. Over 
the next 3 years, the young woman was briefly hospitalized another dozen times. 
After each discharge, she took antipsychotic medications for a few months until 
the thought-voices receded. Invariably, however, they returned.

 Then Greenblat began psychotherapy with psychiatrist Ann Alaoglu at Chestnut 
Lodge, a private psychiatric hospital in Rockville, Md. Although trained as a 
psychoanalyst, Alaoglu didn't have Greenblat lie on a couch and dissect her 
childhood. Instead, Alaoglu provided a relaxed environment and gentle, 
straightforward questioning to convince Greenblat that she finally had found a 
partner in healing. In that atmosphere, the cacophony of thought-voices started 
to ease.

"Before I met her, I didn't trust doctors," Greenblat wrote in an article last 
year for Schizophrenia Bulletin (Vol. 26, No. 1) . "Doctors doped me up, locked 
me in, and were generally distant. Dr. Alaoglu . . . was willing to put herself 
on the line, sharing with me her sense of my progress and lapses."

 Alaoglu's methods hardly represent the norm for schizophrenia treatment. But 
her success with Greenblat and other patients helps explain why the search for 
effective treatments has expanded beyond medication in the past decade. 
Researchers are increasingly exploring ways to combine psychological and social 
approaches with antipsychotic drugs, especially in the early stages of the 
disorder. Techniques in the spotlight include family-education sessions, job 
training, social rehabilitation, and several forms of one-on-one psychotherapy.

 Hallucinated voices

 Consider Alaoglu's approach. She regards hallucinated voices as having meaning 
for the person who hears them. Unlike Greenblat's previous doctors, Alaoglu 
offered Greenblat ways to make sense of the voices.

 Before a flight home, for instance, Greenblat once told Alaoglu that the trees 
were warning her not to go. "You seem a bit nervous about your trip," the 
therapist responded.

 Such observations "gave me a sense of how I was communicating," Greenblat 
says. She was often conveying her feelings indirectly, through personally 
significant symbols that seemed bizarre to others. Such realizations, Greenblat 
says, also helped her develop intimate and safe contact with Alaoglu, easing 
schizophrenia's terrifying isolation and stigma.

"Psychotherapy doesn't fix schizophrenia," Alaoglu says. "But it can help to 
improve a person's functioning."

 As Greenblat's condition improved over the next few years, she collaborated 
with her psychiatrist in adjusting her doses of antipsychotic medication. She 
also participated in a vocational rehabilitation program.

 Greenblat, now in her 30s, is studying for a master's in health science. The 
rigors of school sometimes cajole her thought-voices out of hiding, but she 
pulls through these rough times with the help of family members, friends, and 
Alaoglu.

 No quick fixes

 Greenblat's ongoing struggle illustrates a bitter truth: There are no quick 
fixes for schizophrenia. It's a severe mental disorder that draws most of its 
public attention in rare cases when a sufferer commits an act of violence.

 Over the past century, schizophrenia treatments have included isolation in 
pastoral settings or hospital wards, intensive psychotherapy, brain surgery, 
dialysis, and a growing number of medications. The fiercest theoretical battle 
has pitted psychoanalysts-some of whom have regarded schizophrenia as a product 
of emotionally callous parents-against biological psychiatrists-who view 
schizophrenia as a brain disease.

 Psychoanalysts and other psychotherapists now emphasize the need to build 
healing relationships in treating schizophrenia. More biologically oriented 
psychiatrists stress the use of antipsychotic drugs.

 Combining these approaches may take treatment to another level. "People aren't 
blaming families for schizophrenia anymore," says psychiatrist Courtenay 
Harding of Boston University. "But they're also starting to realize that a pill 
doesn't reclaim a life."

 Merely defining the disease has evoked a century of controversy. Increasingly, 
however, psychiatrists are agreeing on three general categories of symptoms 
known, respectively, as positive, disorganized, and negative. Still, many 
researchers suspect that there are different types of schizophrenia with 
different causes.

 Positive, or psychotic, symptoms include delusions, such as believing that 
secret agents are monitoring one's thoughts, and hallucinations, in which a 
person experiences imaginary but disturbing sights and sounds.

 Disorganized symptoms include confused thinking and bizarre speech and 
behavior, as well as inappropriate emotions, incoherent sentences, and wild 
gestures. Some schizophrenia sufferers also have difficulty interpreting 
everyday sights, sounds, and feelings.

 Negative symptoms include apathy, a lack of verbal and emotional expression, 
and an inability to hold down a job or interact with others.

 Most cases of schizophrenia-which afflicts 1 in 100 people-are diagnosed in 
young adults.

 Brains and genes

 The causes of schizophrenia remain unknown. In the past decade, researchers 
have sought to identify problems in brain structure and chemistry, as well as 
genetic mutations that underlie this mental disorder.

 The scientific emphasis on brains and genes has accompanied a growing clinical 
reliance on antipsychotic medications to treat schizophrenia. The first of 
these drugs, chlorpromazine, appeared in 1954. One major consequence of this in 
the 1960s was the mass release of schizophrenia patients from state mental 
hospitals, antipsychotic prescriptions in hand. However, few community-based 
mental-health centers materialized to offer treatment to supplement the drugs.

 A new wave of antipsychotic drugs has since raised expectations for improved 
schizophrenia treatment. Even for the roughly one-half of schizophrenia 
sufferers who clearly benefit from antipsychotic drugs, most face a long-term 
struggle with disabling symptoms and poor social skills, according to 
psychiatrist Juan R. Bustillo of the University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine in Albuquerque. These same people stand a good chance of sinking back 
into a full-blown psychotic state at some point, even if they dutifully take 
their medication, Bustillo adds.

 Combination therapies

 When drugs alone are not an answer, combination therapies of drugs and other 
treatments show promise, argue Bustillo and his colleagues in a review of 
recent schizophrenia-treatment research in the February American Journal of 
Psychiatry.

 Family therapy and so-called assertive community treatment show particular 
promise in preventing the return of psychotic symptoms and the need for 
hospitalization, Bustillo's group holds.

 In family therapy, teams of clinicians meet regularly with patients and their 
families. The primary goal here is to provide information about schizophrenia 
and ways to cope with it. Another critical goal is to reduce the tendency of 
family members to react to their schizophrenic relatives with expressions of 
exasperation and discouragement. These negative responses don't cause 
schizophrenia, but research has linked the social stress that comes with them 
to renewed bouts of psychosis.

 Assertive community treatment consists of caregivers meeting with patients and 
family members in their homes and providing practical advice on living 
independently with schizophrenia. These programs also give advice to 
schizophrenia patients on finding and keeping a job.

 A combination of these approaches substantially improves the quality of life 
for schizophrenia sufferers and their families, according to the research of 
psychiatrist William R. McFarlane of the Maine Medical Center in Portland.

 His approach employs teams of mental-health workers, each of which conducts 
educational sessions with groups of six to nine patients and their relatives. 
Families learn to help each other and get a big morale boost from expanded 
social contacts, McFarlane says. The addition of multifamily sessions to 
assertive community treatment improves the capability of schizophrenia 
sufferers to avoid sinking back into psychosis and to stay employed, at least 
over the 1-to-2-year periods studied so far.

 Individual psychotherapy

 Individual psychotherapy represents the most controversial form of 
schizophrenia treatment, at least in the United States. Fifty years ago, 
psychoanalysts were the primary purveyors of psychotherapy for all sorts of 
mental problems. Their attempts to cure schizophrenia by untangling family 
conflicts met with little success, however. To make matters worse, 
psychoanalysts left many parents feeling unjustly blamed as the cause of their 
children's schizophrenia.

 A set of treatment recommendations in 1998 from the Schizophrenia Patient 
Outcome Research Team (PORT), which was sponsored by the National Institute of 
Mental Health in Bethesda, Md., advised against using a "psychodynamic model" 
in psychotherapy with schizophrenia sufferers. In other words, it recommended 
to health-care professionals that they offer support without probing for 
ostensibly unconscious, family-related discord.

 A revision of the PORT guidelines will make major changes, says psychiatrist 
Anthony F. Lehman of the University of Maryland School of Medicine in 
Baltimore, who directs the project.

 Despite its marred reputation, psychoanalysis deserves consideration by the 
PORT revisers, asserts Brian Martindale, a psychiatrist in London, who conducts 
psychotherapy with schizophrenia sufferers. He says a psychoanalytic approach 
to individual and group psychotherapy helps in establishing a working 
relationship with these patients. Efforts to reclaim psychoanalysis as part of 
schizophrenia treatment often get the cold shoulder in the United States.

 Europeans currently conduct most of the research in this area. Updates on 
several treatment projects that include a psychoanalytic perspective appear in 
Psychosis: Psychological Approaches and Their Effectiveness (2000, B. 
Martindale et al., eds., Gaskell), a compendium published last year.

 The British government plans to finance 50 early intervention teams that will 
treat people soon after their first psychotic episodes, Martindale says. These 
teams will include clinicians trained in a psychoanalytic approach much like 
that employed by Alaoglu.

"The most essential requirements in psychosis therapy are persistence, honesty, 
and an ability to convey to the patient hope for a better future, even if it's 
a distant one," says psychiatrist Yrjo O. Alanen of the University of Turku, 
Finland. He has done psychotherapy with schizophrenia sufferers for 40 years.

 Alanen and his coworkers have organized schizophrenia-treatment teams in 
communities throughout Finland. These teams offer a variety of services based 
on a person's particular symptoms and circumstances. Treatments include 
individual and family therapy, vocational training, and antipsychotic 
medication.

 Among patients tracked for up to 8 years after entering treatment, about two- 
thirds remain free of psychotic symptoms and a majority hold down jobs.

 Young adults who first became psychotic as part of an identity crisis and had 
warm family ties at the time of their psychotic episode, have benefited mainly 
from psychoanalysis, Alanen says. These individuals did best without 
antipsychotic medication, he adds.

 Young people who became psychotic in the context of stormy family 
relationships and an unstable personality profited from drugs as well as family 
and individual therapy. Particularly severe cases of schizophrenia, in which 
people had become isolated and unable to maintain social contacts or to express 
emotions, required both medication and basic forms of rehabilitation.

 Bustillo's group sees potential in two other forms of individual psychotherapy 
for schizophrenia.

 One technique, called personal therapy, attempts to reduce patients' anguish 
by helping them recognize their own psychotic symptoms. In combination with 
medication, this technique has fostered social adjustment and reduced psychotic 
relapses among schizophrenia sufferers (SN: 11/8/97, p. 293). U.S. therapists 
have now expanded personal therapy to include computer and group exercises in 
abstract thinking and social communication.

 The second method that Bustillo deems potentially valuable is based on a 
treatment for depression called cognitive-behavior therapy. Given help in 
problem-solving and social-coping skills, patients with schizophrenia are 
encouraged to challenge their own psychotic beliefs and experiences and to 
consider more reasonable explanations for them.

 It's clear that a mix of psychological treatments and antipsychotic drugs 
constitutes the best medicine for schizophrenia, Lehman says. However, most 
schizophrenia sufferers can neither find nor afford community-based services 
and experienced psychotherapists.

 Nor will this situation change soon, Lehman says. To begin with, he notes, 
antipsychotic drugs generate huge profits for pharmaceutical companies. 
Aggressive marketing campaigns for these medications bombard psychiatrists, 
most of whom now get little medical school training in psychotherapy. What's 
more, drug prescriptions and brief office visits are easier on managed medical 
care's bottom line than are more complicated and expensive psychological 
treatments.

"Our system of care for people with schizophrenia is inadequate," says Harding. 
Over the long haul, integrated treatment provided by clinicians who maintain 
close ties to patients will save money and change lives for the better, she 
says.


