The Latest Pisces of an Evolutionary Puzzle: Science News Online, May 5, 2001

 The Latest Pisces of an Evolutionary Puzzle

 A fascinating fish that time hasn't forgotten

 Sid Perkins

 When Pieter C.R. Venter slipped beneath the waves off the northeastern coast 
of South Africa last October, he didn't expect to find biological gold. Venter, 
a patent attorney on vacation from Pretoria, was taking the final dive in a 
series leading to his deep-water scuba certification.

 The midafternoon sun shone brightly at the ocean surface, but little of that 
light filtered down to where Venter, his dive mate, and their instructor were 
exploring a cave-pocked canyon in the St. Lucia Marine Reserve. Near the end of 
the dive, at a depth of about 340 feet, Venter noticed a glowing eye in a 
nearby cave reflecting the beam of his underwater light. He swam over to 
investigate.

"We expected to see sea bass and grouper on the dive, so it took me about 6 
seconds to realize what I was looking at," he says. "It was a coelacanth," the 
mysterious, oddly ancient-looking fish that many people deem a living fossil. 
Venter remembered learning about the fish when he was in school

 Beneath an overhang, Venter saw three steely blue, lobe-finned fish-the 
largest was about 6 feet long, and the smallest measured about 3.5 feet.

"I was ecstatic, and I thought at first that I might have been hallucinating," 
he says. Breathing a highly compressed nitrogen-containing mixture of gases for 
extended periods sometimes convinces divers that they're seeing weird things, 
but Venter admits that a 6-foot-long coelacanth would have been an elaborate 
hallucination.

 He waved to his diving partner to come to see the fish, but because their 
underwater time was running out, the companion couldn't confirm the find before 
they began their ascent. Venter immediately began planning a follow-up 
expedition but almost as quickly had doubts about whether he had really seen a 
coelacanth.

 A month later, Venter returned to the scene, this time with three companions 
and two video cameras. The images they captured proved beyond a doubt that the 
coelacanth, once thought extinct for millions of years, still swims in the 
waters off South Africa.

 Fossil coelacanths

 Much of the intense scientific scrutiny of the coelacanth (pronounced 
"see-luh-kanth") and the public's fascination with it stems from the fish's 
possible evolutionary significance. Fossil coelacanths, which were first 
discovered in 1839, had an arrangement of bones in the fleshy portion of their 
fins that was similar to that in the limbs of modern land animals. For almost a 
century, paleontologists thought early coelacanths were close ancestors of the 
first vertebrates to walk on land.

 Therefore, it caused quite a stir when the first living coelacanth was hauled 
from the deep by a trawler based in East London, South Africa, in late December 
1938. This figure from the ancient fossil record was suddenly inhabiting the 
20th century.

 The coelacanth's stumpy, lobed fins; its large, rough scales; and the bony 
plates on its head all gave the white-blotched fish a distinctively primitive 
appearance. A museum curator in East London tried to retain the fish's internal 
organs for further study, but she couldn't find enough chemical preservative. 
The hot, humid conditions in the port town took their toll, and it was up to 
the local taxidermist to save what he could of the find.

 Another specimen

 Scientists immediately began looking for another specimen. They believed that 
the detailed anatomy and biology of the living coelacanth would shed light on 
its ancestors, says Peter L. Forey, a paleontologist at the Natural History 
Museum in London. Not another coelacanth was found, however, until 1952, when a 
fisherman in the Comoro Islands northwest of Madagascar hauled one up from a 
depth of about 550 feet.

 Since that time, scientists have documented catches of nearly 200 coelacanths 
worldwide and sightings of more than 100 others. Most have come from the Comoro 
Islands, but people have hooked or trawled a half-dozen or so further south, in 
the Mozambique Channel, which lies between Madagascar and the African mainland. 
In the late 1990s, two coelacanths were caught in Indonesia (SN: 9/26/98, p. 
196), and two others were sighted there.

 Most of the nearly 200 coelacanths taken in the Comoro Islands have been 
hauled up as by-catch. In other words, local anglers accidentally hooked the 
fish-known in the Comoros as Gombessa-when they were fishing for something 
else. Because coelacanth meat doesn't taste good and can even upset a person's 
stomach, the fishers had no reason to keep the fish before scientists came 
looking for specimens.

"We'd have known about coelacanths long before now if they weren't so 
inedible," says Forey. "They taste so bad, they get thrown right back."

 A long record

 According to the fossil record, coelacanths first appeared about 380 million 
years ago. Although the rocks in which the fossils lie suggest that most 
ancient coelacanths inhabited shallow marine environments, there were 
freshwater species as well, Forey says. Scientists have identified more than 80 
species in the fossil record and are still discovering new ones.

 In the June 2000 Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, Forey and three coauthors 
describe recently found fossils of one of the earliest coelacanths, which 
probably lived in the brackish water of a river delta in what is now 
northeastern Latvia.

 The fossil record indicates that coelacanths persisted for some 305 million 
years. That's an impressive run, especially considering that they survived a 
mass extinction 245 million years ago that wiped out about 95 percent of all 
species in the seas (SN: 2/1/97, p. 74). In the wake of those extinctions, 
however, coelacanths reached their peak diversity-16 species living at once, 
Foley notes.

 Ancient coelacanths came in many different shapes and sizes, ranging from just 
a few inches to around 6 feet in length. Today's large, plump species are 5 to 
6 feet long at maturity. They can't accurately be called living fossils because 
they're different from any fossil yet found. Forey says the living fish are, 
however, remarkably similar to the most recent of the fossil coelacanths.

 Why the coelacanth suddenly disappeared from the fossil record 75 million 
years ago remains a mystery. It never was a commonly occurring fish, so its 
rarity probably contributed to its vanishing act, Forey says. Before the 
discovery of live coelacanths, there was no way to tell whether the fish really 
became extinct or simply moved into environments that wouldn't naturally 
preserve fish remains. Today's coelacanth habitats aren't conducive to 
fossilization, he notes.

 The largest known population of living coelacanths is found around the Comoro 
Islands, says Hans Fricke, a coelacanth specialist at the Max Planck Institute 
for Behavioral Physiology in Seewiesen, Germany. These volcanic islands popped 
up from the floor of the Mozambique Channel within the past 5 million years, 
and their slopes are too steep to hold sediments that could rapidly cover a 
dead fish and thus begin the fossilization process.

 Fricke has led several expeditions to the Comoros since 1987 and has used 
submersibles and ultrasonic tracking devices to study the coelacanths there. 
Each fish has a unique pattern of white splotches on its side, which enables 
scientists to identify individuals. Fricke and his colleagues have spotted only 
109 coelacanths during their research, but the scientists estimate that between 
400 and 600 of the fish live in the waters of the Comoros. Repeated sightings 
of several recognizable individuals around Grand Comore, the largest of the 
Comoro Islands, indicate that the fish live in the same area for extended 
periods.

 In the upcoming months, Fricke plans to study the South African coelacanths 
that Venter discovered 1,500 miles from the Comoros population and look for 
genetic differences between the two.

 For the most part, coelacanths have a lethargic lifestyle. By day, they stay 
in deep-water caves, which shelter them from the strong currents that sweep 
past the Comoros. At night, Fricke says, the coelacanths range into even deeper 
waters, where both radio and direct observations indicate that they usually 
drift with the current to prey on other fish. Surveys show that very few fish 
populate the depths where the coelacanths forage, but researchers say that 
several adaptations make coelacanths an efficient predator that can get by on 
occasional nibbles.

 First, the coelacanth has an extremely slow metabolism. Calculations show that 
it needs only 20 to 30 grams of food per day to fuel its lazy lifestyle, Fricke 
says. The fish also has a long spiral valve in its intestine, which slows the 
passage of food and enables it to be more completely digested.

 Second, the coelacanth uses the same sort of electrosensitive cells as sharks 
and some other fish do. These animals detect weak electric fields emitted by 
their prey, says William E. Bemis, an ichthyologist at the University of 
Massachusetts in Amherst who has studied the coelacanth.

 He says the coelacanth is unique among vertebrates because its 
electrosensitive cells are concentrated in a single organ, the so-called 
rostral organ in its head.

 Another unique feature of the coelacanth is its intercranial joint, which 
enables the fish's upper jaw to flex upward about 10 degrees when the lower jaw 
drops about 30 degrees. This increases the suction created when the coelacanth 
suddenly opens its mouth to gulp its prey. A large muscle in the fish's head-as 
big as the muscles in a human forearm-flexes this joint and helps the 
coelacanth hold its prey, Bemis says.

 Finally, the coelacanth can see extremely well in dim light thanks to its 
tapetum, a crystal layer behind its retina. Light reflecting off the tapetum 
gives the retina a second chance to capture photons that weren't detected 
during their first pass through.

 Comoros expedition

 While on an expedition in the Comoro Islands last year, Fricke and his 
colleagues collected samples of DNA from 15 coelacanths. Their analysis will 
reveal the amount of genetic variation found in the Comoros population and 
serve as a baseline for comparison with DNA from coelacanths in other areas.

 Fricke plans to take his submersible to South Africa next March or April to 
collect DNA from the coelacanths that Venter discovered last October. During 
this 2-to-3-week expedition, Fricke's group will also examine whether the 
coelacanths in the St. Lucia Marine Preserve form a viable population. Before 
that, Venter plans to do his own series of dives to study the coelacanths he 
saw there.

 Fricke says he'd love to discover genetic differences between the Comoro and 
South African populations, but he doesn't expect to. The coelacanth expert 
predicts that the handful of fish outside the Comoros are simply strays. The 
fish's lifestyle makes it prone to being swept away from home by sudden 
currents that often surge southwestward past the Comoros at the depths where 
the coelacanth forages.

 Fricke is even more convinced that the Indonesian coelacanths found in recent 
years, like those off South Africa, are also strays. From tracing the currents 
that buffet the area where the fish were found, Fricke estimates that the 
undiscovered homeland of the Indonesian coelacanths may be near isolated 
islands in the Philippines or possibly further out in the South Pacific.

"I don't believe we've found the mother population of coelacanths," Fricke says.

 Uncertain future for an ancient survivor

 Now that the coelacanth has reappeared among the living, what are its 
prospects for survival? The short answer: Uncertain.

 Despite detailed study of dozens of specimens, scientists still know little 
about this mysterious Lazarus of the deep. Pieter C.R. Venter's sightings in 
South Africa last year were the first made by a free-swimming diver at the 
coelacanth's natural depth.

 Coelacanths brought to the surface don't survive very long. The fish's gills 
are small, so it can't absorb enough oxygen from the relatively warm water near 
the surface. Also, its slow metabolism doesn't allow it to easily recover from 
the stress of fighting at the end of a line or in a net.

 The survival of coelacanths as a species depends in large part on their 
reproduction rate. But Phillip C. Heemstra of the J.L.B. Smith Institute of 
Ichthyology in Grahamstown, South Africa, says that the fish's fecundity is one 
of its biggest mysteries.

 Each female has only one functional ovary, which produces eggs the size of 
small grapefruit. In fact, coelacanths produce the largest fish eggs known-each 
about 4 inches in diameter. The eggs hatch inside the female, so she bears live 
young. Scientists don't know when the fish reach their sexual maturity, how 
often they reproduce, or even how they mate-the male fish has no obvious 
intromittent organ.

 The average size of a litter of coelacanth pups isn't known. Of the nearly 200 
documented catches, only 2 have been pregnant females. Although one carried 5 
pups, the other carried 26. Based on these two pregnancies, scientists estimate 
that the pups are 14 to 16 inches long at birth. The smallest coelacanth ever 
caught was a pup about 17 inches long.

 Regardless of how many coelacanths are born in a litter, nobody knows where 
they go immediately thereafter to mature, Heemstra says. Except for the one pup 
caught, all of the other specimens either brought to the surface or observed at 
depth have been at least 3 feet long.

 Some researchers have used rings on the fish's scales to estimate that the 
coelacanth reaches maturity at age 12 and has a 20-year life span. But Heemstra 
says that analysis of an otolith-an ear stone-from one fish suggests that the 
fish may live to be at least 60.

 Coelacanths could live even longer. Recent observations suggest that the fish 
may have an exceedingly slow growth rate.

 Fricke says that last November he recognized the blotch pattern on a 43-inch 
coelacanth that he had first seen from his submersible in January 1987. 
Although it was probably not a mature coelacanth-the largest specimens are 
typically more than 50 percent longer-he says the fish he identified had grown 
little, if at all, during the 14 years between sightings.


