Peru Holds Oldest New World City: Science News Online, April 28, 2001

 Peru Holds Oldest New World City

 Bruce Bower

 New York City is the Big Apple. New Orleans is the Big Easy. Now, make way for 
Caral, an ancient Peruvian city that qualifies as the Big Mound.

 Six huge, mound-shaped ceremonial platforms at Caral date from 4,000 years 
ago, an archaeological team reports in the April 27 Science. That makes the 
site, located in the Supe Valley about 14 miles from the Pacific Ocean, the 
oldest-known urban center in the Americas.

 Moreover, preliminary evidence indicates that at least 2 of 17 other 
comparably sized archaeological sites in the Supe Valley flourished at the same 
time that Caral did, says Jonathan Haas of the Field Museum in Chicago.

 Haas suspects that a network of ancient, inland metropolises, including Caral, 
traded extensively with coastal outposts. "Supe Valley cities were the big 
gorilla on the ancient South American landscape," he says. "Everyone else was 
mouse lemurs."

 Caral's massive size and great antiquity demonstrate that large-scale South 
American civilizations need not have originated on the coast, as one 
influential theory holds, according to Haas and his colleagues Ruth S. Solis of 
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos in Lima, Peru, and Winifred Creamer of 
Northern Illinois University in De Kalb.

 Although archaeologists discovered it in 1905, Caral had attracted little 
scientific attention until now. It lies in a remote area with no paved roads or 
basic amenities. Moreover, the site contains no pottery, since its residents 
didn't make ceramic vessels. This has discouraged both archaeologists and 
looters.

 The site's central zone contains the six large mounds, many smaller platform 
mounds, two sunken circular plazas, and various residences and buildings. 
Platform mounds housed high-status citizens and served ceremonial functions.

 For radiocarbon dating, the researchers focused mainly on reed fibers from 
woven bags they found at the site. Caral's workers used the bags to carry rocks 
for building the mounds, the researchers say. The reeds, which live for about 1 
year, provide highly specific age estimates of when the workers built the 
platforms.

 Construction occurred from about 4,090 to 3,640 years ago, the researchers 
say. Activity at the site may have begun as early as 4,700 years ago, Haas adds.

 Remains at the site indicate that Caral's people grew crops such as beans and 
squash-but not corn-in irrigated fields. Seafood, probably acquired through 
trading, provided most of their protein.

 For perhaps the first time in the New World, authoritarian leaders assumed 
power at Caral and forced their subjects to do the heavy labor needed for 
massive building projects, Haas proposes.

 The political structure at Caral may not have been as authoritarian as Haas 
envisions, remarks archaeologist Daniel Sandweiss of the University of Maine in 
Orono. Still, he calls the new age estimates for Caral "very significant."

"Caral is a huge site considering how old it is," says archaeologist Betty J. 
Meggers of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. "This is a 
revolutionary discovery."


