Epileptic seizures may be predictable: Science News Online, May 5, 2001

 Epileptic seizures may be predictable

 Jessa Netting

 People with epilepsy typically lead peaceful lives in the days and hours 
between their seizures. However, the calm they experience before the mental 
storms may not be so tranquil after all.

 Patterns of mild electrical disturbance in the brains of epilepsy patients 
seem to foreshadow a seizure hours before its onset, reports a group of 
neurobiologists and electrical engineers. If the findings are confirmed, they 
may lead to devices that would theoretically predict seizures and even halt 
them before they begin, suggest the researchers in the April Neuron.

 Fifty million people around the world-roughly 1 in 100-live with epilepsy. 
It's characterized by erratic discharges of electrical activity in the brain. 
These seizures can set off violent spasms and cause a person to lose 
consciousness (SN: 6/3/00, p. 384).

"One of the worst aspects of epilepsy is that seizures come without warning," 
says Brian Litt of the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in 
Philadelphia, who coauthored the study with colleagues from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology and Emory University, both in Atlanta. Although not 
often directly harmful, a seizure can endanger a person by unexpectedly 
occurring during an activity, such as driving, that requires control.

 Currently, epilepsy patients must take seizure-quelling medications every day. 
Some complain that these drugs dull the senses and have other side effects.

 One potential advantage of prediction is that patients would need medication 
only in the few hours surrounding an epileptic episode, says Robert Lowenstein, 
an epilepsy researcher at Harvard University Medical School in Boston.

 Accurate prediction of seizures, he adds, also offers the possibility that an 
implanted electronic device could stimulate the brain and defuse seizures 
before they occur. Lowenstein and others are developing such devices. Past 
research focused on detecting a seizure in the few minutes before it occurs 
(SN: 5/23/98, p. 326). Litt decided to take a longer view of the process by 
using a standard measurement of brain activity, the electroencephalogram (EEG).

 Attracted by the quantitative rigor of industrial engineering, Litt and his 
colleagues teamed up with electrical engineer George Vachtsevanos and his 
group, all at Georgia Tech. They usually design failure-detection systems in 
equipment such as aircraft.

 Rosana Esteller of Vachtsevanos' group had designed a technique for handling 
large data sets. The researchers examined 3 days' data from EEG analyses of 
five epilepsy patients being evaluated for surgery to remove the region of 
their brain responsible for their seizures.

 The researchers found that a series of electrical events anticipated the 
seizures. Mild energy bursts occurred 7 hours before the seizure, followed 5 
hours later by frequent, symptomless seizures too small for the patients to 
recognize. "It's like a match that keeps lighting a fuse until finally it 
catches," says Litt.

"This is some of the strongest evidence to date that [a seizure] can be 
predicted several hours beforehand," contends Lowenstein.

 Litt expects that within only a few years, epilepsy patients will carry 
brain-implant devices that will both predict and preempt seizures.


