Light shines in quantum-computing arena: Science News Online, May 19, 2001

 Light shines in quantum-computing arena

 Peter Weiss

 For a few years, scientists have been predicting that computers exploiting the 
quantum properties of matter will carry out computations billions of times 
faster than today's supercomputers. Yet the technical challenges are so 
daunting that such quantum computers may not be feasible for decades.

 Now, researchers have developed a new, yet less exotic computing method that 
may be as good as quantum computing for certain tasks, such as searching 
databases. The method relies entirely on classical physics, say Ian Walmsley 
and his colleagues of the University of Rochester in New York. To convert their 
ideas into hardware, the Rochester scientists have built an optical device and 
successfully demonstrated the method.

 The group reported its results at the Lasers and Electro-Optics/Quantum 
Electronics and Laser Science conference in Baltimore last week.

 Researchers expect quantum processors to work incredibly fast thanks in part 
to particles' wavelike interactions, including interference. The processors 
would take advantage of another, stranger effect known as entanglement, in 
which two or more particles share one quantum state (SN: 8/21/00, p. 132).

 Walmsley and his colleagues suspected that classical interference such as that 
between intersecting light waves, could lead to a computation method analogous 
to the interference aspect of quantum computing. Optical computers already 
exist, but their calculations take advantage of different intensities of light. 
Says Walmsley: "They don't exploit the fact that waves interfere."

 His group built a prototype of an interference-based optical computer. Then, 
they searched a database using a famous quantum-computing algorithm invented by 
Lov K. Grover of Lucent Technologies' Bell Labs in Murray Hill, N.J. (SN: 
11/29/99, p. 334). In 1997, Grover theorized that a quantum system relying on 
his interference-based algorithm would require only a single lightning-fast 
operation to find a target item.

 The Rochester researchers simulate a 50-item database by vibrating a crystal 
of tellurium dioxide so that one small region of the crystal expands. Then, 
they fire a sub-trillionth-of-a-second pulse of light through a diffraction 
grating, which spreads the light into beams of various frequencies. The 
expanded region slightly alters the speed of the beam passing through it. The 
light rays exiting the crystal meet up and interact with a copy of the original 
pulse.

 Because of interference, only the altered beam corresponding to the targeted 
database item passes on to a detector, the researchers say. The Rochester 
scheme thus completes its search in a single operation.

 David A. Meyer of the University of California, San Diego and some other 
theorists had previously argued that a computer using classical physics can 
perform as well as any quantum computer in some calculations that involve only 
interference. Until now, however, there's been no actual interference-based 
classical computer for testing the idea. The Rochester team's work has 
experimentally verified this theory, Meyer says.

 Walmsley says that his group is preparing experiments to see if the new 
approach might even work for some quantum calculations that are expected to 
require entanglement to be carried out quickly and efficiently.


