Molecular Chemistry Takes a New Twist: Science News Online, June 2, 2001

 Molecular Chemistry Takes a New Twist

 Jessica Gorman

 In a discovery that could have implications for biological research, new 
calculations show that a basic tenet of chemistry is wrong. At issue is why 
molecules twist into the shapes they do. The new finding indicates that in some 
molecules, quantum forces trump the traditional explanation.

 The find focuses on ethane, or C2 H6, which has two carbon atoms bonded to 
each other. Each also attaches to three hydrogen atoms. On either end of the 
carbon-carbon bond, each hydrogen-adorned carbon atom, or methyl group, spins 
like a three-pronged turnstile, says chemist Frank Weinhold of the University 
of Wisconsin-Madison.

 College instructors teach chemistry students to look at the molecule from one 
end, so that one carbon blocks the other from view. From this vantage point, 
students can distinguish the two ethane conformations. In the depiction of 
ethane's stable, or so-called staggered, conformation, all six hydrogens are 
visible and equally spaced. In diagrams of the less stable, or eclipsed, 
conformation, the rear three hydrogens are hidden because they line up directly 
behind the front three hydrogens.

 Textbooks give students a seemingly straightforward reason for the greater 
stability of the staggered form, says Lionel Goodman of Rutgers University in 
New Brunswick, N.J. They pin it on so-called steric effects. In the eclipsed 
conformation, close carbon-hydrogen bonds crowd each other, thereby raising the 
molecule's overall energy.

 But now, 50 years after this seductively simple explanation caught on, Goodman 
and his Rutgers colleague Vojislava Pophristic say that it's not so. "The 
implications are rather large because the cornerstone of our understanding of 
the structure of molecules is the steric effect," says Goodman. "And ethane is 
regarded as the benchmark for understanding the structure of molecules."

 Pophristic spent 5 years crunching calculations with a supercomputer to figure 
out what underlies the stability of ethane's staggered conformation. First, she 
mathematically modeled ethane and removed the parts of the calculations that 
relate to the steric effect. To her surprise, the ethane molecule remained 
staggered. Something else must keep it in the staggered conformation.

 Then, Pophristic looked at the other known influence on ethane's twisting-a 
quantum mechanical effect known as hyperconjugation. "The electrons of one 
methyl group jump over to the other methyl group," says Goodman.

 When Pophristic blocked the electron jumping by placing a hypothetical screen 
between the two methyl groups, ethane's structure finally assumed the eclipsed 
form, she and Goodman report in the May 31 Nature. Hyperconjugation, not steric 
effects, makes staggered ethane stable, they conclude. And what goes for ethane 
could go for many other organic compounds, says Goodman.

 Researchers can no longer assume that steric effects play the major role in 
determining stable forms, comments Weinhold. They should give more attention to 
quantum mechanical effects when studying biological molecules and processes 
such as protein folding. "You eventually have to come to grips with this 
quantum mechanical aspect of everything," says Weinhold.


