Salmon hatcheries can deplete wild stocks: Science News Online, June 2, 2001

 Salmon hatcheries can deplete wild stocks

 Janet Raloff

 Each year, hatcheries release millions of chinook into the Columbia River 
system in a bid by state game managers to save wild stocks of this salmon. The 
fish there is so beleaguered that many of its populations, threatened with 
extinction, are protected under the Endangered Species Act. A new study now 
offers evidence that hatchery fish may be hastening the wild stocks' demise.

 Phillip S. Levin and his colleagues with the National Marine Fisheries Service 
(NMFS) in Seattle analyzed chinook-population data spanning the past quarter 
century for the Snake River, which feeds into the Columbia. Some 18 months 
after the fall spawning of chinook, a river of smolts heads for the ocean, 
where the young fish will spend the next 4 or more years. The Seattle 
scientists compared releases of hatchery-reared smolts with data on the number 
of returning wild adults.

 The team also noted fluctuations in food available for the smolts once they 
reach the ocean. Measures of the local oysters' plumpness indicate ocean-food 
resources. Work by others, Levin explains, has shown that this index reflects a 
year's food availability "all the way up the food chain."

 Oyster data revealed that for waters around the mouth of the Columbia, none of 
the past 25 years has provided a feast. All the years had food supplies in the 
average or poor range. Poor years coincided with El Nino events-periods of 
climatic perturbations fostered by unusual warmth in large areas of the Pacific 
Ocean.

 Populations of wild adults that had struck out for the ocean when near-shore 
food supplies were low had high rates of mortality. This mortality was 
aggravated, Levin's team found, when large numbers of hatchery smolts had 
entered the ocean with the wild fish.

 In lean years, the more hatchery chinook released, the higher the mortality of 
wild stocks from that year's smolts. In contrast, the NMFS scientists detected 
no adverse effect of hatchery releases on wild smolts entering the Pacific in 
years with normal food supplies.

 Levin notes, however, that El Ninos are occurring at greater frequency in 
recent decades than previously, and global warming may also heat the Pacific. 
Consequently, the conditions now contributing to poor food availability in 
near-shore areas may become the norm in future decades, he cautions.

 Levin's group reports its findings in the June 7 Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B.

 The widely varying year-to-year numbers of chinook released by Snake River 
hatcheries made the new analysis possible, Levin explains. The release totals 
trace to political decisions, he notes, not to estimates of the environment's 
capacity to support salmon.

 Today, Columbia River chinook adult stocks are so depleted that the northwest 
states permit little fishing of them. Yet, thanks to hatcheries, "there are 
more juvenile fish coming down the Columbia River than there have ever been," 
notes Ray Hilborn, a population ecologist at the University of Washington in 
Seattle. Moreover, he notes hatchery-reared smolts, owing to their coddling, 
tend to enter the river bigger than their wild brethren-with bigger appetites. 
What's happening, he says, is that hatchery fish are replacing wild salmon.

 That's not what was supposed to happen, says Jim Lichatowich, a consulting 
salmon biologist in Oregon. "The Endangered Species Act says that [wild 
populations] have to be sustainable in their natural environment," he explains. 
The act also seeks to preserve local wild populations, not to replace them with 
hatchery-reared emigrants.

 The new report illustrates the flawed logic in attempting "to overcome 
declining wild populations by filling the system to overcapacity with hatchery 
fish," Lichatowich argues.

 Indeed, until this report by Levin's team, discussions of the environment's 
carrying capacity for wild chinook focused on competition for food in rivers, 
adds Michael Schiewe, director of fish ecology for NMFS in Seattle. "Most 
people thought that in the ocean there'd be no problem," he says-its resources 
seemed limitless.

 This is just one more piece of evidence "making it abundantly clear the ocean 
is not unlimited," says Brian Riddell of the Canadian Department of Fisheries 
and Oceans' Pacific Biological Station in Nanaimo, British Columbia.

 The bottom line, Lichatowich says, is that over their 125-year history, salmon 
hatcheries have shown that "they cannot maintain the supply of salmon in the 
face of shrinking habitat." Though overfishing contributed to the initial 
depletion of chinook, he says, "what's keeping the salmon populations low right 
now is habitat"-rivers cut off by dams, drained periodically by irrigators, and 
contaminated with pollutants.


