Look on the bright side and survive longer: Science News Online, May 26, 2001

 Look on the bright side and survive longer

 Bruce Bower

 Brief autobiographies written more than 60 years ago by a group of then young 
Catholic nuns have now become a matter of life or death. Those nuns who 
chronicled positive emotions in their twenties have lived markedly longer than 
those who recounted emotionally neutral personal histories, a new study finds.

 This result, which derives from a study group with unprecedented similarity in 
lifestyle and social status, supports earlier evidence that expressing 
happiness, interest, love, and other positive feelings enhances physical 
health, say psychologist Deborah D. Danner of the University of Kentucky in 
Lexington and her colleagues. The nuns were participating in a study on aging 
and Alzheimer's disease (SN: 5/18/96, p. 312).

"Our results should spur research into the poorly understood link between 
positive emotions and longevity," remarks study coauthor Wallace V. Friesen, 
also of Kentucky. "I never would have guessed this association is so strong."

 Danner's team analyzed positive emotional content in life stories written by 
180 nuns when they were, on average, 22 years old. The scientists then noted 
which nuns had since died and when.

 Nuns whose stories contained the most sentences expressing any of 10 positive 
emotions lived an average of 7 years longer than those whose accounts included 
the fewest such sentences, the team reports in the May Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology. The researchers also found that longevity increased by 
9-1/2 years for nuns whose life stories contained the most words referring to 
positive emotions and by 10-1/2 years for nuns who used the greatest number of 
different positive-emotion words.

 The autobiographies included few negative emotions, partly because they were 
to be read by the congregation's Mother Superior, the researchers say. But 
individuals conveyed a range of positive emotions. For example, an emotional 
account portrayed college life as "very happy" and looked forward to a "life of 
union with Love Divine." A more neutral autobiography listed college activities 
and told of hope "to do my best for our Order."

 Danner's team next plans to look for links of low positive emotion to 
particular causes of death, such as heart disease.

 The new results strengthen the suspected association between expressing 
positive emotions and living longer, says psychologist James W. Pennebaker of 
the University of Texas at Austin, who has found a link between writing about 
emotions and physical health in other groups.

 Outside convents, social status has been shown to correlate strongly with 
longevity, even for celebrities. Among actors and actresses ever nominated for 
an Academy Award in a leading or supporting role, those who won outlived those 
who lost-and performers who were never nominated-by an average of nearly 4 
years, report Donald A. Redelmeier and Sheldon M. Singh, both of the Sunnybrook 
and Women's College Health Sciences Center in Toronto.

 Factors related to success, such as hiring personal chefs and trainers, having 
more control over one's career, and facing intense public scrutiny that 
discourages disgraceful behavior, may contribute to the winners' longevity, the 
researchers propose in the May 15 Annals of Internal Medicine.


