Cosmic Chemistry Gets Creative: Science News Online, May 19, 2001

 Cosmic Chemistry Gets Creative

 Big guns, bench work: How life could've come from above

 Jessica Gorman

 In a laboratory at the University of Chicago, Jennifer Blank places a steel 
capsule in the firing path of a 15-meter-long gun that shoots soda-can-size 
bullets. Sensibly, she then leaves the room. From next door, she and her 
colleagues trigger the gun to fire. They hear only a muffled pop, but they know 
they've just caused violence of almost unworldly proportions.

 This oversize gun play is how a cadre of researchers including Blank, a 
geochemist from the University of California, Berkeley, simulate comet and 
meteorite impacts. They're out to answer an awe-inspiring question: Could 
life's building blocks have stowed away on such space debris and then survived 
an impact with Earth?

 For nearly a hundred years, researchers have wondered whether the newborn 
Earth possessed a primordial stew with all the ingredients necessary for 
creating life. In a famously successful 1953 chemistry experiment at the 
University of Chicago, Stanley Miller and Harold Urey demonstrated that a spark 
of electricity coursing through a brew of hydrogen, water, ammonia, and methane 
could ignite a reaction that makes amino acids-the building blocks of proteins 
and, therefore, of all Earth's life.

 But when Miller and Urey performed their experiment, they assumed that the 
early Earth's atmosphere was very different from today's. In the 1950s, 
scientists thought that the atmosphere 4 billion years ago was rich in gases 
that contain hydrogen and poor in those bearing oxygen. Chemists call such an 
atmosphere "reducing." But many researchers now hold that the ancient Earth's 
atmosphere, compared with the earlier view, had more oxygen and less 
hydrogen-as the atmosphere does today. Amino acids don't form as readily under 
that condition as they did in the 1953 experiment, and when they do form, they 
tend to break apart.

 There's no shortage of theories for explaining how life could have arisen on 
Earth, even in the primitive atmosphere now considered likely. For example, 
some researchers suggest that life got its first toehold in one of Earth's more 
exotic locales, such as deep-sea hydrothermal vents or on the surface of 
certain rocks (SN: 5/5/01, p. 276).

 Others, including Blank, have looked outward. These researchers speculate that 
precursors to life might have arrived on an asteroid, meteorite, comet, or even 
interplanetary dust (SN: 2/3/01, p. 68).

 If you make a shopping list of all the chemicals you'd need to create life, 
they're all found in space, says astrobiologist Max Bernstein of NASA's Ames 
Research Center and the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) 
Institute, both in Mountain View, Calif. "It seems unlikely that that's just a 
coincidence," he adds.

 The next question is, Could those chemicals have traveled from their out-of 
this-world venues to Earth's surface?

 No one knows if the delicate chemicals could have survived the intense heat 
and pressure of an arrival via comet or meteorite. Nor does anyone know how an 
asteroid, meteorite, or comet impact might have altered Earth's atmosphere 
locally, perhaps making it more friendly to life.

 Short of witnessing a collision firsthand-not a desirable scenario in the case 
of a comet or an asteroid hitting Earth-researchers need to attack these 
questions with simulations, such as mathematical calculations and computer 
models. Still another way is Blank's way. Right in the lab, she and her 
colleagues recreate the behavior of comets and meteorites striking Earth.

 Large comets

 According to Christopher Chyba of SETI and Stanford University, large comets 
probably supplied vast amounts of extraterrestrial material to the early Earth. 
Since potentially life-spawning chemicals almost certainly were within that 
heap of space stuff, Chyba and Elisabetta Pierazzo of the University of Arizona 
in Tucson mathematically modeled comets and asteroids slamming into Earth.

 They concluded in 1999 that some amino acids on kilometer-wide comets would 
indeed survive a direct hit to Earth's surface. Even more of the molecules 
could endure a low-angle encounter. The scientists also found that some types 
of amino acids would be more rugged than others in such impacts.

 Intriguing as such theoretical calculations are, their value is limited unless 
they can be tested. These tests call for big guns.

 Blank suspects that comets, in particular, could have given Earth everything 
required for life. Spectroscopy studies have shown that comets contain organic 
material, including the components of amino acids. Comets also carry water, and 
an impact's energy could have driven some of the initial reactions that led to 
life, Blank adds.

 There's a problem with this idea, however. In a beaker, these molecules break 
down well below the high temperatures present during an impact. So, how could 
they survive an actual impact?

 For one thing, says Blank, a comet isn't a beaker. And small, tabletop 
experiments ignore one of an impact's crucial factors-pressure. "We have very 
poor intuition for the effects of pressure," she says.

 To figure out whether amino acids can withstand pressures of up to 200,000 
times that of Earth's atmosphere and temperatures of 500@ to 600@C, Blank and 
her colleagues created some of the best physical simulations so far. In each 
trial, they encased a solution of amino acids in a stainless steel, nickel-size 
disk and put the disk in a large tank. They then shot it with a metal-tipped 
projectile that traveled at nearly 2 km per second, or 4,500 miles per hour. 
Blank says that the first apparatus they used looked like a 3-ton cannon. The 
Chicago fire marshals were not pleased, she recalls.

 After retrieving the steel container, Blank and her colleagues found that some 
portion of each of the five amino acids she tested survived the shock of the 
impact. In fact, the violent reactions even stitched some amino acids into 
peptides, the chainlike molecules that make up proteins, says Blank. She 
reported her team's work in San Diego in April at a national meeting of the 
American Chemical Society.

 Using a similar megagun at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, 
Blank's team first froze the steel container to better simulate the conditions 
of a comet. Compared with the Chicago experiments, an even larger proportion of 
the amino acids in the disks survived. The researchers also found that 
different peptides formed when they varied the pressure and duration of the 
impacts by changing the speed of the projectile and the thickness of its tip.

 Since these results suggest that impact wouldn't destroy amino acids on an 
incoming comet, "we couldn't rule out this extraterrestrial origin" for 
primordial organic molecules, says Blank. The experiment "is support for the 
possibility" that comets brought amino acids and other biologically important 
material to Earth, she says.

 Blank and her team achieve realistic pressures and temperatures, even though 
the 2-km-per-second speed of the projectile is much lower than the minimum 
speed at which a comet would hit Earth. However, the duration of the shock the 
researchers generate is much shorter than what they would expect for a large 
impact. Blank notes that, so far, her team's results suggest that lengthening 
the duration of the shock creates more peptides.

 For the moment, these laboratory results are helping provide reality checks on 
theoretical models of high-speed impacts, says Pierazzo, who's now working with 
Chyba to apply impact calculations to the possible survival of comet- or 
asteroid-delivered amino acids on Mars and on Jupiter's moon Europa. What's 
more, Chyba adds, the velocities in experiments like Blank's will probably 
increase as new technology becomes available.

 Impact simulations

 Simulating comets is only one goal for aficionados of impact simulations. 
Consider Seiji Sugita of the University of Tokyo. Like Blank, he relies on 
large guns, but he has a different goal in mind. Using an instrument at NASA's 
Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif., Sugita has studied how 
meteorites interact with the local atmosphere during impacts.

 In his experiments, Sugita has found that iron-rich meteorites could have 
temporarily altered the atmosphere around their impact site. Most notably, they 
could decrease oxygen concentrations, creating the type of environment around 
them that would encourage amino acids to form efficiently.

 With this type of atmospheric change, organic material deposited by meteorites 
might have participated in reactions that formed life's first biologically 
important molecules, says Sugita, who also presented his results at the April 
American Chemical Society meeting.

 To reach this conclusion, Sugita and Peter Schultz of Brown University in 
Providence, R.I., used Ames' 10-meter-long vertical gun-a device originally 
designed to study how Apollo spacecraft would land on the moon. This instrument 
can launch objects to velocities of 7 km per second. In their experiments, 
Sugita and Schultz shot a small plastic projectile at a piece of copper and 
carefully analyzed the light emitted during the ensuing impact. The projectile 
represented a meteorite, while the copper provided a hard surface for breaking 
the projectile apart.

 The researchers observed in detail how the projectiles, during the intense 
impacts, shattered at temperatures of several thousand degrees C. At 
millionth-of-a-second intervals throughout the experiment, spectroscopy data 
revealed temperature and chemical changes, says Sugita. With a plastic 
projectile moving at 6 km per second, he adds, the experiment simulates an iron 
meteorite impact of about 20 km per second, which is close to the speed 
calculated for some incoming meteorites.

 Sugita and Schultz found that the plastic projectile fragmented into tiny 
particles, which reacted extensively with molecules of the experiment's 
earthly, nitrogen-rich atmosphere. Extrapolating this result with a carbon-rich 
plastic projectile to an iron-rich meteorite, the researchers concluded that 
the latter would react with carbon dioxide on the young Earth, temporarily 
creating a reducing atmosphere around the impact site.

 Sugita's experiments suggest how even an early Earth atmosphere that was 
hostile to the formation of biological molecules could have been locally, 
temporarily transformed into a friendlier status, comments Bernstein. This 
could have helped precursor molecules already on the planet or delivered from 
space take the next steps toward life.

 Small asteroids

 Many researchers say large impacts by asteroids, comets, and meteorites, such 
as those modeled by Blank and Sugita, would have been the primary source of 
organic molecules for the early Earth. Still, some scientists are examining the 
opposite end of the extraterrestrial spectrum-small, millimeter-size particles 
of asteroids and comets. Perhaps these grains, too, could have ferried 
biology's precursor molecules to Earth's surface.

"Maybe it's the small stuff," says Duncan Steel of the University of Salford in 
England.

 Daniel P. Glavin and Jeffrey L. Bada of the University of California, San 
Diego study whether amino acids could survive as such small objects enter 
Earth's atmosphere. Even if only one amino acid, glycine, withstood the intense 
heat that incoming space particles encounter, it could spawn life, they say.

 Bada says that, at first glance, glycine alone might seem too limited a 
chemical palette. Scientists used to think that life needed "every amino acid 
under the sun," he says, but now, some scientists suspect everything may not be 
required.

 Glycine could have made the backbone of a molecule called peptide nucleic acid 
that's been suggested to have served as a forerunner to DNA and RNA, he and 
Glavin suggest.

 Taking another angle on space dust, Steel and Christopher McKay of NASA's Ames 
Research Center looked at a population of small meteoroids that vaporize higher 
in the atmosphere than the typical ones, which are made of rock and metal.

 The researchers suspect the reason for this quick-burn property may be the 
presence of massive organic molecules. They say such organics wouldn't be 
volatile enough to escape from these so-called tarry meteoroids as they travel 
near the sun, and they've calculated that heavy organic molecules could 
theoretically survive thousands of years in space. The constituents of these 
small tarry meteoroids wouldn't disintegrate completely in the atmosphere and 
could shower down on Earth, claims Steel.

"There appears to be an ongoing rain coming down on our head," he says.

 It may be that the best clues to life's first molecules remain out in space. 
Researchers can theorize with computers about impacts, simulate them in the 
laboratory, and test meteorites that have fallen to Earth. But they've yet to 
get their hands on untainted, extraterrestrial samples of space stuff.

 The Stardust mission is on its way to collect much anticipated samples from 
the comet Wild 2. The mission is scheduled to return to Earth in 2006. Various 
international attempts to retrieve other comet and asteroid samples could 
follow over the next several years.


