Early Mammal's Jaw Lost Its Groove: Science News Online, May 26, 2001

 Early Mammal's Jaw Lost Its Groove

 Sid Perkins

 A tiny fossil skull found within 195-million-year-old Chinese sediments 
provides evidence that crucial features of mammal anatomy evolved more than 45 
million years earlier than previously recognized.

 The well-preserved fossil shows several characteristics of mammals, says 
Zhe-Xi Luo, a vertebrate paleontologist at the Carnegie Museum of Natural 
History in Pittsburgh. Most notably, there's no groove at the rear of the 
jawbone. This indicates that the three bones of the middle ear had separated 
from the ancient animal's mandible. This separation occurs in modern mammals 
but not in reptiles.

 The jaw hinge of the skull also assumes an advanced form. A wide, mammal-style 
brain case gives the animal its genus name- Hadrocodium, which is Greek for 
full head-Luo says. The species name, wui, honors the paleontologist who 
discovered the specimen in 1985. Luo and his colleagues describe the new 
species in the May 25 Science.

 Its discoverers almost mistook the corn-kernel-size skull for a bone fragment. 
A painstaking, grain-by-grain removal of the sediments encasing the fossil 
gradually revealed its distinct features. Six or seven lineages of ancient 
mammals lived about 195 million years ago. However, all of these had a grooved 
jawbone, one hallmark of ancient mammals that had only recently evolved from 
reptiles, Luo adds.

 Although the Hadrocodium skull has several features of a mammal, Luo and his 
colleagues can't determine whether the animal's lineage evolved into one of the 
three known groups of modern mammals-placental mammals, marsupials, or the 
egg-laying platypus-or eventually went extinct. "We just know that it's more 
closely related to living mammals than anything else living at that time," says 
Luo.

 Dental wear on the teeth, among other evidence, indicates that the lilliputian 
skull belonged to a nearly full-grown or adult Hadrocodium. The animal would 
have been no longer than a paper clip and weighed only about 2 grams, making it 
the smallest so-called mammaliaform known from its time and rivaling the 
tiniest mammals of any period.

 Hadrocodium's small proportions also reveal that there was more evolutionary 
diversity among early mammals than had been previously known. Its diminutive 
stature and sharp teeth almost guarantee that the animal's diet consisted of 
insects, worms, or other small invertebrates, Luo notes. Even 195 million years 
ago, "in the early Jurassic period, mammals were occupying all available 
ecological niches," he adds.

 The volume of the ancient skull, although minuscule, is on par with skull-body 
proportions seen in modern mammals, says Andre R. Wyss, a paleontologist at the 
University of California, Santa Barbara. The tiny fossil might help scientists 
work out how today's major groups of mammals are related and provide insight 
into what ancestral mammals looked like, he notes. The presence of advanced 
features in a skull from 195 million years ago indicates that the earliest 
stages of mammalian evolution unfolded even further back in the past.


