Perfecting Porosity: Science News Online, June 23, 2001

 Perfecting Porosity

 Better living through holey chemistry

 Jessica Gorman

 Some chemists worry plenty about nothing . . . . Well, almost nothing. It's 
the holes inside solid materials that are on their minds.

 Such porous materials can look like ordinary rocks, but they're infiltrated 
with invisible nooks and crannies. Like kitchen sponges, these materials can 
soak up liquids with a marked thirst. And they do so with an intriguing finesse.

 The best known and most widely used porous solids today are crystals called 
zeolites. They occur naturally, but scientists also synthesize them. Zeolites' 
role in the transformation of raw petroleum into products like gasoline has 
made them central players in the oil-refining business. Labyrinthine channels 
in the crystals trap and help break down large molecules in oil.

 More recently, zeolite crystals have served as mini-test tubes in which 
scientists have grown the smallest possible carbon nanotubes-microscopic 
cylinders of graphite that possess unusual electronic properties and could 
serve as the basis of future nanoscale electronics (SN: 12/16/00, p. 398).

 Yet materials scientists know there's more scientific and technological gold 
to be found in porous materials. Chemists are eager to improve on the holes 
that make porous solids so valuable. Compared with the pores available today, 
bigger crystal cavities, for example, would be expected to trap larger 
molecules.

 In their search for these payoffs, researchers have been combining geometry 
and chemistry to design their own porous solids. Such materials, they say, 
could be built with chambers of just the right size, shape, and chemistry to 
attract and break down pesticides, for example, or to capture radioactive 
pollutants. Large pores created with particular chemistries might act as 
minireactors to promote reactions that would never occur in a bench-top beaker.

 There's yet another attractive aspect of designer porous solids. The huge 
amount of empty space in such materials enables them to absorb a nearly 
unimaginable amount of gas. "We have materials that can take a whole building 
full of gases and put it in one gram of material," says Omar Yaghi of the 
University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. "You could use it to store a fuel, let's 
say, and then release it later."

"The fact that you can vary the composition, structure, pore size, shape, and 
function [of porous materials] makes me think there's a great potential beyond 
zeolites," Yaghi says. "You can put together whatever building blocks you want 
and produce a material at will . . . . So, you've achieved the state that we've 
been trying to achieve for a long time. You've achieved tailored materials."

 Porous solids

 Researchers designing porous solids are pursuing several strategies. For 
example, Achim Muller of the University of Bielefeld in Germany is creating 
porous materials by joining together smaller building blocks. He calls one of 
the types of block that he's created "a big wheel." Constructed of hundreds of 
molybdenum and oxygen atoms, it's 4 nanometers wide. Muller says that by 
stacking these wheels, he can form channels.

 The space inside the channels is electron-rich, unlike zeolite pores, which 
are electron-poor, Muller notes. So, the big-wheel channels might catalyze 
chemical reactions that can't occur in zeolites. What's more, zeolites are 
monolithic structures that can't be broken into smaller units, whereas 
researchers could link big wheels to create materials with specific, 
predetermined internal structures, he says.

 M. Ishaque Khan of the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago has 
developed a similar construction method, which he refers to as "Lego-chemistry."

"If you know how to glue molecules [together] of different kinds, you can come 
up with almost any kind of material to cater to the needs of industry and 
society," Khan says.

 The challenge is that researchers don't yet know how to stitch all their new 
building blocks together. Recently, Khan's team created compounds from 
inexpensive polyoxometalates, which are chemical clusters made from oxygen 
atoms and transition metal elements, such as vanadium and molybdenum. 
Polyoxometalates are a particularly good choice for the blocks, Khan says, 
because they come in many sizes and shapes suitable for building a variety of 
porous materials.

 Khan and his coworkers are pursuing other synthesis methods involving 
interlinked oxometalates, as well. In one, they assemble a structure around 
template compounds, such as amines, that initially fill the spaces destined to 
be pores. Sometimes, however, the structure crumbles as the templates are 
removed, he notes.

 In fact, such stability has been a universal problem for those trying to 
design materials with bigger pores. Crystals with very large pores generally 
aren't rigid enough to support themselves unless they have molecules, called 
guests, filling the cavities.

 For a porous material to be as useful as possible, guests must be able to 
check in and out without the crystal collapsing. That way, both the porous 
material and its guests could even be reused. Such guests might be valuable 
materials being stored or contaminants extracted from the environment.

 Chemists designing materials with large pores face another formidable 
challenge. Crystals with bigger pores require a framework of more atoms 
surrounding each pore, explains Gerard Ferey of the Institut Lavoisier in 
Versailles, France. But in a large framework, the chains of atoms twist, 
interlock, and generally clog up the would-be pores. "Nature hates a vacuum," 
Ferey recalls.

 This tendency to clog space instead of forming pores leaves little room for 
guests to enter or reside in a new material.

 Pore designers

 These difficulties haven't dashed the hopes of pore designers. Yaghi and his 
colleagues have recently found a way to create porous materials that seems to 
alleviate the two challenges of instability and interlocking. Over the years, 
researchers have generally produced porous solids "through a process that many 
have called shake-and-bake or stir-and-wait," says Yaghi. "It was more of an 
art than a science. There was no design involved."

 Not so for Yaghi, Michael O'Keeffe of the Arizona State University in Tempe, 
and their team. Their protocol begins with a choice of one out of a dozen 
simple, three-dimensional molecular topologies, such as the architecture of Pt3 
O4. Then, they make substitutions for each platinum or oxygen atom by selecting 
complicated components. Only then do they determine the specific chemical steps 
required to stitch those complex parts together.

 The team, "uses the same topology as the very usual structure from which it 
starts," says Ferey.

 This technique-choosing a material's topology and characteristics before 
building it-is similar to a method often used already by medicinal chemists to 
design drugs, says O'Keeffe. "Organic chemists design a drug, and then they 
design a synthesis for it," he says.

 Two years ago, Yaghi and O'Keeffe used the approach to create the first nexus 
of metallic and organic components, a metal-organic framework (MOF), that 
didn't collapse when guest molecules left the structure (SN: 11/20/99, p. 327). 
Due to its porous nature, one ounce of this material, called MOF-5, has 19 
times the surface area of a football field.

"You're looking at a situation where one kilogram of MOF could contain several 
tanks of methane," Yaghi says.

 The researchers have since demonstrated with an even newer material that 
interlocking frameworks don't always clog up. In the substance MOF-9, the 
metal-organic framework intertwines but still has accessible pores.

 Even more recently, they've synthesized MOF-14, which embodies an intertwined 
metal-organic framework with extremely large, unclogged pores, says Yaghi. In 
the Feb. 9 Science, the researchers reported that the chains of atoms in the 
new material don't seriously block the crystal's pores, thus making available 
the biggest holes yet in a metal-organic framework-each more than 1.6 
nanometers in diameter.

 Now, the Yaghi team is busy using its technique to predict and create even 
more materials. "This is a breakthrough kind of chemistry," Yaghi claims. "You 
can design something unknown to inorganic or solid state chemists."


