Two new dinosaurs chiseled from fossil gap: Science News Online, June 23, 2001

 Two new dinosaurs chiseled from fossil gap

 Charlotte Schubert

 A 1-ton, potbellied vegetarian and a fierce, two-legged predator have surfaced 
from a 30-million-year gap in the dinosaur fossil record, and they are 
true-blooded Americans, chiseled from rock along the Arizona-New Mexico border.

 That rock is one of the few sediments that has yielded fossils from the middle 
of the Cretaceous period, which spanned from 146 million to 65 million years 
ago. The dearth of mid-Cretaceous fossils has made it difficult for 
paleontologists to discern the origin of specialized horns, bills, claws, and 
other anatomic innovations apparent in the more plentiful fossil record 
beginning 75 million years ago.

 The two newly discovered dinosaur species, found by a team of paleontologists 
led by Doug Wolfe of the Mesa Southwest Museum in Mesa, Ariz., represent the 
first of their kind in North America. Bits of similar fossils have been found 
in China, the probable ancestral home of the roughly 90-million-year-old 
fossils. Wolfe and several of his colleagues announced their findings this week 
in Washington, D.C. The work is funded by the Discovery Channel, which is 
airing a special on the finds on July 15.

 Catherine Forster of the State University of New York at Stony Brook says, 
"They've come up with some good material."

 The herbivore, dubbed Nothronycus, is, all the scientists say, just plain 
"bizarre." The paleontologists picture it as a feather-coated biped with a tiny 
head and long neck. Each of its neck vertebrae is bigger than its skull. Huge 
claws protruded from its forelimbs, possibly for defense or ripping up 
vegetation.

"It walked like Godzilla with this big gut," says team member Jim Kirkland, the 
Utah Geological Survey's paleontologist. Nothronycus' 12-foot-tall form towers 
over similar species uncovered in the early Cretaceous, and the dinosaur 
probably links early and late Cretaceous species of the therizinosaur group. 
Nothronycus' description, based on scattered bones of one individual, will 
appear in the Journal of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology this fall.

 Kirkland describes the new predator, a yet-unnamed type of Coelurosaur, as 
"the coyote of the Cretaceous." Like coyotes, he speculates, it consumed a 
variety of prey. As a group, the Coelurosaurs-which include duck-billed 
dinosaurs, oviraptors, and even Tyrannosaurus rex-sport a variety of special 
features, including beaks and horns. The new creature lacks adornments.

 The group used information from Chinese fossils to reconstruct the new 
Coelurosaur from the remains of two individuals.

 The original Coelurosaur ancestor may have looked a lot like this new find 
did. The species is too young to have been the original ancestor of the 
Coelurosaurs, Wolfe says, but "this dinosaur is a good example of what we hope 
might be the rootstock."

 Many paleontologists speculate that modern-day birds emerged from Coelurosaur 
rootstock, an idea bolstered by recent finds in China of early Cretaceous 
fossils of what were apparently feathered Coelurosaurs (SN: 4/28/01, p. 262).

 The sediments from the Arizona-New Mexico site will probably continue to yield 
surprises. The researchers have already spied some promising new bones waiting 
to be retrieved.


