Physics Bedrock Cracks, Sun Shines In: Science News Online, June 23, 2001

 Physics Bedrock Cracks, Sun Shines In

 Peter Weiss

 By solving a decades-long mystery about the sun, researchers have set off a 
scientific ripple that could alter conceptions of the universe as a whole.

 In the first scientific data to emerge from the Sudbury (Ontario) Neutrino 
Observatory (SNO) in Canada, physicists have found evidence that their most 
fundamental theory of the universe-the so-called standard model (SN: 7/1/95, p. 
10) -contains a major flaw. They've also uncovered a new clue to the 
composition of the dark matter thought to make up 95 percent of the mass of the 
cosmos.

 The revelations arise from a new study of the neutrino, an elusive form of 
matter. Neutrinos come in three types-which scientists call flavors-known as 
the electron neutrino, muon neutrino, and tau neutrino. These neutrinos span a 
large range of energies.

 Since the 1960s, scientists have measured the sun's copious neutrino output as 
an indicator of its internal, nuclear-fusion reactions. However, solar-neutrino 
observatories examining different energy ranges have consistently detected only 
about half or fewer of the neutrinos that theorists predict they should find. 
Finally, scientists can now say they know why.

"Our measurements provide an answer to what has been a major puzzle in science 
for over 30 years," says SNO Director Arthur B. McDonald of Queen's University 
in Kingston, Ontario.

 Solar-fusion reactions unleash only enough energy to make electron neutrinos, 
so that's the flavor that scientists were expecting to detect. But the new data 
indicate that electron neutrinos oscillate with other flavors as they make 
their way to Earth. Because detectors have been less sensitive to muon and tau 
than to electron neutrinos, the result was a systematic undercounting of solar 
neutrinos.

"Neutrinos are very confused, very schizophrenic," explains John N. Bahcall of 
the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton, N.J. By pinpointing the source 
of the neutrino shortfall, the Sudbury team has made "a beautiful measurement" 
that "confirms our calculations of how the sun shines," he says.

 Sudbury scientists unveiled their data on Monday in Victoria, British 
Columbia, at the annual congress of the Canadian Association of Physicists.

 Evidence of neutrinos' schizophrenia first surfaced in 1998. In Japan, 
physicists were studying muon neutrinos produced by cosmic rays hitting Earth's 
atmosphere. The researchers at the Super-Kamiokande detector in Kamioka 
observed that more muon neutrinos arrived at their instrument from directly 
above the underground device than along other paths through the Earth (SN: 
6/13/98, p. 374). The scientists concluded that muon neutrinos taking the 
longer routes had time to oscillate into other flavors that were more difficult 
for their detector to see.

 These findings shook up particle physics (SN: 1/30/99, p. 76) because the 
standard model rules out such oscillations. What's more, according to quantum 
mechanics, neutrinos could oscillate only if they had mass-another 
contradiction to the standard model.

 Although the standard model has been a remarkably successful theory, the crack 
in it that appeared at Super-Kamiokande has now been widened by the SNO 
finding, researchers say.

 Besides studying atmospheric neutrinos, researchers at Super-Kamiokande have 
measured solar neutrinos. They find 45 percent of the predicted particle flow. 
The new Sudbury data follow up directly on that measurement by tallying 
neutrinos in the same energy range. But unique features of the Canadian 
instrument enable it to reveal details about those neutrinos unattainable with 
Super-Kamiokande.

 The Japanese detector, filled with ordinary water, can't distinguish among the 
solar-neutrino flavors. However, using 1,000 tons of heavy water as a detector, 
the Sudbury researchers can measure how many electron neutrinos reach their 
device, which sits in a working nickel mine.

 This measurement has enabled scientists to infer how many electron neutrinos 
reach Super-Kamiokande. Discerning electron neutrinos from other neutrinos is 
the key capability that had been needed to solve the solar puzzle, scientists 
say.

 The Sudbury device reveals that the electron neutrinos arriving at an earthly 
detector total only 35 percent of the predicted solar-neutrino output. 
Therefore, the additional neutrino flow detected at Super-Kamiokande must be 
made of up muon and tau neutrinos. Moreover, they must have left the sun as 
electron neutrinos-the only kind it produces-and changed flavor along the way.

 By knowing the sensitivity of Super-Kamiokande to muon and tau neutrinos, the 
Sudbury team has been able to extrapolate that the total solar output is almost 
precisely what theorists have called for.

 Although the SNO team is still collecting data, the evidence for oscillating 
solar neutrinos "is pretty definitive at this point," comments Stephen J. Parke 
of Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill.

 Moreover, these new data refine scientists' view of dark matter, says SNO's 
Kevin T. Lesko of Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory.

 For decades, scientists have known that the mass of the visible objects in the 
cosmos is far too little to account for features of the universe such as the 
gravitational tug that keeps galaxy clusters together. Researchers have 
hypothesized that some combination of familiar, nonluminous matter and some 
unknown matter-together dubbed dark matter-makes up the difference.

 Researchers had suspected that the total neutrino mass was probably not the 
overwhelming contributor to dark matter, Lesko notes. Now, the Sudbury findings 
permit researchers for the first time to set a firm limit: The universe's 
neutrinos make up no more than about half the dark matter.


