Nearby star may have its own asteroid belt: Science News Online, June 16, 2001

 Nearby star may have its own asteroid belt

 Ron Cowen

 Observations of warm dust swaddling a young, nearby star suggest that 
astronomers have found the first asteroid belt outside the solar system. And 
where there are asteroids, there could be planets.

 Several features of the dust surrounding the star Zeta Leporis indicate that 
the particles were generated by a massive collection of asteroids smashing into 
each other, says Christine H. Chen of the University of California, Los Angeles.

 The material's temperature, mass, and proximity to the youthful star are all 
indicators that "the system we observed around Zeta Leporis is similar to what 
we think occurred in the early years [of the solar system] when planets and 
asteroids were created," says study collaborator Michael Jura of UCLA. Chen and 
Jura reported the finding last week in Pasadena, Calif., at a meeting of the 
American Astronomical Society.

 Zeta Leporis lies some 70 light-years from Earth, and astronomers estimate its 
age to be 50 million to 500 million years. That's young enough that the star 
could still be forming planets and asteroids but old enough that any dust that 
surrounded the star at its birth would already have coalesced into larger 
objects or spiraled into the star, Chen notes.

 Indeed, she and Jura calculate that any dust grains orbiting Zeta Leporis 
would last only about 20,000 years before being absorbed by the star.

 The observed dust must therefore have come from some reservoir that 
continually replenishes the grains, Chen asserts. The most likely source, she 
notes, is collisions between large bodies, such as asteroids. In our solar 
system, collisions between members of the asteroid belt replenish dust in the 
region where the inner, terrestrial planets reside.

 Astronomers have known since 1983 that dust orbits Zeta Leporis. That year, 
NASA's Infrared Astronomy Satellite detected a larger-than-expected infrared 
signal from the star's vicinity. That's a sign of dust, which absorbs visible 
light from the star that it surrounds and reemits the radiation at infrared 
wavelengths.

 Last February, Chen and Jura examined Zeta Leporis with an infrared camera on 
one of the Keck telescopes atop Mauna Kea in Hawaii. The camera revealed that 
the dust is confined to a region around the star no larger than 6.1 
astronomical units (AU) in radius and could lie as close as 2.5 AU. One AU is 
the distance between the sun and Earth. The belt of asteroids in our solar 
system lies between 2.1 and 3.3 AU from the sun.

 Chen and Jura calculate that to produce the amount of dust they observed, the 
asteroids orbiting Zeta Leporis must have a total mass about 200 times that of 
all the rocky denizens of the solar system's asteroid belt.

 An asteroid belt circling Zeta Leporis "is a solid inference" of the new 
findings, comments Mark V. Sykes of the University of Arizona in Tucson. He 
suggests that the gravity of a planet as massive as Jupiter may be required to 
stir up the belt, generating the collisions necessary to produce the amount of 
dust Chen and Jura observed.

 Trying to find evidence of such a massive planet indirectly, by studying the 
wobble it would induce in the motion of Zeta Leporis, could prove difficult 
because the star's rapid rotation would interfere with those observations, 
Sykes says. As telescope optics continues to improve, however, astronomers 
might be able to discern a planet by direct imaging, he adds.


