Ebola May Enter Cell via Folate Gate: Science News Online, July 21, 2001

 Ebola May Enter Cell via Folate Gate

 Nathan Seppa

 Every virus thrives by invading cells, replicating within them, and then 
spreading to other cells. Unlike a burglar who crudely breaks into a residence, 
however, a virus uses its own proteins as molecular keys to unlock cells.

 Deadly Ebola virus and its cousin Marburg virus are among the most efficient 
intruders known.

 Yet scientists haven't discovered their means of cell entry. New findings in 
the July 13 Cell point to a possible lock for the viruses' key: a cell-surface 
molecule that normally binds to a member of the vitamin B family.

 This vitamin, called folate, is fundamental to growth and development. Many 
cells in the body, though not all, display folate receptors to capture the 
vitamin.

 The new experiments show that a glycoprotein on the outside of both Ebola and 
Marburg viruses can latch on to one type of folate receptor, enabling the 
viruses to sneak into the underlying cell, says study coauthor Mark A. 
Goldsmith, a virologist and immunologist at the University of California, San 
Francisco School of Medicine.

 Goldsmith and his colleagues experimented with lymphocytes, a type of white 
blood cell that the viruses don't typically attack. After genetically altering 
the lymphocytes to make them produce various receptor proteins, the researchers 
found that the viruses infected cells displaying the folate receptor.

 The study is "clearly incriminating the folate receptor as being involved in 
cell entry of Marburg and Ebola virus types," says Asok C. Antony, a 
hematologist and oncologist at the Indiana University School of Medicine in 
Indianapolis.

 The folate receptor "could be the right molecule" permitting some Ebola and 
Marburg infections, but probably not all, says Paul Bates, a virologist at the 
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Earlier research hinted that 
another cell-surface molecule, the asialoglycoprotein receptor, is an entry 
point for Marburg virus.

 Ebola, in fact, appears to invade some cells that don't have folate receptors, 
Bates says. "There have to be other keys out there unlocking the doors to these 
cells," he says.

 Ebola virus was first described in Zaire, now the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, in 1976. Recognition of Marburg virus dates from a 1967 outbreak in 
Marburg, Germany, that apparently spread to people from monkeys imported from 
Uganda. Both viruses can cause hemorrhage, fever, organ failure, and death.

 Scientists haven't yet determined all the cells that the viruses attack. 
Candidates include liver cells and cells lining blood vessels and the 
respiratory system.

 There is some evidence that airborne droplets may spread Ebola virus, Antony 
says. Perhaps it's not a coincidence, he says, that respiratory-system cells 
are among those displaying folate receptors.

 Antony hypothesizes that if folate receptors are truly the viruses' dominant 
cell-entry points, then being folate deficient-as many people in developing 
countries are-could leave a person susceptible to infection. Such an individual 
would have many unoccupied folate receptors and so, plenty of places for 
viruses to attack.

 However, Goldsmith doubts that simply giving virus-exposed people heavy doses 
of folate would help them avoid the disease. He finds more promising some 
test-tube experiments in the new study showing that an antibody designed to 
occupy the folate receptor can block cell entry by the viruses.

 A third treatment option suggested by the new results would introduce a 
free-floating decoy receptor to which a virus could bind. That might keep it 
from infecting cells, Goldsmith says.

 Decoys sopping up the virus might work, says Antony, but scientists would be 
left with the problem of how to remove accumulated viruses from the blood.

 Before any of these therapies can be pursued, says Goldsmith, "it's more 
important to discover what other [vulnerable] receptors might be out there."


