Landfills Make Mercury More Toxic: Science News Online, July 7, 2001

 Landfills Make Mercury More Toxic

 Janet Raloff

 Mercury, a nerve poison, is a major ingredient in many products-from 
thermometers and fluorescent bulbs to batteries and old latex paint. A new 
study finds that landfill disposal of such products can chemically alter the 
mercury in them, not only rendering it more toxic but also fostering its 
release into the air.

 Although even mercury in its elemental form is toxic, its most poisonous 
embodiment is methyl mercury, the result of a chemical modification by bacteria 
(SN: 3/9/91, p. 152). The finding of such a process in landfills underscores 
the importance of ensuring that mercury doesn't enter the municipal-waste 
stream, says study leader Steve E. Lindberg of Oak Ridge (Tenn.) National 
Laboratory.

 The decomposition of interred landfill wastes creates methane. Some landfill 
managers burn the gas in flares as it exits pipes atop the waste field. Most 
managers, however, merely vent the gas-and any contaminants it may carry-into 
the air.

 Two years ago, Lindberg's team found methyl mercury in the water vapor that 
condensed out of the gas emanating from a Florida landfill. Concentrations were 
at least 100 times those typically seen in water. The finding made sense, 
Lindberg recalls: In wetlands, researchers had previously identified certain 
bacteria that methylate natural, inorganic mercury derived from minerals. This 
same family of microbes resides in landfills.

 However, methyl mercury comes in two forms-mono- and dimethyl-mercury-with the 
latter being the more toxic. To probe which form is made in landfills, Lindberg 
and his coworkers collected gases destined for flaring. In the August 
Atmospheric Environment, they report finding some 50 nanograms of dimethyl 
mercury per cubic meter of landfill gas.

 That "is higher, by a factor of 30 or 40, than concentrations of total mercury 
in ambient air," Lindberg notes, and it's at least 1,000 times that of any 
dimethyl-mercury concentration ever recorded in open air. His team also 
detected lower concentrations of the less volatile mono-methyl mercury in the 
landfill gas.

 Although chemists had detected methyl mercury in air and rain, "nobody had 
been able to demonstrate where it comes from," notes John W.M. Rudd of the 
Winnipeg (Manitoba) Freshwater Institute, part of Canada's Department of 
Fisheries and Oceans. The new study offers "the first real evidence that 
landfills might be a major source," he says.

 Some 60,000 U.S. children are born each year with developmental impairments 
triggered by fetal exposure to methyl mercury, usually as a result of their 
moms having eaten tainted fish (SN: 7/29/00, p. 77). "If it doesn't get 
methylated, mercury doesn't get into fish," observes Edward Swain of the 
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency in St. Paul.

 To limit the rain of mercury from human activities, regulators have focused on 
curbing emissions of inorganic mercury from coal burning. However, Lindberg 
notes, although chemists assumed that mercury could become methylated in the 
air, they couldn't show it.

 Now, Swain posits, a "shift in paradigms" may be in order. He says that 
sending mercury-containing wastes to landfills may essentially be spoon-feeding 
copious amounts of the toxicant to methylating bacteria, which then cough the 
injurious forms into air.

 The new findings point to the need to inventory emissions by 
landfills-especially the older ones, which hold the richest stores of 
mercury-tainted wastes-says Frank D'Itri of Michigan State University's 
Institute of Water Research in East Lansing.

 Lindberg plans to embark on such an inventory. He says that the new data also 
suggest a need for technologies to capture methyl mercury from landfills before 
it can enter the atmosphere.


