Earliest Ancestor Emerges in Africa: Science News Online, July 14, 2001

 Earliest Ancestor Emerges in Africa

 Bruce Bower

 Our ancient kin have taken a big step back in time. An international team 
working in Ethiopia has found bones and teeth of the earliest known hominid, a 
member in good standing of humanity's evolutionary family.

 The fragmentary remains come from at least five individuals-in the genus 
Ardipithecus-who lived between 5.2 million and 5.8 million years ago, says 
anthropology graduate student Yohannes Haile-Selassie of the University of 
California, Berkeley. He describes the finds in the July 12 Nature.

 Until now, the earliest Ardipithecus fossils came from a 4.4-million-year-old 
Ethiopian site. Australopithecus, the genus that includes Lucy's famous 
remains, lived in eastern Africa no more than about 4 million years ago.

 DNA studies have suggested that a common ancestor of people and chimpanzees 
lived in Africa anywhere from 5 million to 7 million years ago.

" Ardipithecus was close [in time] to the common ancestor of chimpanzees and 
humans," Haile-Selassie says. "We don't know what that common ancestor looked 
like."

 Much is also unknown about Ardipithecus' looks. The new finds consist of a 
partial jaw, a few teeth, several hand and foot bones, and pieces of an 
upper-arm bone and a collarbone. The bones are about the size of those from a 
modern common chimp. However, Ardipithecus displays dental features found in 
other hominids but not in any fossil or living ape.

 Moreover, the new finds include a toe bone shaped like those of Lucy and her 
kind. This constitutes "subtle but clear evidence" that Ardipithecus, like 
Australopithecus, walked on two legs, says anthropologist C. Owen Lovejoy of 
Kent (Ohio) State University, who independently examined the toe fossil. 
Ongoing studies of 4.4-million-year-old Ardipithecus fossils will further 
illuminate this hominid's stance, Lovejoy says.

 The fossils were unearthed at sites in what is now a desert. When Ardipithecus 
lived there, the region contained a dense forest and had a cool, wet climate, 
according to studies led by Giday WoldeGabriel of Los Alamos (N.M.) National 
Laboratory.

 That work, reported in the same issue of Nature, includes chemical analyses of 
fossil-bearing soil and study of the sites' other animal remains, such as 
extinct elephants, rats, and monkeys.

 The researchers dated layers of volcanic ash above and below the fossils by 
measuring argon gas trapped in samples of the rock. This gas accumulates at a 
known rate in rocks and minerals. Age estimates based on orientation shifts in 
ancient Earth's magnetic field at the sites corroborated the argon-based dates.

"This is the best evidence for the earliest hominids," comments anthropologist 
Laura M. Maclatchy of Boston University.

 The new finds raise puzzling questions about why early hominids evolved an 
upright stance, Maclatchy adds. Researchers have often portrayed a two-legged 
stride as an adaptation to trekking across hot, grassy savannas. Yet 
Ardipithecus lived in shady forests where a hominid would have less need to 
stand up to dissipate heat or walk long distances.

 Earlier this year, a French team announced the discovery of fossil teeth and 
limb-bone fragments of a 6-million-year-old hominid in Kenya. The researchers 
placed this creature in a new genus, Orrorin.

 Orrorin's evolutionary status is uncertain, Haile-Selassie holds. Its teeth 
resemble those of apes far more than those of later hominids, he says. However, 
Orrorin's leg bones may have supported an upright stance, Haile-Selassie 
acknowledges.


