Faces of Perception: Science News Online, July 7, 2001

 Faces of Perception

 It's tough to explain how people so easily tell one face from another

 Bruce Bower

 Newborn babies are wrinkled, wide-eyed strangers in a strange land of light, 
shadow, and color. Nonetheless, these little bundles of visual innocence take 
an immediate shine to faces.

 Just a few hours after birth, infants begin to imitate adults' smiles, frowns, 
and other expressions. Given a choice, the same babies gaze longer at a picture 
of their mother's face than at an image of the face of a female stranger. They 
also boast a budding aptitude for telling strangers' faces apart and give 
particular notice to faces rated as attractive by adults.

 The magnetic pull that faces exert on babies' attention has stimulated much 
research by psychologists over the past 30 years. In related work, 
neuroscientists are pursuing the brain areas that enable most adults to say 
with confidence, "I never forget a face." Debate over the meaning of all this 
research has now come to a head.

 Some scientists suspect that newborns possess an innate ability to spot basic 
facial features, such as two eyes situated above a mouth. As a result of 
humanity's extended evolution in small groups, where it's critical to discern 
friends from foes, genes now give human brains a head start in decoding faces, 
according to these researchers.

 Consequently, they add, a few brain areas-in particular, a small patch of 
right-brain tissue just behind the ear-specialize in perceiving and recognizing 
faces. People who incur damage to these regions neither recognize the faces of 
those they know nor remember new faces.

 An alternate explanation of face recognition, however, is gaining momentum. 
Its adherents argue that infants come equipped not with a special 
face-recognition capability but only with preferences for general perceptual 
features, such as curved contours. Babies use these visual inclinations as a 
launching pad for learning to recognize faces, say researchers in this camp.

 A propensity for looking at faces may coexist with preferences for several 
other visual categories in newborns, none of which is predetermined by genes, 
these researchers argue. By 3 to 4 months of age, infants usually prefer 
pictures of cats over horses, tigers over cats, chairs over tables, and mammals 
over birds. Such curious predilections probably exist even in newborns, these 
scientists propose.

 Moreover, they point out, the behind-the-ear brain area most directly 
implicated in face recognition actually coordinates all sorts of expert visual 
judgments. It's just as crucial for making deft distinctions among classic 
cars, bird species, and imaginary creatures with no faces as it is for 
recognizing pictures of one's high school classmates. Damage to this part of 
the brain hinders object recognition to a lesser extent than it does face 
recognition, but the effect is still noticeable, add supporters of this view.

 The theoretical division runs deep among face researchers. "Debate about the 
nature of face recognition is unbelievably heated right now," says 
neuroscientist Charles A. Nelson of the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis. 
"It has polarized groups of researchers."

 In the long run, this dispute will yield major scientific insights, holds 
neuroscientist Nancy Kanwisher of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"It will take a while to figure out how the brain carves up visual perception," 
she says. "This is how science works."

 A fuzzy world

 It's hard to know precisely what a baby sees when he or she looks at a face 
looming overhead. Studies indicate that newborns perceive a fuzzy world, devoid 
of sharp delineations among objects and the nuances of noses, cheeks, and other 
parts of the facial landscape.

 Despite their vague take on the world, infants have an innate preference for 
gazing at facelike sights, such as a pair of round blobs over a horizontal 
line, contends psychologist Mark H. Johnson of Birkbeck College in London.

"Newborns possess a simple, blurred representation of facial structure," 
Johnson says.

 His view derives from several findings. First, newborns see well enough to 
imitate adults' facial expressions. Second, babies so quickly start to 
distinguish among faces and recognize their mother's face that there is 
virtually no time for learning these tricks. Third, within days of birth, 
infants know enough about facial features that they prefer attractive over 
unattractive faces.

 Finally, as with adults, babies show no partiality to good-looking faces if 
the images of the faces are turned upside down.

 To do all this, babies must begin life knowing how the human face is 
organized, contends psychologist Alan Slater of the University of Exeter, 
England. Newborns thus naturally look toward facelike configurations, with two 
eyes above a nose and mouth, he theorizes.

 Other scientists see more merit in visual simplicity. Newborns probably focus 
on general elements of faces, contends psychologist Paul C. Quinn of Washington 
and Jefferson College in Washington, Pa. The contour, or shape, of the head may 
represent a particularly compelling component of the face for babies, he says.

 For instance, in the January Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, Quinn 
and his coworkers reported that 3- and 4-month-old infants distinguish among 
cats and dogs based on silhouettes of the animals' heads.

 Consider babies who first spent time looking at a cat's head silhouette. In a 
later trial, these infants looked longer at a head silhouette of either a new 
cat or a dog than at the silhouette of the previously seen cat, revealing a 
preference for visual novelty. Along the same line, babies who viewed a series 
of head silhouettes of either cats or dogs later preferred to look at head 
silhouettes of the other species.

 In contrast, no such signs of appreciating novel figures appeared among 
infants shown body silhouettes of either cats or dogs.

 In earlier work, Quinn had found that 3- and 4-month-olds also distinguish 
among familiar and novel silhouettes of human heads. At that age, babies favor 
head shapes of people over those of cats, dogs, and other animals, he says.

 Babies soak up the subtleties of the faces they encounter with surprising 
ease, Quinn adds. In one stark example, he finds that 7-month-old infants of 
both sexes raised by single mothers prefer to look at pictures of female faces, 
whereas those raised by single fathers opt for male faces.

 Face recognition

 In fact, constant exposure to faces in the first few years of life generates 
the brain's face-recognition system, argues Nelson in the March-June Infant and 
Child Development. He suggests that babies only need to start out with a 
capacity for discerning general properties of figures, much as Quinn proposes.

 Experience in looking at faces during the first year of life focuses infants' 
perceptual spotlight, Nelson contends. For instance, he and his coworkers find 
that infants do better than adults at noticing facial differences in monkeys 
and also in people from racial backgrounds other than their own. These 
advantages illuminate babies' reliance on broad visual cues that, in Nelson's 
opinion, eventually get replaced by a system for rapidly recognizing familiar 
human faces.

 Faces contain two structural elements that are big-time baby pleasers but are 
by no means unique to faces, according to studies directed by psychologist 
Francesca Simion of the University of Padova, in Italy. First, newborns prefer 
to look at patterns with a greater number of elements in the top half of the 
visual field. They gaze longer at a T-shape pattern composed of squares than at 
an upside-down T shape, as well as at head shapes with more squares randomly 
positioned in the top than in the bottom half.

 Second, in the days after birth, babies fixate more readily on curved rather 
than straight contours. Infants shown face drawings without head contours 
exhibit none of their usual preference for an upright face, Simion's team finds.

 Babies aren't the only ones who can use such basic visual cues to grasp faces. 
A computer network programmed to respond to simple visual features and to 
modify its output after getting feedback on errors learns to recognize faces 
with considerable accuracy. This system, devised by Herve Abdi of the 
University of Texas at Dallas and his colleagues, captures increasingly fine 
visual details as it encounters a greater number of faces.

"The bulk of the evidence suggests that the ability to recognize faces is 
learned," Nelson argues.

 Special status

 Controversy also surrounds efforts, conducted mainly with adults, to track 
down brain areas devoted to face recognition.

 Evidence that faces enjoy special status in the brain comes from individuals 
with a condition called prosopagnosia. After suffering damage to the brain's 
right temporal lobe, these people have lost the ability to recognize familiar 
faces. Moreover, a different pattern of temporal lobe brain damage blocks the 
capability to identify inanimate objects, while sparing face recognition.

 A 16-year-old boy named Adam presents a particularly intriguing case of 
prosopagnosia. Adam's temporal-brain damage occurred when he contracted 
meningitis at 1 day of age. He now exhibits "impressively bad" face recognition 
and mild difficulty at detecting various objects, says psychologist Martha J. 
Farah of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Adam draws a blank 
even for pictures of his mother.

 Uninjured parts of Adam's young brain apparently had no way to regroup and 
assume responsibility for face recognition, Farah proposes. "This indicates 
that the genome encodes for a specific face-processing area in the brain that 
can't be replaced," she says.

 Several brain-imaging studies suggest that face recognition depends on a few 
regions of the temporal lobes, particularly the area just behind the right ear 
known as the fusiform gyrus. Kanwisher and other investigators find that neural 
activity in the fusiform gyrus surges at least twice as strongly when healthy 
adults view faces as when they look at assorted objects, letter strings, or the 
backs of human heads.

 The findings from brain-damaged patients and healthy volunteers justify 
renaming the fusiform gyrus as "the fusiform face area," Kanwisher says.

 You could just as easily dub this patch of tissue "the fusiform greeble area," 
according to Isabel Gauthier of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, who has 
directed a series of brain-imaging studies on object recognition. After a 
little training, most volunteers easily classify imaginary, faceless, plantlike 
creatures called greebles according to their sex and family. These participants 
display elevated fusiform gyrus activity as they identify pairs of matching 
greebles.

 Comparable brain responses occur as people peruse real-world objects or 
animals that they know much about, Gauthier and her coworkers find. For 
instance, the fusiform gyrus lights up in car buffs as they examine pictures of 
different makes and models of classic automobiles and in bird authorities as 
they inspect images of various avian species (SN: 2/5/00, p. 91).

 Rather than specializing solely in faces, the fusiform gyrus fosters 
proficiency at visually analyzing any class of items that a person strives to 
master, Gauthier asserts. "The brain doesn't need to care about different 
categories of things in the world, such as faces," she remarks. Instead, neural 
tissue solves computational problems, such as assembling visual elements into 
meaningful wholes.

 Kanwisher remains skeptical of Gauthier's findings until the data on greebles, 
cars, and birds are confirmed by independent researchers. Gauthier, who did 
postdoctoral work in Kanwisher's lab, responds that she looks forward to such 
attempts.

 It's unclear whether infants and children learn to identify faces in the same 
way that adults gain visual expertise with whatever strikes their fancy, 
Gauthier adds. In a recent study, she and her colleagues tested young adults 
with autism, a disorder that includes difficulty with face recognition but 
involves no apparent temporal lobe damage. Nevertheless, the participants 
exhibited unusually low fusiform gyrus activity while trying to tell faces 
apart.

 Whatever mechanisms enable neurologically healthy kids to develop face 
expertise in the fusiform gyrus may be unavailable to their peers with autism, 
Gauthier theorizes.

 She now wants a closer examination of brain-damaged patients, such as Adam. 
Having been told that their injury should cause problems with recognizing 
faces, prosopagnosics usually give up quickly on tests of this ability, she 
says. In contrast, the same individuals assume they should routinely conquer 
object-recognition tasks, so they spend a lot of time poring over such tests. 
As a result, the relative superiority of object recognition among 
prosopagnosics has been exaggerated, in Gauthier's view.

 Investigators have yet to assess whether Adam looks longer at objects than at 
faces on recognition tests, she notes.

 Temporal lob activity

 Intriguing leads from other research groups seem unlikely to break the 
theoretical stalemate over face recognition.

 Distinct, overlapping patterns of temporal lobe activity occur when volunteers 
look at faces, chairs, shoes, cats, and other remarkably specific categories of 
objects, according to brain-imaging studies directed by James V. Haxby of the 
National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md.

"We can tell if a person is looking at a shoe, a chair, or a face, based on the 
pattern of their brain activity," Haxby remarks. He described such findings in 
March at the annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society in New York 
City.

 Specific neural-activity patterns serve as maps of the visual features that 
characterize each category, Haxby proposes. Overlapping maps occur because 
categories often share some visual elements.

 It's unclear how the brain generates maps for different categories. There's 
clearly not a genetic capacity for distinguishing chairs from shoes, although 
one might exist for telling faces apart, says Haxby.

 Whatever the case, the first few months of life appear to be critical for 
forming the neural framework of face recognition. A team of McMaster University 
psychologists in Hamilton, Ont., examined 14 young people, 9 to 21 years old, 
who were born with cataracts in both eyes and were blind until they had eye 
surgery at 2 to 6 months of age. They now have great difficulty in seeing faces 
as unified entities, the team reports in the April 19 Nature.

 When shown a pair of face pictures that differ only in the configuration of 
the same features-say, one face with closely set eyes and little space between 
the nose and upper lip and another face with eyes wide apart and more space 
above the upper lip-the former cataract patients usually couldn't distinguish 
one picture from the other. Volunteers of the same age but with no previous 
vision problems did far better at this task.

 Further testing of these people suggests that adults who were deprived of 
vision early in life manage to recognize faces by focusing on the shape of the 
nose and other isolated features, says study coauthor Richard Le Grand.

 Early visual input to the right brain, which arrives via the left eye, proves 
vital for perceiving faces as integrated units, Le Grand adds. People born only 
with left-eye cataracts that were later removed do just as poorly on 
face-configuration tasks as those who needed two cataracts removed, he and his 
coworkers find.

 LeGrand's team plans to use brain-scan technology to identify right-brain 
areas activated in these individuals during face recognition. The researchers 
will also see if early-cataract patients can learn to make expert visual 
distinctions of objects other than faces, such as Gauthier's greebles.

 If such studies don't change the face of the face-recognition debate, they'll 
certainly feed into its body of hotly contested data.

 Corrections:


