Gene Makes Tomatoes Tolerate Salt: Science News Online, Aug. 4, 2001

 Gene Makes Tomatoes Tolerate Salt

 John Travis

 The birthplace of agriculture, the Mideast's Fertile Crescent, became largely 
a desert long ago, and salt in the soil had a lot to do with it. Today, 
according to some estimates, salt-laden soil ruins the farming potential of 
more than one-third of all irrigated lands worldwide. "Every time we water the 
land, we're depositing minute quantities of salt. It catches up with us," notes 
Eduardo Blumwald of the University of California, Davis.

 Blumwald and a colleague have now made a dramatic advance in combating this 
agricultural nightmare (SN: 11/10/84, p. 298; 11/17/84, p. 314). They 
genetically modified a traditional crop plant, the tomato, so that it can 
thrive in salty water. Besides providing farmers with a cash crop for salted 
lands, such plants may also pull salt out of soils, enabling other crops to 
thrive again.

"It's a remarkable feat," says UC-Davis' Emanuel Epstein, who decades ago 
proposed endowing commercial crops with salt tolerance.

"It's a really important breakthrough," concurs plant biologist Edward Glenn of 
the University of Arizona in Tucson.

 While some wild plants flourish in salty conditions, traditional crops become 
stunted or die when exposed to high concentrations of sodium chloride.

"There's hardly anything for farmers to plant that's salt-tolerant," says 
Glenn. Researchers have for decades struggled to breed this trait into already 
domesticated plants. Their failure left many scientists convinced that 
salt-tolerance derives from multiple genes.

 In 1999, however, Blumwald's group reported that adding active copies of a 
single gene normally inactive in the weed Arabidopsis thaliana made the plant 
salt-tolerant. The gene encodes a protein that shuttles sodium into sacs, or 
vacuoles, inside plant cells, protecting them from salt damage. Salt-tolerant 
plants use this trick, but traditional crops seem to have turned off the gene, 
says Glenn.

 Blumwald has now duplicated his Arabidopsis work in the tomato. In the August 
Nature Biotechnology, he and Hong-Xia Zhang of the University of Toronto report 
that their altered plant can grow hydroponically in solutions with sodium 
chloride concentrations of 200 millimolar (mM). Most crops start dying off at 
50 mM salt; seawater contains 530 mM.

 The altered tomato plant draws salt from the soil mostly into its leaves, not 
into its fruit. According to Blumwald's unofficial and admittedly biased 
testing, the tomatoes "taste great."

 While praising Blumwald's work, Clyde Wilson of the U.S. Salinity Laboratory 
in Riverside, Calif., offers some cautions. Field testing of the new plant must 
demonstrate qualities required for a commercial tomato, he says. The fruit must 
ripen uniformly, for example, and have tough enough skin for handling.

"It is difficult to predict how successful this particular approach will be 
with other crops," adds Wilson, noting that the tomato has a simple genome 
compared with many other crops, such as wheat.

 Blumwald remains confident. He already has introduced the salt-tolerance gene 
into canola, the seeds of which provide a valuable oil.

 He hopes eventually to further improve plants' salt tolerance to the point 
where they could be irrigated with seawater. Says Blumwald: "It's not a dream 
anymore. It's a real possibility."


