Bacteria live inside bacteria in mealybug: Science News Online, July 28, 2001

 Bacteria live inside bacteria in mealybug

 Charlotte Schubert

 The ability of life forms to co-opt each other has taken a novel twist: 
Scientists have provided the first proof that a bacterium takes up long-term 
residence inside another bacterium. Both the host and the tenant, in turn, 
dwell inside a mealybug, which passes the bacteria on through its own eggs.

 Many types of insects, including mealybugs and aphids, play host to bacteria. 
In return, the bacteria often provide nutrients to the insect.

 Since the early 1900s, scientists have known that there was something 
particularly bizarre about mealybugs. When viewed with a microscope, the 
bacteria inside the abdominal cells of some mealybug species appear to be 
packaged in capsules.

 Now, a group at Utah State University in Logan reports that each of these 
capsules is itself a bacterium. Carol D. von Dohlen, William R. McManus, and 
their colleagues started out by identifying the DNA for two bacterial species 
in the citrus mealybug, Planococcus citri. Then, using fluorescently labeled 
DNA, they pinpointed the location of the two sets of genetic material. That's 
when the researchers saw that one bacterial species actually encapsulates 
another, they report in the July 26 Nature.

 The new observations gel with decades-old electron microscope images showing 
details of the capsules. The researchers can now clearly interpret those 
details as bacterial structures. The Utah biologists observed that the 
bacterial capsule invades citrus mealybug eggs before hatching. Such behavior 
is common among insect-dwelling bacteria. It ensures that the bacteria will 
pass into successive generations of insects.

 Lynn Margulis of the University of Massachusetts in Amherst says that the Utah 
group's data appear to be the first thorough molecular documentation of 
bacteria living inside bacteria. She notes, however, that other microscopists 
have "excellent" images of such phenomena.

 John Stolz of Duquesne University in Pittsburgh agrees, but he rates much of 
the prior evidence as "circumstantial" and falling short of confirming 
long-term bacteria-in-bacteria associations. The new data clearly document such 
persistence, Stolz says.

 Finding bacteria living inside each other has implications for the evolution 
of all cells with nuclei. Such eukaryotic cells form the building blocks of 
animals, plants, and many microbes. Bacteria lack a nucleus, but Margulis 
theorizes that the nucleus arose when one type of bacterium moved inside 
another.

"The discovery is a really fundamental one," says Paul Baumann at the 
University of California, Davis. However, it's not clear what one bacterium 
does for the other in the mealybug, he notes.


