Environment's stuck with nonstick coatings: Science News Online, July 21, 2001

 Environment's stuck with nonstick coatings

 Jessica Gorman

 The family of nonstick materials that includes Teflon can degrade into 
pollutants that persist in the environment, new research suggests.

 Known as fluoropolymers, these coatings get their tough and slippery traits 
from fluorine atoms strongly bonded to the materials' carbon backbones. 
Manufacturers use the materials in products ranging from frying pans and other 
kitchen items to engines and electrical insulation.

 Scott A. Mabury of the University of Toronto and his colleagues heated a 
variety of fluoropolymers to 360@C and 500@C. In both cases, a version of 
nuclear magnetic resonance analysis tuned to detect fluorine showed that the 
materials broke down into several undesirable products. One of these, called 
trifluoroacetate (TFA), is toxic to plants, and there's no evidence that it 
degrades in the environment. Environmental concentrations are low now but could 
eventually build to troublesome levels, say the researchers.

 Other breakdown products included long-lasting fluorine- and chlorine-rich 
carboxylic acids, which might have negative health and environmental effects 
because animal tissues absorb them, Mabury's group reports in the July 19 
Nature. Moreover, Mabury says the team was surprised to find ozone-depleting 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and greenhouse gases known as fluorocarbons coming 
from the heated materials.

 The researchers discovered the chemical cocktail while trying to solve a 
riddle, says Mabury. Several years ago, scientists realized that gases known as 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons, which have replaced 
ozone-destroying CFCs in many products, break down in the atmosphere to form 
TFA. However, the amount of TFA measured in the environment is much higher than 
this process could supply.

 Using environmental models depicting TFA's diffusion into Toronto rainwater, 
Mabury's group found evidence that the widespread heating of fluoropolymers 
could produce the missing TFA. Among the sources for such heat are engines and 
open burning of household trash, Mabury notes.

 This is "a plausible explanation for the observed amounts of [TFA] in 
rainwater around and downwind of urban areas," comments Tim Wallington, an 
atmospheric chemist with the Ford Motor Co. in Dearborn, Mich. Even so, he 
says, the benefits of such coatings currently outweigh their risks.

 Mabury agrees. "I'm not getting rid of my frying pans," he says.

 Still, since TFA sticks around for so long, researchers ought to keep an eye 
on it, adds Thomas M. Cahill of Trent University in Peterborough, Ontario. "In 
order to do that, we need to know how the stuff is getting into the 
environment," he says. On that score, he says, Mabury and his colleagues have 
"plugged a fairly significant hole [in our knowledge base]."

"It fills a nice little gap, but it's not a big gap that it fills," comments 
Hartmut Frank of the University of Bayreuth in Germany. Significant sources of 
TFA in the environment, particularly in the oceans, are still missing, he says.


