Don't look now, but is that dog laughing?: Science News Online, July 28, 2001

 Don't look now, but is that dog laughing?

 Susan Milius

 Amid all the panting, a dog at play makes a distinctive, breathy exhalation 
that can trigger playfulness in other dogs, says a Nevada researcher. Yes, it 
might be the dog version of a laugh.

"To an untrained human ear, it sounds much like a pant, 'hhuh, hhuh,'" says 
Patricia Simonet of Sierra Nevada College in Lake Tahoe. However, this 
exhalation bursts into a broader range of frequencies than does regular dog 
panting, Simonet discovered when she and her students analyzed recordings.

 They observed the bursts during play but not in aggressive clashes, Simonet 
reported in Corvallis, Ore., last week at a meeting of the Animal Behavior 
Society.

 Gordon Burghardt of the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, who theorizes 
about the evolution of play, says Simonet's presentation caught his interest. 
Her dog-laughing proposal needs more testing, he cautions. But he notes that 
other scientists have proposed that nonhuman primates and even rodents laugh.

 Simonet's team investigated the question by standing in parks with a parabolic 
microphone that enables them to record dog hubbub from a distance. "People kept 
coming up to talk to us, so we finally had to wear signs explaining that we 
were trying to record," she says.

 Simonet differentiates a broader-frequency exhalation from pants by calling it 
a laugh. With recordings of such laughs and growls, the researchers tested 15 
mostly young dogs in an observation room. When the researchers broadcast the 
laugh, a puppy often picked up a toy or trotted toward a presumed playmate, if 
a person or another dog was in the room. Simonet's own best attempt at the 
laugh likewise prompted dogs to look for a romp. Broadcasting growls elicited 
no such effects.

 This dog-exhalation study reopens many questions about whether animals laugh, 
comments Brian Knutson of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. He 
has recorded chirps that laboratory rats give as they wrestle with each other. 
Rats also chirp before receiving morphine or having sex. He interprets the 
sound as indicating "the rat expects something rewarding."

 Such phenomena help neuroscientists trace the brain's reward circuitry, 
Knutson explains. He says he's unsure about how to compare the chirp of a 
romping rat to the guffaw of a person. "I think we've done a decent job of 
figuring out what it means in the rat," he says. "Now the onus is on the human 
researchers."

 Another analyst of rat chirps, Jaak Panksepp of Bowling Green (Ohio) 
University, has recorded the animals' ultrasonic squeaks while he tickled them. 
"Of course, you have to know the rat," he cautions. He says he is open to the 
possibility that the rat chirps amount to laughter in the animal world. Also, 
he suggests that Simonet's team could search for animal laughter by recording 
the sound dogs make when they are tickled.

 Yet another student of play, Marc Bekoff of the University of Colorado in 
Boulder, says he thinks he knows the panting sound Simonet describes. "When I 
get down on all fours and go up to dogs and go 'hhuhahhuhahhuh,' they get very 
solicitous," he says. "Whether it turns out to be like a laugh or not doesn't 
matter in the end, because what's important are all the questions it opens up 
about how communications work."


