Human Brains May Take Unique Turn: Science News Online, Sept. 1, 2001

> Human Brains May Take Unique Turn

 Bruce Bower

 Two neuroscientists have tapped into what may represent a fundamental 
difference in brain development between people and other mammals.

 If the findings hold up, they'll offer insight into how humans evolved an 
enlarged frontal cortex capable of supporting symbolic thought and language 
use, conclude Kresimir Letinic and Pasko Rakic of Yale University School of 
Medicine.

 Researchers have identified many commonalties in how brains of various animal 
species develop. In contrast, facets of brain growth unique to any one species, 
including humans, have been elusive.

"There must be small differences between brain development in humans and in 
other animals," Rakic says. "These small differences can have a big functional 
impact on how the brain works."

 In 1969, Rakic and his coworkers first used brain slices from human 
fetuses-obtained following second-trimester death-to identify remnants of a 
stream of neurons that traveled from the telencephalon to the thalamus. The 
telencephalon is a structure that gives rise to the cortex, and the thalamus is 
a relay center for messages to and from the cortex.

 In the new study, Letinic and Rakic injected a dye into the telencephalon of 
living tissue slices taken from the brains of 15-to-26-week-old human fetuses, 
as well as from monkey and mouse fetuses of comparable development. Over a 
period of 36 to 48 hours, the dye unveiled a contingent of human neurons that 
were migrating from a spot on the telencephalon to a destination on the 
thalamus. This activity was absent from the other creatures' brains, the 
researchers report in the September Nature Neuroscience.

 In further tests on human and mouse brain tissue, Letinic and Rakic found that 
only in people did thalamic neurons at the end of the migratory stream attract 
telencephalic neurons taken from its source. In mice, neurons located along the 
migratory path chemically repelled telencephalic neurons, the scientists report.

 Although other scientists need to confirm that this neural migration occurs 
only in people, the new data suggest that specific developmental innovations 
fostered human brain evolution, says Stewart A. Anderson of the Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University in New York City. Since the migrating neurons 
head to a part of the thalamus that connects to the frontal cortex, this link 
"may provide one mechanism for the remarkable flexibility of human cognition," 
he says. It also supports a theory that disturbed thalamic development 
contributes to thought disorders such as schizophrenia, he holds.

 Barbara L. Finlay of Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., regards the new data 
as intriguing evidence for an evolutionary change in brain development. 
However, the same neural migration that Letinic and Rakic observed in human 
tissue may also occur in apes, which the researchers didn't test, she notes.

 Moreover, there are few examples of evolution molding specific brain areas 
independently, Finlay notes. In a controversial analysis of data from 131 
mammalian species's evolution, her team finds that within a species, most brain 
areas grow or shrink in unison according to overall changes in brain size.


