The Seeing Tongue: Science News Online, Sept. 1, 2001

> The Seeing Tongue

 In-the-mouth electrodes give blind people a feel for vision

 Peter Weiss

 Blind since birth, Marie-Laure Martin had always thought that candle flames 
were big balls of fire. The 39-year-old woman couldn't see the flames 
themselves, but she could sense the candle's aura of heat.

 Last October, she saw a candle flame for the first time. She was stunned by 
how small it actually was and how it danced. There's a second marvel here: She 
saw it all with her tongue.

 The tongue, an organ of taste and touch, may seem like an unlikely substitute 
for the eyes. After all, it's usually hidden inside the mouth, insensitive to 
light, and not connected to optic nerves. However, a growing body of research 
indicates that the tongue may in fact be the second-best place on the body for 
receiving visual information from the world and transmitting it to the brain.

 Researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison are developing this 
tongue-stimulating system, which translates images detected by a camera into a 
pattern of electric pulses that trigger touch receptors. The scientists say 
that volunteers testing the prototype soon lose awareness of on-the-tongue 
sensations. They then perceive the stimulation as shapes and features in space. 
Their tongue becomes a surrogate eye.

 Earlier research had used the skin as a route for images to reach the nervous 
system. That people can decode nerve pulses as visual information when they 
come from sources other than the eyes shows how adaptable, or plastic, the 
brain is, says Wisconsin neuroscientist and physician Paul Bach-y-Rita, one of 
the device's inventors.

"You don't see with the eyes. You see with the brain," he contends. An image, 
once it reaches an eye's retina, "becomes nerve pulses no different from those 
from the big toe," he says. To see, people rely on the brain's ability to 
interpret those signals correctly.

 With that in mind, he and his colleagues propose that restoring sight is only 
one of the many trajectories for their research. Restoring stability to those 
with balance disorders is another. So is bestowing people with brand new 
senses, such as the capability to use heat to see in the dark.

 Restoring lost vision

 First things first, however, and for the Wisconsin scientists that means 
restoring lost vision. Swapping the sense of touch for sight is not a new idea. 
In the 1960s, Bach-y-Rita, his colleagues, and other scientists began 
developing and testing devices that enable the skin of blind people to pick up 
visual information.

 For Bach-y-Rita, the experiments also provided insight into the brain's 
plasticity. His more general goal has been to find out how well one sense can 
take the place of another.

 Until the 1980s, "one of the axioms of neuroscience was that there was no 
plasticity in the adult central nervous system," says Edward Taub of the 
University of Alabama in Birmingham. Today, the field has turned around in 
response to many studies, including Bach-y-Rita's. Now, scientists view the 
brain as almost as malleable in old age as in youth, he adds.

 The idea of tongue as eye evolved from the earlier skin-as-eye studies. 
Bach-y-Rita and his coworkers had been placing touch-stimulating arrays on 
areas of people's skin, such as the back and the abdomen. The scientists used 
either electrodes or little buzzers to excite nerve endings of the skin in a 
pattern that corresponded to visual images.

 They found that after receiving training, blind people using these systems 
could recognize shapes and track motion. Some subjects could perceive the 
motion of a ball rolling down an inclined plane and bat it as it rolled off the 
plane's edge. Others could carry out an assembly-line task at an electronics 
plant. It required them to recognize glass tubes lacking solder and then to 
deposit some solder into those tubes.

 These results impressed Bach-y-Rita and his colleagues enough to begin trying 
to apply their basic research toward designing aids for the blind, he says.

 The researchers' early systems had the look and feel of what they 
were-experiments. The buzzers were noisy, heavy, and power hungry. Although 
electrodes could stimulate nerves quietly and efficiently, high voltages and 
currents were necessary to drive signals through the skin. That sometimes led 
to uncomfortable shocks.

 Because of these drawbacks, Bach-y-Rita began thinking about the tongue. "We 
brushed him off," recalls coworker Kurt A. Kaczmarek, an electrical engineer 
and perception researcher, also at the University of Wisconsin. "He tends to be 
a bit ahead of his day."

 In time, however, Kaczmarek was convinced. "One day, I said 'Okay, Paul. Let's 
go up to the lab and try it.' It turns out, it worked quite well," he says.

 Tongue stimulation, however, isn't the only way to circumvent blindness. One 
competing approach, for example, is to implant microchips in the eyes or brain 
(SN: 4/12/97, p. 221). Another scheme, devised by a Dutch scientist, converts 
images to what he calls soundscapes, which are piped to a blind person's ears.

 Tongue stimulation

 To Bach-y-Rita, his team's switch from skin to tongue stimulation was crucial. 
"We now, for the first time, have the possibility of a really practical 
[touch-based] human-machine interface," he declares. He and his coworkers 
founded the Madison-based company Wicab, to exploit the potential. Kaczmarek 
points out the fledgling company may be in for some competition, since a German 
inventor already has been granted a U.S. patent for a tongue-vision system.

"Using the tongue for seeing is a whole new approach. . . . I think it has 
great promise," says Michael D. Oberdorfer, program director for visual 
neuroscience at the National Eye Institute in Bethesda, Md. His office has been 
funding some of the Wisconsin group's work.

 The tongue is a better sensor than skin for several reasons, says Bach-y-Rita. 
For one, it's coated in saliva-an electrically conductive fluid. So, 
stimulation can be applied with much lower voltage and current than is required 
for the skin.

 Also, the tongue is more densely populated with touch-sensitive nerves than 
most other parts of the body. That opens up the possibility that the tongue can 
convey higher-resolution data than the skin can.

 What's more, the tongue is ordinarily out of sight and out of the way. "With 
visual aids to the blind, there are cosmetic issues," says Oberdorfer. "And 
you'd want something easy to wear that doesn't interfere with everyday 
activities."

 Currently, the Wisconsin researchers' tongue-display system begins with a 
camera about the size of a deck of cards. Cables connect it with a toaster-size 
control box. Extending from the box is another cable made of flat, flexible 
plastic laced with copper wires. It narrows at the end to form the flat, 
12-by-12, gold-plated electrode array the size of a dessert fork. The person 
lays it like a lollipop on his or her tongue. Stimulation from electrodes 
produces sensations that subjects describe as tingling or bubbling.

 The Wisconsin researchers say that the whole apparatus could shrink 
dramatically, becoming both hidden and easily portable. The camera would vanish 
into an eyeglass frame. From there, it would wirelessly transmit visual data to 
a dental retainer in the mouth that would house the signal-translating 
electronics. The retainer would also hold the electrode against the tongue.

 The tongue display still has a long way to go in terms of performance, the 
researchers admit. In the July 13 Brain Research, Bach-y-Rita and his 
colleagues Eliana Sampaio and Stephane Maris, both of the Universite Louis 
Pasteur in Strasbourg, France, report results from the first clinical study of 
the tongue display.

 After an initial, brief training period, 12 first-time users-6 sighted but 
blindfolded and 6 congenitally blind, including Marie-Laure Martin-tried to 
determine the orientation of the E's of a standard Snellen eye chart. On 
average, they scored 20/860 in visual acuity. The cutoff for legal blindness is 
20/200 with corrected vision.

"It's not normal sight," comments Taub. "It's like very dim shadows. But it's 
remarkable. It's a beginning."

 One obstacle to better vision with the device is the low resolution of its 
144-electrode display. Engineers on the team say they expect to quadruple the 
array density in the next few years.

 A more serious problem is the range of contrast that can be replicated on the 
tongue, Kaczmarek notes. In a typical image, the eye may simultaneously see 
lighted regions that are 1,000 times brighter than the dimmest ones. But the 
ratio of strongest to weakest tongue stimulation can only be about 3 to 1. 
"That's one of the things we're struggling with," Kaczmarek says.

 Visual sensations

 Exactly how the tongue supplies the brain with images remains a focus of the 
Wisconsin team's research. In his 1993 book, The Man Who Tasted Shapes 
(Putnam), Washington, D.C.-based neurologist Richard E. Cytowic made much of 
how flavors stimulating the tongue of a friend and, later, an experimental 
subject, would elicit visual sensations. However, that type of involuntary and 
poorly understood sensory blending, which is known as synesthesia, probably 
goes beyond what's needed to explain the operation of the tongue display, 
Bach-y-Rita says.

 Instead, there's plenty of evidence, he says, that even those brain regions 
devoted almost exclusively to a certain sense actually receive a variety of 
sensory signals. "We showed many years ago that even in the specialized eye 
region, auditory and tactile signals also arrive," he notes.

 Also, many studies over the past 40 years indicate that the brain is capable 
of massively reorganizing itself in response to loss or injury. When it comes 
to seeing via the sense of touch, reorganization may involve switching portions 
of the visual cortex to the processing of touch sensations, Bach-y-Rita says.

 In that vein, the first clinical study of the tongue device showed that users 
got better with practice. Of the dozen subjects in the initial evaluation, two 
went on to receive an additional 9 hours each of training. When retested, they 
had doubled their visual acuity, scoring an average of 20/430.

 The brain's apparent ability to shunt data for one sense through the customary 
pathways of another may enable the Wisconsin researchers to apply their device 
beyond vision replacement. "It's not just about vision," says Mitchell E. 
Tyler, a biomedical engineer with the group. "That's the obvious one, but it's 
by no means the only game in town."

 The team began tests this summer of a modified system that's intended to 
assist people who have lost their sense of balance because of injury, disease, 
or reactions to antibiotics. The unit gathers signals from accelerometers 
mounted on a person that indicate when he or she is tilting and in what 
direction. By stimulating the tongue with patterns representing the degree and 
direction of tilt, such a device may act as an artificial vestibular system. 
Then, the person might be able to correct bodily position and avoid falling, 
Tyler explains.

 Although the main emphasis of the Wisconsin research has been rehabilitation, 
the group also foresees using its technology to aid people who don't have 
sensory deficits.

 Interest in enhancement of the senses has come primarily from the military. 
While Bach-y-Rita and his colleagues were using external skin as a receiver of 
light-derived images, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency in 
Arlington, Va., funded them to develop a sonar-based system to help Navy 
commandos orient themselves in pitch darkness. The prototype worked, 
Bach-y-Rita says.

 Tyler proposes that ground soldiers could also receive data by means of 
infrared cameras or other sensors that would alert them, through the tongue, to 
the presence and positions of enemy troops or tanks. Civilian workers, such as 
firefighters, might also benefit from such interfaces.

 That's pure speculation right now. Martin's bouts of vision; however, are much 
more than that. In a new film that aired on Canadian television in June, a 
smile spreads across Martin's face as she gets her first glimpse of a candle 
flame.

 The film, Touch: The Forgotten Sense, highlights some of the Wisconsin work. 
Its message is this: Touch works in a thousand ways, often without people even 
being aware of its roles.

 By taking this sense into new arenas, such as the tongue display, Bach-y-Rita 
and his coworkers intend to extend touch's repertoire even more.


