Wanted: Reef Cleaners: Science News Online, Aug. 25, 2001

 Wanted: Reef Cleaners

 Can spiny housekeepers save beleaguered Caribbean corals?

 Janet Raloff

 For millennia, hordes of delicate, nocturnal sea urchins grazed the Caribbean 
sea floor. By dining on shag carpets known as turf algae, these spiny 
herbivorous urchins, often referred to as lawn mowers, kept most area corals 
clean as a whistle.

 That all ended in 1983 with the arrival of a mysterious plague.

 Over the course of 13 months or so, a still-unidentified germ swept through 
the Caribbean basin, beginning at the Atlantic side of the Panama Canal. It 
proved lethal to just one species- Diadema antillarum, the corals' primary 
housekeeper. Infected urchins lost spines, grew lethargic, and exuded mucus. 
Any reef hit by the epidemic would be devoid of living Diadema within 2 weeks.

 Hammering the entire Caribbean and tropical West Atlantic-more than 3.5 
million square kilometers-this die-off was "the most extensive ever reported 
for any marine animal," notes Haris Lessios of the Smithsonian Tropical 
Research Institute in Balboa, Panama. Overall, more than 97 percent of the 
area's Diadema perished, he says.

 The loss triggered an immediate and drastic change in the regional 
environment-from a diverse coral culture to one increasingly dominated by 
algae. Now, 18 years later, largely unmowed blankets of greenery cover most of 
the Caribbean's hard surfaces, including its largely dead corals. Unless this 
dense algal cover is cropped, larval corals can't resettle and reclaim reefs 
built by their dead and dying progenitors.

 That's why things look grim.

 The abundance of living coral in the Caribbean appears to be at its lowest 
point since the epoch when these creatures originally colonized the area, 
according to reef ecologists. As things stand, "within another 10 years, there 
won't be any corals left to recover," Lessios maintains.

 With prognoses getting ever more dire, a bold, month-old pilot program to save 
the reefs is attracting attention. In the Florida Keys, scientists have 
reintroduced several hundred lab-raised Diadema to patches of reef overgrown 
with algae. The goal of this long-shot experiment is to gauge the possibility 
of reestablishing lost urchin populations to recover healthy ecological 
balances.

 This follows on the heels of a report earlier this spring of patchy natural 
recovery of Diadema and young coral.

 Yet even a rebound of Diadema populations, many scientists worry, would amount 
to a band-aid gesture. The urchin die-off and the choking algal communities 
that resulted are symptoms of more fundamental environmental stresses, these 
researchers argue. The most injurious of these, they say, is the centuries-long 
practice of overfishing the finned vegetarians that had once helped keep the 
area's greenery in check.

 Wall-to-wall urchins

 Before its die-off, Diadema had been ubiquitous throughout its range. In any 
square meter, one might encounter close to a dozen specimens, some as much as 
30 centimeters across. Plenty of spots even harbored smaller, wall-to-wall 
urchins-up to 70 per square meter, notes Terence P. Hughes of James Cook 
University in Townsville, Australia.

 At those densities, the urchins were practically starving, he notes. In search 
of algae, they scraped clean any available surface, often to the point of 
eroding reefs. Their thoroughness even killed off some larval corals.

 Several biologists have speculated that this urchin's dominance reflected an 
overfishing not only of other reef grazers-predominantly parrot fish and 
surgeon fish-but also of Diadema's many predators, which included toad fish and 
queen triggerfish.

 Yet until the 1983 die-off, no one appreciated how dependent the ecosystem had 
become upon just one species of urchins.

 There were other urchins, most notably Echinometra viridis. It's also a black- 
spined urchin that to the untrained eye, looks just like Diadema, says Gary K. 
Ostrander of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. But there are important 
differences. Not only does Diadema have spines that are more needlelike, but it 
actively roves in search of algae. In contrast, Echinometra anchors itself to a 
rock.

 Although marine ecologists had suspected that Echinometra and other grazers 
would fill any void left by Diadema, that hasn't happened. Since the epidemic, 
no algae- eating species expanded its population.

 Nor has Diadema staged much of a comeback.

 One reason, Hughes suspects, is that most surviving members of this species 
now live too far apart. Adults release their eggs or sperm-perhaps millions of 
gametes-into the water. If the spawners are more than a meter apart, Hughes 
notes, fertilization doesn't occur.

 Though Diadema hasn't gone extinct, it remains rare throughout most of its 
range. "I can [scuba] dive 16 times in a week and maybe see just three," 
Ostrander told Science News.

 Coral health

 The prevailing rarity of Diadema has had grave repercussions. Hughes monitored 
coral health along some 250 kilometers of Jamaican coastlines throughout the 
decade ending in 1993. During that period, local corals suffered a major 
bleaching caused largely by a stretch of unseasonably warm water there. In 
response, many of the overheated corals expelled the symbiotic algae that had 
not only given them color but also helped them to survive.

 Ordinarily, some bleached reef heads would have recovered as larval corals 
reseeded them. But without masses of Diadema present, algae moved in first. 
They blanketed the bleached reefs and preventing larval coral from getting 
access to the hard surfaces that they need to set up housekeeping.

 In several instances, Hughes witnessed "a smothering of established [live] 
corals" by large, weedy algal blooms in Diadema-free regions. He now suspects 
that hurricane damage and the runoff of nutrient-rich pollution from land 
fostered these blooms.

 In the end, live-coral cover at the sites Hughes studied declined from about 
60 percent of the reef area to just 5 percent. Since many of these species grow 
slowly, "it may take a century for these corals to come back," he notes.

 Last year, Ostrander and his colleagues reported a similar trend at sites they 
had studied since the mid-1990s in relatively pristine waters off San Salvador 
Island in the Bahamas.

 In 1994, the seafloor and reef were covered by about equal areas of live 
corals and algae. Then came a January 1995 bleaching event. It launched "a 
rapid decline in coral abundance and a significant increase in [large 
seaweed]," the researchers reported in the May 9, 2000 Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences.

 By 1998, live coral accounted for just 5.2 percent of the studied area. That 
was about a third of the live coverage seen 4 years earlier. Meanwhile, algal 
cover climbed to nearly 45 percent-more than 2.5 times the territory it swathed 
when the study began.

 The ecological story was the same: Once a coral died, algal squatters rushed 
to cover it, all but eliminating any chance of natural recovery through the 
recolonization of reefs by larval coral.

 When Ostrander returned to his study sites about 10 weeks ago, he says, 
"things appeared to have gotten a little worse."

 An ecological rebound

 Two new studies are injecting some hope, however, that an ecological rebound 
may be possible.

 Earlier this year, Peter J. Edmunds and Robert C. Carpenter of California 
State University in Northridge reported signs of localized Diadema recovery. 
They saw a concomitant reduction in local algal cover and an increase in the 
success with which juvenile corals reinfiltrate reefs.

 The two scientists tallied the abundance of Diadema and other pivotal species 
at five shallow reefs off the north coast of Jamaica. In some zones at each 
site, they found a rebound in Diadema numbers. Though these averaged about five 
of the urchins per square meter, some sites hosted up to 12 per square meter. 
In the rebound zones, the researchers found just 10 percent as much algal cover 
as in areas where Diadema was rare. Moreover, juvenile-coral densities were 11 
times higher in urchin-grazed zones than in areas nearly devoid of Diadema.

 After more than a decade of reproductive failure, corals and Diadema appear to 
be successfully repopulating limited areas, Edmunds and Carpenter find. 
Although these observations are heartening, "our results should not be 
construed to mean that reef recovery is inevitable throughout the western 
Atlantic," they cautioned in the April 24 Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences.

 Alina M. Szmant is hoping to generate equally heartening news. A marine 
biologist at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, she headed a team 
that on July 27 released 200 lab-raised juvenile Diadema on plots in the 
Florida Keys.

 This was no small feat, observes her colleague Thomas Capo of the University 
of Miami in Key Biscayne. Figuring out how to raise the young urchins proved 
devilishly difficult, he notes. During their unusually long larval phase, they 
must be nurtured while they float in water for 3 months-a deceptively tough 
task.

"We're also the first to get these animals to actively spawn under captive 
conditions-which they've been doing for almost a year now," Capo says.

 To date, he has raised at least 4,000 larvae through metamorphosis, during 
which larvae leave their buoyant life in the water to become round, spiny 
bottom dwellers.

 Because the researchers wanted robust animals to release on the reefs, they 
kept their urchins for 4 months after metamorphosis. By that time, the 
creatures had reached about 5 centimeters in diameter, as measured from tips of 
opposing spines.

"No one can afford to give us enough money to repopulate urchins throughout the 
Caribbean-or even the Florida Keys," Szmant acknowledges. "But if we can create 
high-density pockets of the urchins, then hopefully their fertilization success 
will improve," and their populations will rebuild naturally.

 In the first experiment, the juveniles were placed in two areas-one caged, the 
other open. These populations will be watched to see which set-up is better at 
both surviving predation and removing algae.

 Szmant's team also rounded up some wild adults and transplanted them as a 
group. The adults now may be close enough to each other to successfully 
reproduce. Over the next month or so, her group will also collect larval coral 
to eventually replant on urchin-cleaned reefs.

 The longer-term plan, Szmant says, is to tailor bigger releases according to 
the lessons learned in these small-scale trials.

"Reintroducing sea urchins to start clearing off coral-reef rock is radical and 
exciting," says Elliott Norse of the Marine Conservation Biology Institute in 
Redmond, Wash. Short of sending in squads of divers to scrape corals free of 
algae, there are few other options available right now to reverse the 
continuing decline of corals, he says.

 Though the amount of algal pruning necessary to counter nearly 2 decades of 
neglect is daunting, Lessios says, "you have to start somewhere."

 Hughes adds a caution to this iota of optimism. Even if robust new populations 
of Diadema could be reestablished, it's only a partial solution, Hughes argues. 
"It's far from ideal because [algal pruning] should be shared among lots of 
species," he says.

 Norse agrees. He favors the siting of new marine reserves that are off-limits 
to fishing (SN: 4/28/01, p. 264) so they would enable recovery of the parrot 
fish and surgeon fish that formerly backed up urchins in algae management.

 Crisis management

 The growing need for crisis management in the Caribbean and other marine 
environments should serve as "a wake-up call" that there can be high costs of 
paring down the food web, says marine ecologist Jeremy B.C. Jackson of the 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif. Underlying many marine 
plagues today, he argues, has been the common practice of mining aquatic 
systems of desirable fauna until only one species remains to hold the food web 
together. When something knocks this species out, Jackson notes, "the whole 
system inevitably collapses."

 In the July 27 Science, he and 17 colleagues review many dozens of studies and 
documents that provide a historical backdrop on a host of ecosystems devastated 
by human activities that rendered them vulnerable to catastrophes-including the 
Caribbean's Diadema epidemic.

 For instance, Chesapeake Bay oysters were once so large and numerous that they 
could filter the entire estuary every 3 days, Jackson observes. After a century 
of overfishing, the depleted oyster populations takes "a lot more than a year" 
to do the same thing.

 After dredging of the bay to harvest deepwater oyster populations began in the 
1870s, the species' numbers diminished precipitously. Within a few decades, 
Jackson notes, the Chesapeake became vulnerable to the toxic effects of 
pollution and eutrophication-in which an overabundance of nutrients initiates a 
cascade of algal blooms, episodes of oxygen deprivation, and fish kills.

 Too many urchins can be as big a problem as too few.

 Overfishing of North Atlantic cod, Jackson notes, knocked out a major predator 
of Gulf of Maine sea urchins, species that don't include Diadema. As the cod 
numbers diminished, populations of the algae-chomping urchins grew explosively. 
That, in turn, ultimately "transformed kelp forests into bare rock bottom" and 
erased the protective environment that had sheltered other bottom-dwelling 
animals, he says.

 The lesson is clear, Jackson and his colleagues say. Humanity can hope to keep 
the species it cherishes only if it nurtures a diverse, integrated community of 
their neighbors.

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                          
