New Fossils Resolve Whale's Origin: Science News Online, Sept. 22, 2001

 New Fossils Resolve Whale's Origin

 Ben Harder

 Recent fossil finds from Pakistan overturn the picture of whale evolution long 
championed by paleontologists, bringing them closer to agreement with an 
alternative view proposed by molecular biologists. The discoveries establish a 
close evolutionary link between cetaceans, which include whales, dolphins, and 
porpoises, and a group of mammals known as artiodactyls. These hoofed animals 
with an even number of toes include cows, sheep, goats, pigs, deer, and 
hippopotamuses.

 Four-legged, terrestrial ancestors of whales and other cetaceans waded into 
the sea about 55 million years ago and gradually developed skeletal adaptations 
for aquatic life, paleontologists hold. But precisely what variety of land 
mammal first got its feet wet has been a source of spirited debate (SN: 
11/6/99, p. 296).

"We've thought since the ' 60s that whales evolved from hoofed, carnivorous 
mammals" known as mesonychians, says Philip D. Gingerich of the University of 
Michigan in Ann Arbor. Like most paleontologists, he says, he "considered it 
pretty well established" on the basis of dental similarities that cetaceans 
were surviving descendants or close relatives of this otherwise extinct group.

 However, Gingerich's latest report, in the Sept. 21 Science, removes whales 
from the mesonychians and places them in the same evolutionary lineage as 
artiodactyls-just as researchers analyzing genetic and immunological data have 
maintained.

 Gingerich and his colleagues reversed their position after analyzing the 
skeletons of two early aquatic whales, about the size of sea lions, that they 
unearthed last year in central Pakistan. The fossils, which they gave species 
names of Artiocetus clavis and Rodhocetus balochistanensis, are the first of 
cetaceans ever discovered with intact ankle bones.

 To the researchers' surprise, the ankle had a unique form that's found only in 
artiodactyls. Since living cetaceans have no vestige of these bones, the 
discovery of early whales with distinctly artiodactyl ankles provides a 
"Rosetta stone" linking modern marine mammals to living artiodactyls, says 
Gingerich.

"The new [fossil] data are much more in agreement with the molecular data than 
what we thought before," says J.G.M. Thewissen, a paleontologist at the 
Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine in Rootstown. Working 
independently in fossil beds in northern Pakistan, he and his colleagues have 
concluded that pakicetids, a group ancestral to modern cetaceans and predating 
the transition to marine life, also had the artiodactyl ankle form. They report 
their work in the Sept. 20 Nature.

 The new finds are "very exciting for those of us working on molecular data," 
says John Gatesy, an evolutionary biologist at the University of California, 
Riverside, whose work in nuclear DNA sequencing supports a close 
whale-artiodactyl relationship.

 Gatesy's data and other lines of molecular evidence also suggest that whales 
have a closer evolutionary relationship with hippos than with other 
artiodactyls. Paleontologists, however, aren't ready to group whales with any 
specific artiodactyl.

"None of the fossil evidence supports hippos and whales as being sister taxa," 
says Kenneth D. Rose, a paleontologist at the Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions in Baltimore.

 Nevertheless, Gingerich predicts that renewed focus on the fossil record of 
early artiodactyls will help researchers determine just where the whales fit 
in. And that, he acknowledges, could be alongside the hippos.


