Speed demon gets hooked on silicon: Science News Online, Sept. 15, 2001

 Speed demon gets hooked on silicon

 Peter Weiss

 Industrial scientists have devised a way to coat wafers of silicon, the stuff 
of the microelectronics revolution, with a high-performance semiconductor whose 
wider use could be a boon to many areas of electronics. Mating silicon to 
gallium arsenide, which currently shows up in special applications, has been a 
technological goal for more than 30 years.

 If the fabrication advance announced this month by Motorola in Schaumburg, 
Ill., works on a commercial scale, fast low-power chips may become less 
expensive and more common, semiconductor specialists say. The same may prove 
true of chips hosting solid-state lasers and other optical components.

 Those changes could benefit consumers by shrinking the size and cost of cell 
phones, according to the technique's developers. The new process may also make 
more affordable such technologies as collision-avoidance systems for vehicles 
and fiber-optic telecommunications to homes.

 Wafers of gallium arsenide and other semiconductors that can transmit 
electrons at high speeds and efficiently emit or detect light are costly and 
fragile. Previous efforts to graft such compounds onto a cheap, flexible 
silicon base failed because their crystalline structures don't align with that 
of silicon. In gallium arsenide, the atoms are 4 percent further apart than 
atoms in a silicon wafer are. Although researchers have grown gallium arsenide 
on silicon in the past, the resulting crimping and strain in the compound's 
crystal lattice made it unsuitable for optical electronic components.

 To get around the crystal mismatch, the Motorola researchers say they have 
squeezed two other materials between the silicon and gallium arsenide. Because 
atoms shift around in those interlayers, the gallium arsenide bonds to the 
intermediate layer beneath it without warping. "That's the magic of it," says 
Jamal Ramdani of Motorola's Physical Sciences Research Laboratories in Tempe, 
Ariz.

 After 2 years of secret development, Motorola has filed more than 270 patent 
applications based on the technique. Semiconductor specialists outside the 
company agree that successfully mating the two materials promises to be 
important. However, until the Motorola work appears in the scientific 
literature, those specialists also are greeting the announcement with caution. 
On Tuesday, William Ooms, a research manager at Motorola, described the 
technique at a materials science workshop in Chattanooga, Tenn.

"If this is real, it's really important," comments Joe C. Campbell of the 
University of Texas in Austin. "But there have been some premature claims 
before."

 The recent advance arose from an earlier setback. Ramdani and other 
researchers were working toward tiny transistors free of the current leaks that 
plague such components (SN: 3/25/00, p. 204: ). In 1999, the researchers made 
what the company declared to be "the world's thinnest functional transistor" by 
growing a scanty layer of the ceramic material strontium titanate (STO) on 
silicon. Yet when they tried to pare that layer further, oxygen corrupted the 
underlying silicon, creating a spongy layer of silicon dioxide beneath the STO.

 At first, Ramdani considered the new layer an obstacle. But he says that while 
vacationing on a beach, he realized that the layer might be a godsend. He had 
noticed that it enabled the STO crystal to relax despite a 2 percent mismatch 
with the silicon. Ramdani began wondering whether the STO would serve the same 
function for gallium arsenide.

 Initial experiments confirmed his hunch. In the 2 years since, the roughly 100 
researchers assigned to the project have surmounted many hurdles, including 
getting gallium arsenide to bond to the entire surface of an underlying layer 
of STO.

 These investigators have also made working cell-phone amplifiers and an 
infrared-light-emitting device using the new wafers. What's more, they've made 
wafers with 300-millimeter diameters-twice that of the largest wafers of 
gallium arsenide alone. The amplifiers will hit the market within months, the 
company predicts.

 The gallium arsenide feat may be just a beginning. Different interlayers 
should allow other semiconductors, such as indium phosphide, to grow on 
silicon. Whereas gallium arsenide transistors are about 10 times as fast as 
those of silicon, indium phosphide transistors up the pace by another factor of 
10.

"If they can do it with gallium arsenide, they can do it with other materials," 
surmises Vincent P. LaBella of the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville.


