Neandertals show ancient signs of caring: Science News Online, Sept. 15, 2001

 Neandertals show ancient signs of caring

 Bruce Bower

 A nearly toothless jawbone found last year in France, which represents an 
early form of the Neandertals, speaks volumes about the ancient roots of 
providing life-saving care for the injured and infirm, according to a new 
report.

 The partial jaw, dated at between about 169,000 and 191,000 years old, 
contains extensive bone damage and loss. It belonged to an adult who survived 
for at least 6 months while being virtually unable to chew food, concludes 
archaeologist Serge Lebel of the University of Quebec in Montreal and his 
colleagues.

 Survival for this prehistoric individual required the caring efforts of his or 
her fellow Neandertals, Lebel's group concludes in a paper slated to appear in 
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The new find pushes back 
by more than 100,000 years evidence for caregiving by a Homo species.

 The French fossil jaw shows that, beginning deep in prehistory, Neandertals 
exhibited a humanlike propensity to aid their debilitated comrades, says 
anthropologist Erik Trinkaus of Washington University in St. Louis, a coauthor 
of the paper. "This was probably a widespread social behavior among Neandertals 
and other ancient Homo species as well," Trinkaus asserts.

 At the French site, Neandertal caregivers may have saved fruits and other soft 
foods for their toothless peer, the scientists speculate. It's also possible 
that family members or friends pounded, chopped, or cooked tougher food so that 
it could be eaten without chewing.

 Earlier excavations have yielded evidence of Neandertal caregiving at several 
European and western Asian sites dating to around 50,000 years ago. For 
instance, extensive arthritic damage on a Neandertal skeleton found at Shanidar 
in Iraq indicates that this individual was sustained by others' help.

 The diseased jaw and 10 isolated Neandertal teeth were found in southeastern 
France at a rock shelter called the Bau de l'Aubesier. It doesn't appear that 
any of the unearthed teeth came from the fossil jaw, the researchers say.

 Lebel's team dated their discoveries by using a laboratory technique to 
measure stored energy in six pieces of burned flint found near the fossils.

 The jaw displays Neandertal characteristics such as a slanting orientation, 
which would have supported a jutting lower face. No intact tooth remains in the 
fossil. Two partial teeth show signs of traumatic breakage, Trinkaus says. 
Extensive bone wear and erosion appear throughout the jaw.

 Initial tooth loss probably exposed the Neandertal individual's gums, and then 
gum infections and bone disease developed, Trinkaus theorizes. A face injury of 
some kind could also have caused tooth loss and gum damage, he adds.

"It's clear that it was very hard for this individual to chew and that the 
condition lasted for some time," comments anthropologist Christopher B. 
Stringer of the British Museum in London. "Others must have provisioned for 
this person in some way." The new evidence doesn't resolve the debate over 
Neandertals' place in human evolution, he adds.

 Stringer suspects that the earliest examples of caregiving behavior occurred 
among the common ancestor of Neandertals and modern humans, which lived 
approximately 400,000 years ago.


