Immunity's Eyes: Science News Online, Sept. 8, 2001

 Immunity's Eyes

 Biologists reveal the proteins that first see dangerous microbes

 John Travis

 About 3 weeks after a 4-year-old boy visited the emergency room for a nagging 
eye infection-which doctors easily cured-the boy's mother arrived at the same 
Canadian hospital. She was infected with the same bacterium, though it had done 
much more than redden her eyes. She showed signs of shock: plummeting blood 
pressure and a racing heart.

 Physicians suspected sepsis, the destructive overreaction of the immune system 
to an overwhelming bacterial infection of the blood. They gave the woman 
massive doses of antibiotics, but it was too late. Just hours after arriving at 
the hospital, she died.

 Both mother and son had been infected with Neisseria meningitides. Why had the 
boy beat the bacterium but his mother had succumbed? No one knows for sure, but 
the answer could lie in the two having had differences in certain proteins that 
stud the surfaces of white blood cells. These so-called toll-like receptors, or 
TLRs, are the key sensors guiding the body's initial reaction to bacteria, 
viruses, or fungi. Scientists call this first line of defense the innate immune 
response.

 Over the past 4 years, scientists have found that TLRs respond to microbial 
features such as a bacterium's cell wall, tail, or even its DNA. In doing so, 
the receptors trigger white blood cells to engulf and kill infectious microbes 
or to signal other immune cells to rally to the cause.

 Toll-like receptors are the "eyes of the innate immune system," according to 
Bruce Beutler of the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "These 
receptors are the main way that the innate immune system sees pathogens. That 
had been a big mystery for the last 100 years or so," he says.

 The recent discovery of the human versions of these immune sensors has ignited 
a research frenzy. "The number of papers that have been published on toll-like 
receptors in the last 2 years is astounding. It's hard to keep up," says Steven 
R. Kleeberger of Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health in Baltimore.

 Insights from TLRs could help immunologists fight sepsis or design vaccines 
that ward off infections in the first place. Someday, profiling a person's TLR 
genes "could tell who's at risk to get sepsis," suggests Beutler. Moreover, 
drugs that block TLRs may stop the immune overreaction responsible for sepsis 
or thwart other disorders of the immune system.

 The field is "moving at the speed of light," says Fabio Re of Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute in Boston. To scientists' surprise, they have even found that 
TLRs show up on fat cells (see "Immune receptors offer new view of fat cells," 
below), may play a role in premature births, and may contribute to lung damage 
from air pollution.

 Front line of immunity

 About a century ago, Russian biologist Elie Metchnikoff offered the first 
glimpse at the innate immune system when he reported that a thorn stuck in a 
starfish was rapidly surrounded by amoeba-like cells. In people, white blood 
cells called macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, and dendritic cells lead 
this front line of immunity.

 While these soldiers of the innate immune system can sometimes fend off 
invading microbes on their own, they often simply hold the pathogens in check 
until the adaptive, or acquired, immune system comes to the rescue. This later 
phase of the immune response depends upon so-called T and B cells.

 Traditionally, immunology researchers have focused on adaptive immunity, a 
bias that Douglas T. Fearon of the University of Cambridge in England noted 
several years ago. "Despite its evolutionary success, innate immunity has been 
treated with condescension by immunologists. It has been considered a stopgap 
measure, a temporary expedient for host defense, buying time until acquired 
immunity took over," he remarked. "In short, innate immunity was 
unsophisticated, unintelligent, indiscreet, and obsolescent."

 With the discovery of TLRs in the 1990s, that viewpoint has itself become 
obsolete, Fearon and other immunologists argue. They contend that the innate 
system not only calls forth the adaptive system but provides it with chemical 
cues that tailor the response of T and B cells. "It's absolutely clear that the 
triggering of the innate immune system is a required first step in the 
recruitment of cells of adaptive immunity and in the training of those cells to 
see things," says David M. Underhill of the University of Washington in Seattle.

 The original receptor named Toll was a fly protein first found to have a role 
in development, not immunity. Then, scientists observed that flies with a 
mutation in the protein's gene were unable to fight off fungi. Further 
investigation revealed that the fly protein recognizes a separate insect 
protein produced during a fungal infection and in turn, activates the fly's 
immune response.

 In 1997, a group led by Charles A. Janeway Jr., a Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute investigator at Yale University, identified the human version of this 
receptor. Its activation in a human immune cell triggers the synthesis of 
molecules called cytokines, which contribute to inflammation, his team found. 
Moreover, the stimulated immune cell produces another protein that activates 
quiescent T cells. In short, this work suggested that TLRs link the innate and 
adaptive arms of the human immune system.

 Despite their recent discovery, the receptors appear to have a long history, 
notes Robert Modlin of the University of California, Los Angeles. Related 
molecules help plants fight off infections, so TLR ancestors were probably 
present hundreds of millions of years ago, before plants and animals evolved 
into separate kingdoms, he explains.

 Biologists following up on Janeway's work soon discovered that the human 
genome contains at least 10 genes encoding TLRs. Investigators quickly 
confirmed that TLRs in mammals help innate immune cells recognize pathogens.

 Beutler's group, for example, studied mutant mice that don't respond to 
lipopolysaccharide, or LPS, a cell wall component of certain bacteria. The mice 
are more susceptible to infection by LPS-bearing microbes than other mice are. 
In 1998, the scientists discovered that their LPS-tolerant mice had mutations 
in the mouse gene that corresponds to TLR4, the human gene originally 
identified by Janeway and his colleagues. LPS is also known as endotoxin 
because it's important in sepsis. When the mammalian body reacts to LPS, the 
immune system goes into overdrive, releasing a flood of cytokines that produce 
fever, shock, and often death.

"We realized that toll-like receptor 4 was the endotoxin receptor," says 
Beutler.

 Immunologists now conclude that TLR4 and at least one other protein form a 
complex on immune cells that binds to LPS and goads the cells into action.

 Different TLRs seem to recognize distinct microbial features. For example, 
TLR2 was once thought to recognize LPS also, but recent studies have linked it 
instead to other molecules made by a variety of bacteria, including the ones 
that cause tuberculosis. And in the April 26 Science, Underhill and his 
colleagues presented evidence that TLR5 detects flagellin, a protein found only 
in the whiplike tails of many bacteria.

 Last year, a research team led by Shizuo Akira of Osaka University in Japan 
reported that TLR9 helps the human immune system recognize bacterial DNA. 
Scientists have sought to exploit this unusual capability by creating vaccines 
made of pure DNA (SN: 12/4/99, p. 385), but such vaccines tend to work better 
in mice than in people.

 Offering an explanation, a German research team reported in the July 31 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that the two species have 
slightly dissimilar TLR9s and recognize different bacterial DNA sequences.

 A complex situation

 Sorting out what microbial features a white blood cell's TLR detects will take 
some time. The complexity of the situation has grown with the discovery that 
different TLRs may work together.

 Last December, Underhill and his colleagues demonstrated that TLR2 can pair 
with TLR6 to recognize different bacterial proteins from those that TLR2 alone 
detects. If such pairings are common among the 10 or so known human TLRs, 
combinations of the receptors may be able to distinguish a far greater variety 
of microbial parts than single receptors do.

"That changes the thinking [about TLRs] a great deal," says Underhill.

 A looming controversy for those working on TLRs is whether the proteins 
respond to products of the mammalian body itself. Several research groups have 
reported TLR reactions to products of mammalian cells: molecules called 
heat-shock proteins and specific fragments of the blood-clotting protein 
fibronectin.

 Why would the receptors react to such products? One explanation may lie in the 
controversial "danger hypothesis" put forth by Polly Matzinger, an immunologist 
at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. She challenges the 
traditional notion that the immune system distinguishes between self and 
nonself and responds directly to the latter. She argues, instead, that the 
immune system reacts to microbes only when danger signals have been released by 
infected or injured cells.

 Damaged cells discharge heat shock proteins and fibronectin, providing a 
possible connection between TLRs and Matzinger's ideas. "Besides sensing danger 
from the outside, they may see danger signals from the self," says Modlin.

 Other researchers say it's difficult to establish that TLRs recognize 
mammalian molecules. "I don't think the evidence is good enough yet," says 
Beutler.

 Destroying pathogens

 Whatever molecules induce TLRs to action, researchers are striving to 
understand what happens next in the immune response. In the Feb. 23 Science, 
for example, Modlin and his colleagues showed that activating one TLR leads 
directly to the death of a microbe. They reported that triggering TLR2 on 
macrophages infected with the tuberculosis bacterium prompts the immune cells 
to destroy the pathogens.

 Of perhaps greater interest is the link that TLRs provide between the innate 
and adaptive immune systems. In the simplest scenario, the innate immune cells 
could send up a generalized distress call for T and B cells. There are hints of 
greater sophistication, however.

 In a paper recently published online by the Journal of Biological Chemistry, 
Re and his colleague Jack L. Strominger report that dendritic cells of the 
innate immune system behave differently depending on whether their TLR2s or 
TLR4s are triggered. Activate TLR2 on the white blood cell's surface and it 
releases one broth of immune molecules; stimulate TLR4 and the dendritic cell 
secretes a different soup.

 Re calls the dendritic cell the "orchestral conductor" of adaptive immunity, 
noting that the chemicals secreted by it shape the manner in which T and B 
cells act. Consequently, dendritic cells, through the activation of their 
various TLRs, may inform the adaptive immune system what type of pathogen has 
invaded and guide the body's overall response.

 Figuring out the roles of all the TLRs and learning how to stimulate them 
artificially may open up new ways to combat infections and improve vaccines. 
"We will be able to tailor a specific immune response," suggests Re.

 On the other hand, in diseases such as sepsis, in which the immune response is 
the problem, activating TLRs is the last thing physicians would want. Indeed, a 
promising sepsis drug now being tested in people turns out to block TLR4 from 
reacting to the LPS in a bacterium's cell wall. "There may be some situations 
where we want to activate tolls and others where we want to block tolls," says 
Modlin.

 Another area of growing interest is explorations of how people's TLR genes 
vary. Changes in those genes may help explain why certain people or populations 
are more or less vulnerable to specific microbes. According to preliminary 
evidence from Beutler's group, people with mutations in one TLR are more 
susceptible to the bacterial infections that can cause sepsis than other people 
are.

"Collectively, the toll-like receptors have a strong influence on the course of 
infections. They may be the major determinants of susceptibility to many 
infectious diseases," says Beutler.

 Ozone damage

 Lately, scientists other than immunologists have started paying attention to 
toll-like receptors. Kleeberger's work focuses on how ozone and other forms of 
air pollution damage lungs and why some people are more susceptible than 
others. His team unexpectedly detected a possible role for TLR4 in that damage. 
When exposed to ozone, mice lacking TLR4 suffer less lung damage than normal 
mice do, the group reported in the February American Journal of Physiology.

 Kleeberger speculates that ozone initially injures cells in the lungs, 
inducing the release of molecules that activate TLR4 and create more damage 
through an immune reaction. His group now plans to study whether variations in 
the TLR4 gene govern a person's susceptibility to ozone.

 The course of pregnancy may also be regulated by TLRs, says Jerome F. Strauss 
III of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia whose 
group reported last March that certain fragments of the clotting protein 
fibronectin activate TLR4. That's provocative because data by other teams 
connect increased concentrations of the fragments in a pregnant woman's blood 
to a higher risk of premature birth. Also, some infections have been associated 
with preterm births, adding to suspicion that TLR activation influences the 
timing of birth. "We're looking for better markers to identify women at risk of 
preterm birth," says Strauss.

 Still, it's the immunologists who are most thrilled with their discoveries 
about TLRs. According to Evelyn Kurt-Jones of the University of Massachusetts 
in Amherst, who studies how these receptors may recognize viruses, the recent 
research "has provided some exciting new ways to look at the innate immune 
system. It has refocused interest on the earliest events in the immune 
response."

 Immune receptors offer new view of fat cells

 Scientists are rethinking the fat cell, and the newly discovered toll-like 
receptors may play an integral part in that reevaluation.

 Until recently, biologists considered fat cells relatively uninteresting. "For 
decades, they were pretty much viewed as fat blobs, as inert storage 
compartments for trigylcerides," says Philipp Scherer of the Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine in New York.

 That worldview shifted in 1994, when scientists discovered that fat cells 
secrete leptin, a hormone that travels to the brain and regulates feeding (SN: 
12/3/94, p. 372). All of a sudden, fat was seen as an endocrine organ.

 Now, says Scherer, there's growing evidence that fat cells can do many of the 
things that immune cells so. For example, they can release and respond to the 
chemicals called cytokines, which regulate the immune system, particularly the 
inflammatory reaction.

 Last year, Scherer's group reported that fat cells make TLR4. Moreover, when 
the researchers exposed fat cells to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), one of the 
bacterial components that activates TLR4, the cells began to make a related 
receptor, TLR2, and to synthesize secreted immune molecules such as 
interleukin-6.

 Scherer plans to test whether LPS-activated fat cells produce small, 
pathogen-killing proteins called antimicrobial peptides. He's also curious 
whether fat cells can swallow and kill microbes as the immune cells called 
macrophages do. "We basically view the fat cell as an extremely fat 
macrophage," he says.

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                          
