Youthful nicotine addiction may be growing: Science News Online, Sept. 22, 2001

 Youthful nicotine addiction may be growing

 Bruce Bower

 The proportion of teenagers and young adults who smoke cigarettes daily has 
declined in the United States over the past 20 years, thanks in no small part 
to a public health campaign to discourage tobacco use. At the same time, 
however, nicotine addiction has widened its grip among those young people who 
do smoke, a new study finds.

 Daily cigarette smokers aren't necessarily hooked on nicotine. But for people 
ages 24 and younger, the rate of addiction among regular cigarette smokers has 
increased even as the overall popularity of smoking has dropped, reports a team 
led by psychologist Naomi Breslau of Henry Ford Health System in Detroit.

"There is reason to worry about these findings," Breslau says. "Nicotine 
dependence makes it much harder for a person to quit smoking cigarettes."

 Her investigation, published in the September Archives of General Psychiatry 
and based on data collected in 1992, provides the first national data on 
nicotine-dependence rates. Other studies, such as the annual Monitoring the 
Future survey of drug use among U.S. teens and young adults, examine daily 
cigarette use but not nicotine dependence.

 Since 1987, the American Psychiatric Association's manual of mental disorders 
has listed nicotine dependence as a form of drug dependence. Cardinal signs 
include an inability to control cigarette use, distress at not being able to 
quit, and harsh withdrawal symptoms in the absence of nicotine use.

 Critics argue that this diagnosis wrongly treats a behavioral problem as a 
medical illness. But if the new findings hold up, they'll highlight the 
overlooked need for physicians to treat teenage nicotine dependence, remarks 
psychiatrist John R. Hughes of the University of Vermont in Burlington.

 Breslau's group analyzed data on tobacco use and nicotine dependence for a 
national sample of 4,414 people, ages 15 to 54. This survey was part of a 
government-funded study of mental disorders.

 Half the volunteers reported having smoked cigarettes every day for a month or 
more sometime in their lives. One in four smokers had become addicted at some 
point. Symptoms of this dependence usually didn't emerge until at least a year 
after daily cigarette use had begun, the researchers say.

 Nicotine-dependence rates for daily smokers didn't vary between males and 
females or between those with little and lots of education. However, black 
cigarette smokers reported less nicotine dependence than their white 
counterparts.

 The lowest incidence of daily cigarette use-reaching about 36 percent-occurred 
among 15- to 24-year-olds. This figure rose in successive age groups to a peak 
of 60 percent among 45- to 54-year-olds.

 In contrast, daily smokers in the youngest age group exhibited a stronger 
tendency to become addicted than their older counterparts. For those young 
smokers whose daily cigarette use had lasted 6 years, for example, nicotine 
dependence rates hit 60 percent. Only 10 percent of the corresponding group of 
45- to 54-year-olds had ever been addicted.

 Breslau's team now will examine data for young people who have completed the 
same surveys since 1992. If the same results emerge, she says, scientists will 
need to expand efforts to identify biological and social factors that boost 
susceptibility to nicotine dependence.

 A rise in nicotine dependence among young cigarette smokers wouldn't surprise 
Jerald G. Bachman of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. Cigarettes are 
among the most dependency-producing substances, says Bachman, a codirector of 
the Monitoring the Future surveys. Despite the overall downturn in the past 2 
decades, he notes, rates of daily cigarette smoking by young people have risen 
slightly in the past few years.


