Social Cats: Science News Online, Sept. 15, 2001

 Social Cats

 Science pokes under the sofa, bats around a few ideas

 Susan Milius

 The most common myth that people have about cats is that they're solitary, 
asocial creatures, fumes Sharon L. Crowell-Davis, a behavioral veterinarian at 
the University of Georgia in Athens.

 Supposed standoffishness hurts an animal's image, says Crowell-Davis, and she 
diagnoses the perceived aloofness of Felis catus as the main contributor to 
outbursts of anticatism. Which species provided the devious villains in the 
recent movie Cats & Dogs, for example? Not the romping, barking pack. And don't 
even get her started on the humor book that lists a hundred and one uses for a 
dead cat.

 Crowell-Davis contends that even in the scientific community, stereotypes of 
cat asociality persist. In the literature, "I've read that because cats don't 
form [a particular kind of] dominance hierarchy, that's evidence of their 
nonsocial behavior," she says. "And then I read that cats do form that 
hierarchy, and that's evidence of their nonsocial nature."

 The simplest definition of a social species requires its members to form 
stable relationships, she explains, and several decades of fieldwork have 
documented them in cats, from the English dockyards to the Forum in Rome. 
Crowell-Davis, in fact, is convinced that "there's a lot of politics in a cat 
colony."

 Interpreting social structures is only one of the fascinations of watching 
groups of cats. Other researchers are turning to domestic cats to answer 
questions about mating systems and the impact of hunting by clustered animals. 
Also, some scientists are tackling the question of whether Fluffy and Tiger's 
endearing quirks represent an animal version of personality.

 Updated classic

 Showing that a species forms social groups takes a bit more than spotting two 
animals in the same place, cautions David MacDonald of Oxford University in 
England. He and two of his Oxford colleagues reviewed studies of cat sociality 
and published their conclusions in the 2000 update of the behavioral classic 
The Domestic Cat (2000, D. Turner and P. Bateson, eds., Cambridge University 
Press).

 Analyses in the 1970s tended to treat clusters of cats as a bunch of asocial 
loners drawn to the same resource, MacDonald recalls. He led a study of three 
colonies of free-living cats, such as those hanging out around a farmer's barn. 
The researchers kept track of which cats hunkered down within 5 meters of each 
other, a task that required 59,000 observations of several dozen cats.

"It became clear that the behavior of individuals in these colonies is far from 
socially random," the investigators reported. "Cats choose to sit together, and 
each individual favors the company of some over others."

 Searching for what might influence the preference for neighbors, MacDonald and 
his colleagues checked for relatedness. Among adult females, a cat was more 
than four times as likely to sit near a female relative than a female from 
another lineage.

 Early in the study, the researchers watched a pregnant female squeeze into a 
crevice between straw bales where her sister was raising three kittens. Amid 
those squirming kittens, the newcomer gave birth, and her sister acted as 
midwife. The attending sister licked the cat in labor, licked the newborns 
clean, and nursed them.

 The two mothers continued to raise their litters jointly, nursing whatever mix 
of the kittens was hungriest at the moment and joining forces to fend off 
intruders. Once the researchers realized what they were looking at, they found 
communal kitten raising in the other colonies they studied.

 One of Crowell-Davis' students, Randall Wolfe, now at Georgetown (Ky.) 
College, hypothesized that gender controls these associations. He predicted 
that females would associate with their female relatives but not their male 
kin. For a pilot study, he staked out a Georgia dairy barn and kept track of 
which cats rested together. He found no gender pattern-a female was as likely 
to associate with a male as with another female. So much for his original idea.

"I kicked it around as people are wont to do when their hypothesis has been 
shot in the foot," he recalls. Finally, he began to wonder if cats develop some 
version of buddies, regardless of gender. As Crowell-Davis explains it, "It's 
as if they just like each other."

 To test this idea, Wolfe moved his stakeout to the land around a house locally 
renowned for its abundant cats. About 20 cats, most of them related, gathered 
around the house. All the cats had been neutered, so Wolfe hoped to see 
associations uncomplicated by mating interests.

 Wolfe divided the area into a grid and spent his weekends jotting down which 
grid square a particular cat occupied and what other cats were nearby. "People 
have a preconception that cats spend most of their time asleep," Wolfe says. 
"Actually, there was a lot to watch."

 Nevertheless, it didn't always add up to high-action drama in the Georgia 
summer. "There were some times when it got a little old, usually at 2 o'clock 
in the afternoon, when it was getting hot and the cats were sleeping," Wolfe 
says.

 When Wolfe analyzed all the data at the end of his 16 weekends of 
observations, he found that the cats indeed had preferred associates. The cat 
buddies showed up together in a variety of locations. Wolfe again found no 
predominance of female-female associations or other clear gender patterns. He 
had only spotty genealogies for the animals, so he didn't attempt an analysis 
for lineage.

 What makes the domestic cat's sociability especially interesting is its 
contrast to the rest of feline life, MacDonald comments. Most of the 39 or so 
species in the cat family live solitary lives. Genetic analysis during the late 
1990s found that domestic cats belong to a lineage of six species of small, 
solitary creatures that probably arose around the Mediterranean.

 There is nevertheless some sociability beyond the house cat. Male cheetahs 
hang around with their brothers, and female lions stay in matriarchal prides.

 Sexual interest

 Although Wolfe negated sexual interest among cats he observed, this factor 
formed the centerpiece for a study by Ludovic Say of Claude Bernard University 
in Lyon, France, and his coworkers. For 3 years, the team monitored cat 
receptivity and mating on the grounds of a local hospital.

 In two of the years, all the females came into heat during the same 3 months, 
sometimes with as many as 10 females looking for mates on the same day. In the 
other year, their receptive phases stretched over about 5 months.

 The researchers analyzed DNA from the 50 or so adult cats and nearly 160 
kittens born during the study. Using the data to identify fathers, Say and his 
colleagues found that paternity patterns differed in the oddball year.

 That year the males showed an unusual range in the number of kittens they 
sired. The most prolific fathered 13 kittens, followed by a father of 10, and 
then a string of scores right down to only 1 kitten. Some adult males had no 
kittens. In all, the males showed five times the variation in fatherhood that 
year than in the other two years, the scientists reported in the May 22, 2001 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.

 That finding fits predictions about mating systems and male competition, they 
point out. In a dense group of animals, the top males have trouble monopolizing 
multiple females that are sexually receptive at the same time. Hence the first 
two years of observation, when males bunched together in their success and 
there were no big winners. Spread out female receptivity, however, and more of 
the males will show up and compete for each female in heat. In that scenario, a 
few tough cats dominate most of the encounters and so are likely to father more 
kittens than the other males do.

 Divide and hunt

 Just how cats divide the areas where they range and hunt has attracted 
attention from both conservationists and scientists. A 1980s survey of cats' 
prey in the small village of Felmersham, England inspired alarm about how big a 
bite cats take out of local fauna. The average cat nabbed 14 prey during 1 year.

 One of the more detailed follow-ups to the Felmersham study came from David 
Barrat, now of the Demersal Fisheries Program in Canberra, Australia. In the 
early 1990s, he put radio collars on suburban cats in Canberra to observe their 
prowling and hunting habits. With about half the cats in the study turning out 
to be yard potatoes, but the others venturing far afield, the mean range turned 
out to be some 7 hectares, or about 17 acres. In general, Barrat reports, the 
cats' nocturnal ranges extend farther than their diurnal ones.

 To see what the cats caught on their nightly rounds, Barrat recruited owners 
of 214 cats to save dead animals that their cats brought home. In a year's 
monitoring, ending in the spring of 1994, the researchers found that most cats 
nailed and carried back only about 10 creatures, but a small proportion of the 
study cats showed up with at least an animal a week. Some 65 percent of the 
total haul consisted of house mice, black rats, and other small mammals. 
However, the cats proved superb opportunists at hunting, pouncing on frogs, 
various reptiles, goldfish, and representatives of 47 bird species.

 Conservationists have proposed that people keep their cats indoors at night. 
That restriction might offer protection to many small nocturnal mammals, but it 
wouldn't save daytime birds, says Barrat.

 Bells on cats' collars don't seem to work, Barrat reports. Belled cats caught 
no less prey than bell-free hunters did.

 Andrew Rowan, research director for the Washington, D.C.-based Humane Society 
of the United States hesitates to commit on the perils of felines in most 
neighborhoods. "The debate is far from settled," he grumbles. Nevertheless, he 
notes the danger of letting cats loose on islands where native creatures have 
never confronted them before.

 Indoor ranges

 Not much research has clarified cats' use of space inside people's homes, says 
Penny L. Bernstein of Kent State University's Stark campus in Canton, Ohio. She 
and Mickie Strack, now at Stockton State College in Pomona, N.J., started by 
monitoring which of Strack's 14 cats hung out together in the 1,600-square-foot 
house she lived in at the time.

 Bernstein and Strack identified an indoor version of ranges, overlapping but 
individually distinct, within the house. The oldest male, Julius, roamed 
throughout the house, whereas a female named Lily spent her time in the most 
constricted range, venturing off the top of the refrigerator only rarely and 
briefly.

 Many of the cats favored the same spots, such as a sun-drenched chair, in 
their overlapping ranges. "They time-shared," Bernstein reports. One would get 
the good location for a while, but then somebody else would move in.

 All these arrangements were negotiated with very little fighting, just hissing 
and an occasional swat. Yet the cats Bernstein and Strack watched were living 
at 50 times the density reported for colonies of outdoor cats.

 Bernstein describes the dominance arrangements among cats as more fluid than 
those of dogs or primates, and the ways of working these out as far more 
subtle. Julius, the cat with the largest range in the researchers' 
observations, died during the course of the study. After his departure, the 
other cats' activity patterns shifted. Lily started coming down from the top of 
the refrigerator much more often. Yet she and Julius had hardly seemed to 
interact.

 Early social skills

 Just how do cats develop their social skills? Earlier observers noticed that 
both puppies and kittens pass through a sensitive period for becoming 
socialized to people and other animals. Dogs learn about the society of their 
world between the ages of 8 weeks and 6 months. "Exposure much earlier than 
that doesn't seem to stick," explains John W.S. Bradshaw of the University of 
Southampton in England. Kittens form many of their social habits earlier, 
starting around 2 weeks after birth and continuing for only about 2 months, he 
says.

 A series of old experiments tested the limits of manipulating kittens, 
socially and otherwise, by arranging weird early experiences. In 1930, 
pioneering psychologist Zing Yang Kuo reported that kittens raised in the same 
cages with rats never killed rats of the same strain they grew up with. Kittens 
raised with both rats and other kittens preferred the feline company but grew 
into adults with less-than-usual tendencies to kill rats.

 However, Bradshaw points out, cats "are complex animals." A kitten that lags 
in some ability may find a shortcut to catch up. Testing kittens for some of 
the basics of predatory skills at 3 months didn't necessarily predict how 
they'd score at 6 months, according to studies in the late 1970s. Kuo reported 
that even a cat that had reached adulthood by the time it had its first 
opportunity to kill a rodent improved significantly after just one try.

 Cats differ so much in their sociability, as well as in other qualities, that 
Bradshaw has started looking for a feline version of personality. The term he 
uses, however, is behavioral style.

 The idea that animals might have their own versions of individual 
personalities crosscuts decades of scientific tradition, Bradshaw admits. 
Biologists striving for objectivity traditionally permitted themselves only to 
note the easily measurable qualities of an animal. Such practices conjure a 
world where all 2-year-old neutered female cats are alike.

"That strikes me as being somewhat perverse," says Bradshaw. Biologists base so 
much of their work on evolution, he explains, "yet evolution only works if 
there's variation."

 Figuring out how to talk about those individual quirks and characteristics 
that make up a behavioral style in an animal isn't easy. Researchers searching 
for stable, basic qualities have proposed behavior measurements for such 
animals as fruit flies, yellow-bellied marmots, and pumpkinseed sunfish.

 Bradshaw and his Southampton colleague Sarah Lowe have approached the issue of 
cat personalities through detailed observations of nine litters of kittens at 
4, 12, and 24 months of age. Lowe made all her observations just after the 
kittens had eaten-her effort to bring some kind of standardization to feline 
behavior.

 A cat's tendencies toward or against four kinds of behaviors held relatively 
constant throughout the period, Bradshaw and Lowe reported in the January 
Animal Behaviour. They described these building blocks of behavioral style as 
inclinations for staying indoors; rubbing against a chair leg, human leg, or 
other target; investigating oddities such as a visitor standing around taking 
notes; and more generally acting boldly rather than shyly.

 The thread of the work fits studies of other creatures in which individuals 
tend toward relatively consistent degrees of shyness or boldness.

 Mere humans have a tough time analyzing feline behavior. A certain scent or a 
subtle pose seems to carry volumes of meaning for cats, but people just don't 
get it. Crowell-Davis says that it's not fair to assume that what's hidden from 
people isn't there.


