Dust, the Thermostat: Science News Online, Sept. 29, 2001

 Dust, the Thermostat

 How tiny airborne particles manipulate global climate

 Sid Perkins

 First in a two-part series on environmental effects of long-range transport of 
dust. Part 2: Ill Winds. Available at .

 On April 15, 1998, Mongolia's Gobi Desert lay between an area of low 
atmospheric pressure on the eastern end of the country and a zone of high 
pressure to the west. As swift winds rushed across the desert floor, they 
lofted sand and dust into the heart of a storm system racing southward into 
China. During the next 2 days, a yellow, muddy, acidic rain fell in a wide 
swath that covered Beijing and the Korean peninsula.

 On April 19, another low-pressure system blasted across the same region and 
boosted yet more particles into the sky, this time toward the east. In this 
case, there was no rain to rinse the air clean. The thick, dusty cloud swept 
across the Pacific Ocean and reached North America 6 days later. It whitened 
the sky from British Columbia to California and dropped more dust along the 
coast than the region had received from any single storm in a decade. Particles 
from the cloud passed over Minnesota and probably onward to the Greenland ice 
cap, where future climatologists might detect the event as a stripe of grit in 
an ice core.

 Dust provides one of the most critical influences on Earth's climate, some 
scientists say. In some cases, dust particles serve as nuclei for condensing 
raindrops, but in others, those particles stifle precipitation. Dust cools 
Earth by blocking sunlight from reaching the ground but absorbs some of the 
sunlight and so warms the atmosphere directly. Although dust's cooling effect 
on Earth seems to predominate today, high amounts of dust ironically may have 
triggered the ends of the ice ages.

 It's no wonder then that dust science is on the rise. As some scientists drill 
ice cores from Greenland and Antarctica in search of dusty clues to ancient 
climates, other analysts collect their dust samples by swooping into storms 
with aircraft, sieving powdery particles from the winds, and viewing the clouds 
from satellites. Researchers are just beginning to assimilate enough data to 
map out how the type and amount of dust in the atmosphere vary according to 
latitude, longitude, altitude, and time of year. They intend to unravel dust's 
profound, complex, and far-reaching effects on the planet's climate system.

 Plenty of dust

 There is no shortage of dust in the atmosphere. Small particles that abound 
include soot, salt, bacteria, fungal spores, and interstellar dust. 
Geophysicists focus on deciphering the effects on climate of the dust particles 
made up of minerals, such as oxides and phosphates, less than 62 micrometers in 
diameter.

 One major supply line for mineral dust begins when wind, water, and severe 
changes in temperature join forces to erode large stones into smaller ones. 
Every time loose pieces of rock bang into or scrape across one another, yet 
smaller chunks can break off and join the fray. Eventually, all that's left are 
micrometer-size bits of mineral-the dandruff of the Earth.

 Glaciers are major dust makers, too. As they grind their way along the stony 
terrain, they produce prodigious amounts of rock flour. Overly dry soil is yet 
another large source of mineral dust.

 Winds at speeds no greater than 5 meters per second can boost dust to 
substantial heights. The wind often blows dust, sand, silt, and other mineral 
detritus into a thick, unconsolidated deposit called loess, which takes its 
name from the German word for loose. These ingredients may instead be washed or 
blown into rivers, lakes, and oceans where they eventually settle out of the 
water into mud and ooze that may dry.

 If loess or these sediments don't compact into rock, they can become a major 
source of dust in the atmosphere, says Joseph M. Prospero, an atmospheric 
scientist at the University of Miami.

 With imagery from satellites, scientists can track dust plumes back to their 
origins. They find that many dust springs have a common feature: They're arid 
basins in areas that were flooded during the recent ice ages. In other words, 
today's dust was yesterday's mud.

 One of the most prolific spawning grounds for dust today is the Bodele 
depression, a low-lying area that was once part of Lake Chad. Although this 
lake on the southern edge of the Sahara Desert was about the size of Lake Erie 
in the mid-1960s, the recent lack of rain and the increased demand for water 
for irrigation has caused Lake Chad to shrink to 5 percent of that area.

"North Africa is pumping dust everywhere, all year long, almost every day," 
says Prospero.

 Depending on the season, the winds chafing the Sahara and the Bodele 
depression carry dust to Europe, the Middle East, the North Atlantic Ocean, the 
Caribbean, and South America. For example, isotopic analysis shows that much of 
the iron in the rich red soils of the Caribbean came from African dust. This 
iron and many of the other minerals in Caribbean soil couldn't have eroded from 
the limestone rocks from which the islands formed, Prospero notes.

 Similarly, much of the phosphorus in the soils of the Amazon basin originated 
in Africa.

 Windstorms over North Africa can mobilize up to 700 teragrams (700 trillion 
grams, or about 770 million U.S. tons) of mineral dust each year. That's a 
substantial share of the world's total. About 2,150 Tg of dust takes a ride on 
the wind each year.

 About half of that derives from natural sources, but the rest is lofted by 
agricultural and other human activities, says Joyce E. Penner, an atmospheric 
scientist at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. She and her colleagues 
report their analysis in the Aug. 1 Environmental Science & Technology.

 Multiple effects

 Just what all that suspended dust is doing to the atmosphere and climate 
remains an extremely complicated question. The magnitude of its cooling over 
the ocean surface differs from that over the land. The color, size, shape, and 
chemical composition of the dust grains also strongly influence their behavior.

 Mineral dust, for instance, comes in a variety of colors. Darker particles 
absorb lots of radiation and scatter relatively little, so they tend to warm 
the air substantially. Brighter particles reflect much of the incoming solar 
radiation back to space and therefore have a net cooling effect.

 Despite dust's daunting diversity, Prospero and his colleagues are quantifying 
its atmospheric effects. Using ground-based instruments, they have observed 
clouds of Saharan dust passing over the Canary Islands. They've employed 
satellites to analyze the clouds as they continue over the North Atlantic. With 
this information, the researchers estimate that, on a worldwide basis, dust 
cools the Earth slightly. The team reports this research in the Aug. 27 Journal 
of Geophysical Research (Atmospheres).

 Over land, the analysts found, the cooling effect is approximately 0.57 watt 
of solar radiation per square meter. The net effect of dust over the ocean, the 
researchers say, is to scatter back into space about twice that radiation. 
That's because the ocean typically reflects less of the sun's radiation back 
into space than does the land, Prospero explains.

 The worldwide cooling, he calculates, is about the same magnitude as the 
warming effect attributed to greenhouse gases that have been added to the 
atmosphere since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.

 Calculating the effects of aerosols such as dust on Earth's climate is much 
harder than estimating those resulting from greenhouse gases, says Joel Levy of 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Office of Global Programs 
in Silver Spring, Md. Whereas greenhouse gases generally last long enough in 
the atmosphere for them to diffuse and become well distributed, dust stays in 
the atmosphere only for a few days or weeks.

"It's very difficult to account for dust storms in long-term climate models 
because they're a 'now you see them, now you don't' kind of phenomenon," Levy 
notes. As such, any cooling or warming effect is tricky to simulate, but 
scientists are making steady progress.

 The first estimates of the effect of dust on climate were mere guesses, says 
Levy. Now, Prospero's group has calculated a worldwide value of dust's cooling 
power, but it's based on dust from only the Sahara. The next step, Levy says, 
is to collect information on the optical properties of dust that comes from 
other places on Earth.

 That type of large-scale data gathering is beginning. Research programs have 
become so massive that they resemble military exercises. This summer, an 
international effort to observe and collect dust streaming off Asia into the 
North Pacific included two airplanes, one ship, several satellites, and a 
ground station in Korea. Even so, Levy notes, "we don't yet have an adequate 
set of measurement instruments and techniques."

 For example, the aircraft-mounted sampling equipment that snatches the dust 
from the atmosphere pulls in small particles effectively but doesn't do as well 
with those larger than 2 micrometers. Getting a representative sample of the 
dust is important because only then can scientists make good estimates of a 
dust cloud's light-scattering properties.

 Furthermore, these properties can change over time. As the dust motes waft 
through the air, water that condenses on them can influence their shape and how 
much light they reflect. These changes can be even more drastic if the water 
freezes. Minerals in the dust can also react with or bind to chemicals emitted 
by human activities, including industrial or automobile emissions, Levy notes.

 The direct effects of dust on the atmosphere may pale in comparison with their 
indirect effect on precipitation patterns, he adds. Dark particles tend to warm 
the atmosphere and turn clouds into water vapor, thereby letting more sunlight 
through to Earth (SN: 1/6/01, p. 15).

 In work over cities on three continents, cloud physicist Daniel Rosenfeld and 
his colleagues found that clouds polluted with industrial emissions tend to 
hold their water rather than releasing it as rain (SN: 3/11/00, p. 164: ). 
That's because the moisture in the cloud is distributed among more particles, 
which makes it more difficult for the drops to grow large enough to fall to 
Earth. A side effect of a polluted cloud's smaller droplets is that it more 
efficiently scatters solar radiation back into space than does a cloud made of 
fewer, larger drops. Therefore, it has a greater cooling effect on Earth's 
surface.

 Now, Rosenfeld and other researchers have shown the same phenomenon among 
clouds tainted by Saharan dust. Moreover, this rain-stifling effect could be 
self-reinforcing, the team suggests. Less rain means drier soil, which leads to 
more dust, which means even less precipitation. Rosenfeld and his team 
published their analysis in the May 22 Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences.

 Dust and ice

 Regardless of the effect of dust kicked up by people's activities, dust may 
have played a major role in the end of the recent ice ages. During glacial 
periods, there seems to have been from 10 to 100 times more dust in the 
atmosphere than there was during intermediate warm spells, says Petr Chylek, an 
atmospheric scientist at Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia.

 Of the six dusty periods recorded in Antarctic ice cores that cover the last 
420,000 years, four immediately preceded the end of the four glacial periods 
recognized during that time. Chylek and his colleagues propose in the Aug. 27 
Journal of Geophysical Research (Atmospheres) that a small but significant 
change in the way the atmosphere circulates in the tropics may explain the 
increased dustiness during glacial times.

 Warm temperatures near the equator cause air near Earth's surface to rise to 
high altitudes and then stream toward higher latitudes, cooling as it travels. 
When this air reaches the edge of the tropics-latitudes of 30@N and 30@S-it 
falls back to low altitudes and then heads for the equator.

 This so-called Hadley circulation ensures that most dust lofted into the 
atmosphere in the tropics doesn't travel to other parts of the world. Airborne 
dust at higher latitudes stands a much better chance of reaching the polar 
regions and being preserved in ice sheets there, Chylek explains.

 He and his colleagues suggest that the average temperatures at the equator 
were lower in glacial periods than during the interglacial warm spells. This 
provided a weaker driving force for the Hadley circulation, and Chylek's 
calculations show that the warm, high-altitude tropical air may have reached 
latitudes of only 27@ before it fell back to Earth.

 Using current size and locations of arid regions, further analysis indicates 
that just moving that boundary 3@ toward the equator could place larger areas 
of many major dust sources in a position to spew dust poleward rather than into 
the tropics.

 This explains a large share of the dust trapped in polar ice, Chylek argues. 
However, a drier climate during glacial periods also might have led to 
expansion of the deserts, and lower sea levels would have exposed great 
expanses of mud and ooze that could dry up and blow away, he notes.

 Wallace S. Broecker, a climatologist at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty 
Earth Observatory in Palisades, N.Y., disagrees with Chylek's scenario. He 
thinks it's much more likely that the large amounts of dust billowing to 
Greenland in glacial times were a result of strong storms.

 Because the edge of the sea ice extended farther south during glacial times 
than it does now and even surrounded Greenland, temperatures on that ice sheet 
then were as much as 23@C colder than they are today. That, in turn, 
intensified the temperature gradient between northern regions and the tropics, 
thereby strengthening the storm systems that could lift dust from arid areas. 
Broecker's analysis appears in the August 2000 Earth-Science Reviews.

 Of all the climatic factors that seem to vary between glacial and interglacial 
periods, the amounts of dust trapped in polar ice sheets underwent the largest 
change, Broecker notes. Previous analyses estimate that there's a 10-to-50-fold 
greater amount during glacial times.

 Broecker also points out that loess, which was generated in copious amounts 
during the peaks of the glacial periods, wasn't produced during interglacials.

 Several scientists have suggested that dust falling on glaciers made them 
darker, causing them to absorb more solar radiation and thereby heating them up 
and accelerating their demise. This could explain why a period of intense dust 
rain immediately preceded the termination of each of the recent ice ages.

 Whether or not dust triggered the ends of the ice ages, scientists hold that 
it plays a significant role in controlling today's global climate. Says 
Broecker: "We're just starting to understand the effects of dust."

 Up in the Air: Dust from World Trade Center

 While it's still too early to ascertain the long-term effects of the dust 
jettisoned into the air by the fires and collapse of New York's World Trade 
Center, scientists say that it's unlikely to influence global climate. 
"Clearly, there was a tremendous amount of dust and smoke. But I would suspect 
that most of the dust consists of rather large particles that will settle out 
rapidly," says Joseph M. Prospero of the University of Miami (Fla.). "The stuff 
didn't get to a high altitude, so probably won't last for more than a few 
weeks." The first rains should clear the air, he notes.

 Although dramatic in volume and the rapidity with which it was ejected, the 
New York dust can't compare with the usual large-scale sources of particulates, 
such as wind-blown deserts, major volcanoes, and industry that spans wide 
areas. "It's like a very small volcano," Prospero says. He points out that 
after the first few minutes, the fires burned clean, giving white instead of 
black smoke, so the effect is expected to be less harmful than the 1991 oil 
fires in Kuwait.

 A more thorough assessment will come from data being collected in a nationwide 
network that monitors particles. Prospero has suggested to scientists at the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency that they put data from the terrorist 
devastation of the World Trade Center into their current 
airborne-particle-dispersal model as a case study. The Environmental Protection 
Agency, which has been sampling dust at and near the crash site, predicts no 
health risk to the general public (see "Where's the smoke from the N.Y. fires?" 
in this issue). - J.A.M.

 Part 2: Ill Winds. Available at .


