When Branes Collide: Science News Online, Sept. 22, 2001

 When Branes Collide

 Stringing together a new theory for the origin of the universe

 Ron Cowen

 For an eternity, our universe lay dormant-a frozen, featureless netherworld. 
Then, about 15 billion years ago, the cosmos got an abrupt wake-up call.

 A parallel universe moving along a hidden dimension smacked into ours. The 
collision heated our universe, creating a sea of quarks, electrons, protons, 
photons, and other subatomic particles. It also imparted microscopic ripples, 
like ocean waves crashing on a shore.

 These ripples generated tiny fluctuations in temperature and density, the 
seeds from which all cosmic architecture-from stars to gargantuan clusters of 
galaxies to galactic super clusters-ultimately arose.

 This model for the evolution of the cosmos, first presented at a cosmology 
meeting at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore last April, has 
been widely discussed and debated ever since. Although the hypothesis sounds 
like science fiction, some scientists say it's the first serious challenge to 
the reigning model of the birth of the universe.

 According to the standard theory, the universe was born some 15 billion years 
ago in a hot, expanding fireball, an event scientists call the Big Bang. The 
universe then underwent a brief spurt of faster-than-light expansion, called 
inflation, before settling down to the much slower, steady expansion observed 
today.

"After many years in which we had a single model-[the Big Bang combined with] 
inflation-for the universe's beginning, we now have an alternative," comments 
theorist Mario Livio of the Space Telescope Science Institute, one of the 
organizers of the April meeting on this topic.

"The reason that this is important is that in spite of its attractive features, 
inflation theory has not been tested observationally in any detail," he notes. 
Livio adds that the new model "provides us with a potential true test that can 
distinguish between it and inflation."

"I don't think it's by any means yet a real rival to inflation, but I think it 
is a model well worth pursuing," says Alan H. Guth of the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, one of the developers of the inflation model.

 No bang

 Despite its name, nothing goes bang in the Big Bang theory. The cataclysm it 
proposes wasn't anything like a bomb exploding into preexisting space, since 
all space was contained inside the infant universe. Rather, the Big Bang refers 
to the event when the immense energy in the infant universe drove it to expand.

 In the new hypothesis, however, "our universe begins in a static, featureless 
state" that persisted for eons, notes Paul J. Steinhardt of Princeton 
University. That dormant period may have lasted a hundred trillion trillion 
years. Then, there really was a bang-a giant collision that heated the cosmos 
to a high temperature. This collision sparked the steady expansion of the 
universe, and over time, gravity molded gas clouds into stars and 
galaxies-equivalent to what happens in the widely accepted Big Bang scenario.

 To generate that all-important collision, the new model presupposes hidden 
dimensions and myriad universes floating through space like parallel plates. By 
chance, one of those plates whacked into the one destined to become our 
universe.

"It's a very radical idea we have," admits Burt A. Ovrut of the University of 
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. "The old idea was that the universe started out 
at some time zero and ballooned outwards in a burst of inflation. We're now 
proposing that `time zero' was just a marker, that the universe really existed 
long before that."

 Steinhardt, Ovrut, and their colleagues Justin Khoury of Princeton and Neil 
Turok of the DAMTP in Cambridge, England, call their model the ekpyrotic 
universe, from the Greek word for conflagration.

"We might have used the term `Big Bang', but that name was taken," jokes Ovrut.

 Fix needed?

 If a theory ain't broken, why fix it? Even in its most primitive form, which 
does not include inflation, the Big Bang theory correctly predicts the cosmic 
abundance of helium and deuterium and the temperature of the radiation left 
over from the birth of the universe.

 The classical Big Bang picture was first proposed in the late 1920s. Two 
decades ago, researchers realized that the scenario needed to be modified.

 In its original form, the model would lead to a universe vastly different from 
the one we live in. For instance, the theory doesn't provide a way for stars, 
galaxies, and larger structures to arise, notes Steinhardt. Moreover, the Big 
Bang model would tend to produce a cosmos whose composition and density would 
vary widely from place to place and whose overall geometry would be warped or 
curved.

 That's in stark contrast to numerous observations, which reveal a universe 
that is the same, on the large scale, in all directions and has just the right 
amount of matter and energy to keep it perfectly flat.

 In 1980, Guth amended the Big Bang theory to account for these discrepancies. 
Refined by several researchers over the past 2 decades, Guth's model posits 
that the infant cosmos underwent a brief but enormous episode of inflation, 
ballooning at a rate faster than the speed of light. In just 10^-32 seconds, 
the universe expanded its girth by a factor of about 100 trillion trillion, 
more than it has in the billions of years that have elapsed since.

 The inflation model accomplishes several feats (SN: 12/19&26/98, p. 392: ). It 
explains why widely separated parts of the universe-regions so far apart that 
all communication between them is impossible-can nonetheless look as similar as 
the closest of neighbors. Inflation theory suggests that when the universe 
began, these regions were indeed neighbors and then rapidly spread far apart.

 Inflation also makes the universe flat. Any curvature to space-time would have 
been stretched out by this era of faster-than-light expansion.

 Furthermore, the ballooning would have provided a way for chance subatomic 
fluctuations in the early universe to inflate to macroscopic proportions. Over 
time, gravity could then have molded these variations into the spidery network 
of galaxies and voids seen in the universe today.

 The Big Bang model combined with inflation matches several important 
observations, including the detailed structure of the radiation called the 
cosmic microwave background, which is left over from the universe's birth. Data 
gathered by several balloon-borne and ground-based telescopes fit the 
predictions of the inflation model (SN: 4/28/01, p. 261: ).

 Yet some cosmologists view inflation as a mysterious, ad hoc device. For 
instance, notes Steinhardt, no one knows what type of force triggered the onset 
of inflation or what ended it. "We've been searching for several years to find 
either a more natural way of incorporating inflation or an alternative model 
based on new physics," he says.

 String theory

 Inflation, Steinhardt says, is based on quantum field theory, which views 
every elementary particle as a pointlike object. In the past decade, however, 
physicists have begun thinking about elementary particles in a new way, based 
on a model called string theory.

 According to this view, electrons, quarks, and all the other elementary 
particles in the universe behave as point particles when observed at a 
distance, but each is actually composed of tiny loops or strings of energy. The 
different vibrations of a string, like the different notes that can be plucked 
on a violin, correspond to different particles.

"It's a beautiful idea because it says that all of the particles we see 
actually arise from a single object-string," says Ovrut.

 Each string vibrates in a space-time that has 11 dimensions-7 dimensions 
beyond the usual 3 of space and 1 of time (SN: 2/19/00, p. 122: ). The newest 
twist on string theory, dubbed M theory, allows for more-complex objects: 
surfaces rather than just strings. These surfaces are known as membranes, or 
just branes.

 Many physicists are studying branes in the hope of linking gravity and the 
other fundamental forces of nature to the elementary particles that communicate 
these forces. According to Steinhardt and his colleagues, certain types of 
branes may turn out to have profound consequences for cosmology.

 Instead of working with the 11 dimensions implied by M theory, the researchers 
have focused on branes that exist in 5 dimensions. In this model, the other 6 
dimensions are tightly curled up and can be ignored. Certain branes that exist 
in this abstract five-dimensional space can be represented by infinitely long, 
parallel planes and seem to have a close correspondence to our universe.

 In this construct, our cosmos could have plenty of company. Other would-be 
universes-also represented by branes-may be floating through the fifth 
dimension. These branes would remain invisible because particles and light 
can't travel through the fifth dimension. However, gravity can couple matter 
across that dimension, and collisions between branes are possible.

 In the ekpyrotic scenario, the fifth dimension is finite in size and bounded 
on either side by a three-dimensional brane. One of these boundary branes was 
the surface that was to become our own cosmos, and the other represents another 
universe. In the version of the theory first described last April, a third 
brane peels off the opposing boundary brane and bangs into ours. In the 
collision, it melds with our brane, igniting the Big Bang.

"There is a certain sense in which this is like two pieces of putty slamming 
into each other and heating up," says Ovrut.

 Critics of the scenario, as well as Steinhardt's team, have noted that the 
universe created by the impact contracts rather than expands. If so, it 
wouldn't have generated a cosmos like ours.

 In a modified version of the ekpyrotic theory, posted Aug. 26 on the Internet 
(), Steinhardt, Nathan Seiberg of the Institute of Advanced Study in Princeton, 
N.J., and their collaborators say such concerns are now unwarranted. According 
to their calculations, the new model can produce a collision without having to 
rely on one invisible brane peeling off from another.

 Instead, one of the boundary branes moves slowly but steadily toward the 
other, attracted by an exchange of lower-dimension branes between the two. As 
the boundary brane moves, it shrinks the fifth dimension. When the two boundary 
branes touch, the fifth dimension collapses completely, an event the 
researchers call the Big Crunch.

 As in the earlier version of the theory, the collision triggers the Big Bang. 
However after the impact, the two boundary branes bounce off each other and 
move apart, recreating the fifth dimension. This rebound starts the expansion 
of our universe.

 In either version of the theory, the laws that govern elementary particle 
physics require that the boundary branes be flat as a pancake before they 
collide and that they stay that way afterwards. Consequently, the universe 
generated by the collision is flat. An episode of inflation isn't needed to 
stretch out any curvature since none ever existed.

 Because the impact is so uniform-exactly the same force is applied up and down 
the flat boundary between the two branes- widely separated parts of the 
universe get the same kick and thus evolve in exactly the same way after the 
collision. This accounts for the uniformity of distant reaches of the cosmos 
without having to invoke an episode of inflation.

 Due to quantum effects, which make the boundary between the branes slightly 
uneven, some parts of our brane would be struck ever so slightly earlier or 
later than other parts. This would create tiny temperature differences within 
the struck brane that, like those in the standard Big Bang model, become the 
seeds for galaxy formation. The collision also causes the brane to stretch or 
expand, accounting for the expansion of the universe observed today.

 The researchers "make a graceful transition from the Big Crunch to the Big 
Bang," says David N. Spergel of Princeton University. "This is arguably a `new 
ekpyrotic universe' that appears to be more elegant than the old model."

 Which theory?

 According to Steinhardt, the ekpyrotic theory does everything that Big Bang 
plus inflation accomplishes. "It's just that we happened to discover one theory 
first-20 years ago," he says.

"What [the ekpyrotic theory] has going for it is a much closer relationship to 
string theory than any formulation we currently have of inflation," says Guth. 
"String theory is simply the only hope we currently have for a quantum theory 
of gravity, and obviously gravity has to be quantized to be consistent with the 
rest of what we know about physics."

 Nonetheless, "I'm still somewhat skeptical about the whole thing," Guth adds. 
"They need to make very strong assumptions about the initial conditions-they're 
really starting out with a universe that's already infinite and uniform."

 Another developer of the inflation model, Andrei Linde of Stanford University, 
takes a much dimmer view of the new work and has posted several papers on the 
Internet lambasting the ekpyrotic model. He says that to produce galaxies, 
Steinhardt and his colleagues have to choose a highly specialized, unrealistic 
form of interaction between branes. Moreover, Linde claims that the branes in 
the ekpyrotic model are not truly uniform in structure and therefore can't 
account for the large-scale uniformity of the universe.

"Instead of a theory, we have only wishful thinking," he says.

 Steinhardt and his colleagues have posted responses on the Internet.

 A slow process

 Making a universe in ekpyrotic theory requires patience, notes Ovrut. Because 
the attractive force between branes is so small, they move at a snail's pace, 
and it could take an extraordinarily long time for a collision to occur, he 
says.

 In effect, says Ovrut, the new theory replaces the very short growth spurt of 
inflation with a very long lead time for a collision.

 As a bonus, he notes, the collision described by ekpyrotic theory not only 
generates cosmic structure, it also creates the known families of quarks and 
other fundamental particles.

"What's very beautiful about these brane models is that one can actually 
compute the spectrum of [elementary] particles, and what you get is something 
like our real world," notes Ovrut.

 At least one empirical test of the ekpyrotic theory may soon be possible. The 
test would examine gravitational waves, the radiation produced when massive 
objects accelerate.

 Big Bang plus inflation predicts that gravitational waves can have extremely 
long wavelengths, while the ekpyrotic theory does not. Long-wavelength 
gravitational waves would leave a distinctive fingerprint on the cosmic 
microwave background.

 Future experiments with a new generation of space, balloon-borne, and 
ground-based telescopes may be able to detect that fingerprint, says Ovrut.

 Other aspects of the ekpyrotic model are still being scrutinized.

"I worry a lot about the details," says Ovrut. "This is a theory that's really 
still in its infancy."


