Gene change speaks to language malady: Science News Online, Oct. 6, 2001

 Gene change speaks to language malady

 Bruce Bower

 An unprecedented genetic find has emerged from an extended British family in 
which more than half the members display a severe speech and language disorder. 
Scientists have now identified a genetic mutation that lies at the root of this 
family's communication breakdown.

 This is the first gene implicated in people's capability to talk and to 
understand language, according to a team led by geneticist Cecilia S.L. Lai of 
the University of Oxford in England. She and her colleagues describe their 
discovery in the Oct. 4 Nature.

"It's exciting that we've found a mutation common to every family member with 
this disorder," says study coauthor Faraneh Vargha-Khadem, a neuroscientist at 
the Institute of Child Health in London. "This mutation may impede development 
of brain areas that mediate speech and language use."

 In the so-called KE family, 15 of 37 individuals across four generations 
display the same communication impairment. Their condition includes low verbal 
and spatial intelligence, difficulties in pronouncing a wide range of sounds, 
and grammatical deficits such as failing to grasp rules for forming the past 
tense of verbs, Vargha-Khadem says. In contrast, some other investigators view 
the KE family's disorder as primarily a problem of grammar use. Scientists 
suggest that finding the genetic bases for the disorder may clarify its scope.

 In earlier work, Vargha-Khadem and her coworkers isolated a distinctive 
segment of chromosome 7 containing about 100 genes, which is possessed only by 
KE family members who exhibit the disorder (SN: 1/31/98, p. 71).

 In the new study, the researchers probed for changes in the suspect region of 
chromosome 7 in an individual outside the KE family who has the same 
communication disorder. This exercise led them to a specific gene, which had 
already been shown to regulate the activity of other genes involved in prenatal 
brain development.

 Lai's team then found that affected members of the KE family displayed a 
substitution of a single nucleotide in one of their two copies of that same 
gene. No such mutation appeared in unaffected family members or in 182 
unrelated adults with no communication disorders.

 These results won't resolve the decades-long debate over whether genes map out 
grammar circuits in the brain or participate in a more general developmental 
process underlying language use. The gene's specific influences on brain 
development remain unknown, Vargha-Khadem says.

 The new finding provides "a smoking gun for a genetic cause of one kind of 
language disorder," contends psychologist Steven Pinker of the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology in a comment published in the same issue of Nature.

 In contrast, psychologist Jeffrey Elman of the University of California, San 
Diego argues that the KE family's genetic mutation fosters a range of 
perceptual and intellectual problems rather than harming language alone.


