Shrimps spew bubbles as hot as the sun: Science News Online, Oct. 6, 2001

 Shrimps spew bubbles as hot as the sun

 Peter Weiss

 Pinkie-size marine crustaceans whose snappy noisemaking has already captivated 
scientists also stage some flashy pyrotechnics, researchers now find. While 
earlier experiments had shown that so-called snapping shrimp generate imploding 
air bubbles that make loud popping sounds (SN: 9/23/00, p. 199), a new study 
reveals that those collapsing bubbles emit flashes of light and may flare as 
hot as the sun's surface.

 In the Oct. 4 Nature, Detlef Lohse of Twente University in Enschede, the 
Netherlands, and his colleagues present measurements of those light flashes. 
Using readings from a sensitive light detector called a photomultiplier tube, 
they offer the first evidence of a biological version of the phenomenon known 
as sonoluminescence.

 That's a process in which sudden collapses of gas bubbles in a liquid cause 
temperatures and pressures to soar inside the shrinking orbs. Under such 
extremes, the gases inside the bubbles momentarily incandesce (SN: 6/21/97, p. 
391) and reach temperatures as high as 20,000@C.

"For an animal to do that is pretty remarkable," comments physicist Lawrence A. 
Crum of the University of Washington in Seattle.

 Sonoluminescence results from cavitation-bubble formation in a liquid when its 
pressure dips below that at which the liquid would ordinarily vaporize, 
permitting the microscopic gas bubbles already present to expand. When such 
bubbles shrink suddenly as the pressure returns to normal, they can launch 
shock waves forceful enough to damage ship propellers, water pipes, and other 
equipment.

 In lab research, scientists use sound waves to make the bubbles-hence the 
prefix sono- in the term sonoluminescence. Lohse and coauthors Barbara Schmitz 
of the Technical University of Munich in Garching, Germany, and Michel 
Versluis, also of Twente University, have wryly dubbed the shrimp-initiated 
sound-and-light show "shrimpoluminescence."

 Snapping shrimp, in the genera Alpheus and Synalpheus, inhabit mostly shallow, 
tropical and subtropical waters worldwide. The animals use snaps to fight 
rivals, find mates, and even stun prey.

 Three years ago, Schmitz, a biologist, noticed flashes when the shrimps' 
enlarged claws made the snapping sounds. She suspected cavitation-induced 
luminescence. After experiments using high-speed video cameras and hydrophones, 
she and the Dutch physicists reported a year ago that snapping does indeed 
produce cavitation. Now, experiments in darkness show that the cavitation, in 
turn, causes luminescence-but not the bright bursts that Schmitz first noticed 
while videotaping the animals.

 Those proved to be due to the camera's lights reflecting from other tiny 
bubbles the snaps also make. The luminescence was more subtle, detectable only 
with a photomultiplier tube. With it, the team recorded bursts of 
cavitation-induced light that are extremely brief and faint. In fact, those 
pulses produce too few photons for human eyes or probably any other eyes to 
see, Lohse notes.

 That dimness suggests that the light has no biological significance, say 
Schmitz and other biologists. The flashes are most likely a byproduct of the 
snapping that's central to the shrimps' lives.

 This lack of biological consequence may underscore how common 
cavitation-induced luminescence could be, suggests Kenneth S. Suslick of the 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

 Researchers have previously observed sonoluminescence outside the lab only in 
certain water pumps and in liposuction surgery using bubbles acoustically made, 
notes Seth J. Putterman of the University of California, Los Angeles.

 Yet cavitation is widespread, Suslick notes, from ultrasound imaging to steam 
bubbles from deep sea vents (SN: 9/7/96, p. 156: ). Cavitation bubbles in 
synovial fluid may even explain the sound of "cracking" knuckles, he ventures. 
And if that's the case, he says, "I'd be willing to bet pitchers of beer that 
cracking knuckles will also generate small amounts of luminescence."


