Probe's comet encounter yields close-ups: Science News Online, Sept. 29, 2001

 Probe's comet encounter yields close-ups

 Ben Harder

 Operating on a makeshift navigation system and performing an extra mission 
assigned on the fly, NASA's Deep Space 1 probe (DS1) has executed a stunning 
rendezvous with a comet.

 The probe passed within 2,200 kilometers of Comet Borrelly's frozen nucleus 
and through the comet's coma of dust and gas. During the fly-by, DS1 captured 
black-and-white and infrared images of the nucleus as well as data about ions 
and other particles that radiate from it.

 The Sept. 22 encounter occurred between the orbital paths of Earth and Mars, 
just days after Borrelly reached the point in its 6.9-year orbit closest to the 
sun. The only other probe that's photographed a comet's nucleus is the European 
Space Agency's probe Giotto, which encountered Comet Halley in 1986.

 Data from DS1's encounter hint at some surprises. The center of Borrelly's 
envelope of ions is offset from the nucleus by about 7,000 km. This unexpected 
finding, supported by visual images, indicates that the fissures spewing jets 
of ionized gas are clustered on one side of the comet's nucleus, says David T. 
Young, a mission scientist.

 The encounter also confirms some assumptions. Harold A. Weaver, a comet 
specialist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, is pleased by images 
showing that the nucleus is 8 km long and 4 km wide. Using data from the Hubble 
Space Telescope of Borrelly's brightness, he had predicted those dimensions, 
but nailing them down "takes a spacecraft flying through the coma," he says.

 Comet Borrelly wasn't on the itinerary when scientists at NASA's Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., launched DS1 in October 1998. The 
probe completed its primary mission-testing its payload of a dozen experimental 
technologies, including an ion-propulsion engine-in September 1999. That's when 
the team decided to go after Borrelly.

 Just months into the 2-year journey to the comet, however, DS1's main 
navigational camera broke. Scientists managed to jury-rig another on-board 
camera to track stars, enabling the crippled probe to keep navigating. Still, 
they weren't sure that DS1, built without a protective coating, could withstand 
the whizzing dust particles in the comet's coma.

 The probe's success bodes well for several upcoming missions to comets. 
Further data analysis will also help scientists know what to expect when 
navigating probes within the comas, says Joseph Veverka, an astronomer at 
Cornell University. Veverka and his team plan to usher a NASA probe called 
Contour past at least two comet nuclei after its launch in July 2002.


