Chemical Neutralizes Anthrax Toxin: Science News Online, Oct. 6, 2001

 Chemical Neutralizes Anthrax Toxin

 Nathan Seppa

 Scientists have created a synthetic compound that disables the toxin that 
makes the bacterial disease anthrax so lethal. Meanwhile, another research team 
has discovered a gene that protects some mice against anthrax. These findings 
could lead to an antidote to the anthrax toxin and help clarify the mechanism 
by which it kills.

 Whether the new compound can serve as an antitoxin in people remains unclear 
since the scientists have tested it only in rats, says R. John Collier of 
Harvard Medical School in Boston. Nevertheless, the concept of neutralizing 
anthrax toxin has appeal because the current treatments, which target the 
bacterium, and the vaccine now in use have drawbacks.

 When a person inhales spores of Bacillus anthracis-the microbe that causes 
anthrax-they unleash three proteins that combine to form a toxin. This triad 
makes blood pressure plummet, causes hemorrhaging, and can lead to coma and 
death.

 The proteins attack human cells as a team. One protein-protective antigen 
(PA)-binds to a receptor on the cell surface and is cleaved by enzymes there. 
The part of PA that remains stuck, called PA63, provides a docking site for the 
other anthrax proteins-lethal factor and edema factor. Once assembled, the 
toxin enables lethal factor to enter the cell. There, it chops up proteins, 
setting into motion the chain of events that leads to anthrax's symptoms, says 
Nicholas C. Duesbery of the Van Andel Research Institute in Grand Rapids, Mich.

 Since no drug in use at present disables the toxin, Collier and his colleagues 
set out to create such a compound. First, they identified a peptide, or partial 
protein, that bonds to PA63 in lab tests. Next, they linked together multiple 
copies of the peptide. In test tubes, this synthetic molecule, which they call 
polyvalent inhibitor (PVI), prevented the natural anthrax proteins from binding 
to PA63.

 When injected into rats, PVI protected the animals against subsequent exposure 
to 10 times the normally lethal dose of anthrax toxin, the researchers report 
in the October Nature Biotechnology. Without PVI treatment, rats died within 
hours.

 Antibiotics can kill B. anthracis but have no effect on the toxin already 
present in the body when symptoms appear, says Robert C. Liddington of the 
Burnham Institute in La Jolla, Calif. The vaccine poses problems, too. It can 
cause side effects, and "it's hard to justify vaccinating a whole country 
against one particular agent of biological terrorism," he says.

 Ideally, a toxin antidote would be mass-produced and kept in storage around 
the country, Collier says.

 Researchers are currently charting the anthrax proteins' course in the body. 
In the Oct. 2 Current Biology, William F. Dietrich of the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute and Harvard Medical School in Boston and his colleagues report that 
certain variations of a gene called Kif1C, which encodes a protein that ushers 
other proteins around inside cells, protect mice from the effects of the 
anthrax toxin.

"We've got the PA63 molecular activity on one end and the disease on the other 
end. The Kif1C gene gives us some clues as to where to look in between," 
Duesbery says.


