Ill Winds: Science News Online, Oct. 6, 2001

 Ill Winds

 Dust storms ferry toxic agents between countries and even continents

 Janet Raloff

 Second in a two-part series on the effects of the long-range movement of dust. 
Part I: Dust, the Thermostat. Available at .

 Last spring, Zev Levin flew to northern China. The atmospheric physicist from 
Tel Aviv University in Israel had been invited to give a series of guest 
lectures on cloud physics and to meet with meteorological researchers to 
discuss cloud seeding.

 On April 7 at 7 a.m., he awoke in his Baichang hotel expecting sunny skies. 
Instead, it appeared "pitch black," he recalls. Levin couldn't even make out 
cars on the street below.

 Then, he detected a yellowish cast. It suggested to Levin that the pall over 
Baichang must be dust: enormous amounts kicked up from a spring storm in the 
Gobi Desert some 1,000 kilometers to the west. When the skies brightened 
somewhat, 45 minutes later, Levin had enough light to finally snap a photo of 
the scene out his hotel window.

"I was in the right place at the right time," he says.

 The mammoth curtain of dust that darkened Baichang indeed came from the Gobi. 
Two days after passing through northern China, the plume of sand and dirt moved 
out over the Pacific. By the time it streamed through the skies over Boulder, 
Colo., on April 13, it still carried enough dust to reduce sunlight by an 
estimated 25 percent, according to a report by the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The plume eventually crossed into the North 
Atlantic. All along its west-to-east path, it left a thin layer of foreign soil.

 Three months later, a cloud of red, iron-rich dust from Saharan Africa was 
heading from east to west. In Barbados, this plume marked its passage by 
depositing a thin veneer of red soil on auto windshields, kitchen counters, 
even bed sheets. The dust cloud then moved into the eastern United States.

 Each year, several hundred million tons of African soil cross the Atlantic to 
the Americas, notes Joseph M. Prospero of the University of Miami. The Middle 
East and Europe get their share of African dust, as well. And untold tons of 
Asian dust cross the Pacific. Even the southwestern United States generates 
some plumes that scientists have tracked as far as Canada.

 Though most people view the episodic fallout of such far-flung dust as merely 
a nuisance, research is beginning to suggest that the long-range movement of 
dust may be unhealthy for wildlife, crops, and even people.

 By studying African dust particles' size, trajectory, and mineral composition, 
Prospero has begun calculating its contribution to Western air pollution. In 
Miami, for instance, passing African dust sometimes constitutes half of the 
breathable particulates in summer air-as much as 100 micrograms per cubic 
meter-jeopardizing the city's compliance with federal Clean Air Act limits.

 As important as drifting soil particles might be to air-pollution standards, 
some hitchhikers in those dust clouds may be even more dangerous. Studies are 
now turning up viruses, bacteria, fungi, and toxic metals in intercontinental 
dust. Nobody has yet looked for hormone-mimicking chemicals and other such 
biologically active pollutants, but Ginger H. Garrison of the U.S. Geological 
Survey (USGS) in St. Petersburg, Fla., has reason to suspect that they're 
blowing around as well.

 Data emerging from her group and others, she says, warn that dirt lofted from 
continent to continent could contribute to agricultural losses and human 
disease.

 Intercontinental plumes

 Though scientists have known that intercontinental dust plumes can ferry 
bacteria and viruses, "most people had assumed that the [sun's] ultraviolet 
light would sterilize these clouds," says microbiologist Dale W. Griffin, also 
with the USGS in St. Petersburg. "We now find that isn't true."

 The first solid evidence emerged almost 4 years ago, following a chance 
meeting between Garrison and Garriet W. Smith, a coral researcher at the 
University of South Carolina in Aiken.

 Previously, Smith had linked a terrestrial fungus, Aspergillus sedowii, to a 
devastating Caribbean sea fan epidemic. He then proposed that rain-eroded soil 
might be washing the fungus into waters where this coral was dying (SN: 
1/30/99, p. 72: ).

 Garrison suggested that Smith also consider airborne dust as a source of 
fungi, and she volunteered to send him some African dust samples that she had 
collected in St. John, the U.S. Virgin Islands. "He laughed," she recalls, "and 
said, 'Sure.'"

"We were all astounded," Garrison says, "when he found [ Aspergillus] in the 
very first sample." Working with Smith, Julianna Weir used DNA tests to confirm 
the presence of A. sedowii in a host of additional samples. She found that the 
fungus collected from the dust would cause disease in sea fans. Weir notes that 
not all strains of that fungus will sicken those corals.

 Prodded by such findings, Garrison, Griffin, and their colleagues launched an 
extensive analysis of other microbes in St. John's air. They compared air 
sampled while an African dust plume was over the island-as indicated by 
satellite images-with air collected on clear days. Although the researchers 
found some microbes in all of the samples, those from dusty days contained 
nearly 9 times as many bacteria and at least 10 times as many viruses as did 
those from nonplume days.

 What's more, 20 times as many of the microbes collected on dusty days were 
viable-able to grow in the lab-compared with those collected at other times.

 Although the scientists couldn't identify all the microorganisms that seemed 
to have arrived with African dust, most of the ones they did recognize turned 
out to be, like Aspergillus, associated with terrestrial plants. This all but 
ruled out winds having picked up the microbes midocean.

 In fact, Griffin's team reported in the June 14 Aerobiologia that a large 
share of the identified bacteria and fungi is made up of apparent 
pathogens-mostly plant pathogens.

 Why hadn't solar ultraviolet light killed the germs during their weeklong 
flight over the Atlantic? Griffin now suspects that big storms carry so much 
dust in their upper layers that these particles shield the microbes traveling 
below. Furthermore, some bacteria or viruses may hide within crevices on the 
airborne particles of soil and sand.

 Sugarcane rust

 In a just-published issue of Global Change and Human Health, Griffin and his 
colleagues note that the suspected link between the Caribbean sea fan disease 
and African dust may be just the tip of an iceberg. The USGS scientists have 
reviewed many past reports of new epidemics-usually affecting crops-that 
seemingly struck out of nowhere.

 Among these was the 1978 emergence of sugarcane rust in the Americas. First 
reported in the Dominican Republic, the fungus disease spread explosively to 
other islands, devastating the Caribbean sugar industry.

 Puccinia melanocephala, the fungus responsible, was previously endemic only in 
Asia and Africa. In a 1985 paper, Sagar V. Krupa of the University of Minnesota 
at St. Paul and his colleagues concluded that the Caribbean epidemic probably 
traced to "transoceanic transport" of spores from Cameroon in West Africa.

 Krupa's group acknowledged at the time that although "there are few if any 
well-documented cases" of viable fungi blowing across the ocean, this seemed 
the best explanation. The Dominican Republic had received no cane-harvesting 
crews or equipment, much less sugar cane, that might have carried rust fungus 
from Africa or Asia, the plant pathologists reported. Moreover, the researchers 
found that records of prevailing winds for 1978 and 1979 coincided precisely 
with the arrival and spread of the disease from Cameroon-and its subsequent 
apparent leap from the Caribbean to Australia.

 The recent Aerobiologia paper from Griffin's group lends credence to other 
links between winds and agricultural epidemics. One such association was 
suggested 5 years ago by the late Merritt Nelson of the University of Arizona 
in Phoenix. He proposed that the 1995 U.S. emergence of Karnal bunt-a smut 
fungus that devastates wheat-was triggered by the burning of infected fields in 
Mexico. The updraft from the flames lofted smut spores high into the air, 
permitting them to travel in winds for hundreds of miles, Nelson proposed.

 Then there was the explosive spread of Asian anthracnose, a spotting and 
wilting disease, in Canadian lentil fields in 1987. The disease typically 
spreads via shipments of infected seed, but Canadian farmers had planted their 
lentil fields with seed that was certified clean. Puzzling over the spread, 
Claude C. Bernier of the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg and his colleagues 
decided to inspect dust kicked up during lentil harvesting.

 In the November 1996 Phytopathology, they reported that combines indeed spew 
dust infected with Asian anthracnose at least 250 meters. "We didn't have 
facilities to measure distances beyond that," Bernier now observes. However, he 
says, the spores should be able to go hundreds of kilometers or more in western 
Canada's strong winds.

 There's even a 19-year-old Veterinary Record report by British livestock and 
meteorological researchers on the possible long-distance aerial spread of 
foot-and-mouth disease. After reviewing 23 outbreaks between the 1950s and 
1980s, they concluded that there's strong circumstantial evidence that the 
virus responsible had at least occasionally leapfrogged within Europe by 
aerosol transport over "a long sea passage," such as the English Channel.

 Toxic effects

 Evidence of toxic effects on people from long-traveling dust is also emerging. 
Raana Naidu of Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Barbados and his colleagues, for 
instance, find seasonal correlations between the arrival of African dust and a 
rise in hospital visits for asthma.

 Decades ago, Prospero set up a dust-sampling station on Barbados. The most 
easterly island in the Caribbean, it's often the first landing site in the 
Western Hemisphere for African dust. Three years ago, Naidu's team began 
analyzing dust from the station.

 The researchers now report preliminary data indicating, as Griffin's team had, 
that there are greater numbers of viable bacteria and fungi in the air when 
African-dust plumes pass through. With such allergy-triggering components, the 
foreign dust may explain some of Barbados' escalating asthma incidence, Naidu 
says.

 Although most emergency room visits for asthma on Barbados occur during the 
rainy season, when fungal growth blossoms, a small peak also appears during the 
May-June dry season. New data by Naidu's team show that this spike coincides 
with times of African-dust fallout containing viable spores of Bacillus 
bacteria. Dust with similar concentrations of microbes, but largely free of 
Bacillus, triggers no increase in the disease.

 Naidu told Science News, "We see more of [an asthma] correlation with the 
content of this dust-the specific organisms in it-than with just the quantity 
of dust."

 Respiratory ills

 A link between dust and respiratory ills has also turned up downwind of the 
Aral Sea in central Asia.

 Only 40 years ago, notes Phillip Micklin of Western Michigan University in 
Kalamazoo, this body of water straddling the current Kazakhstan and 
Karakalpakstan border was the world's fourth-largest lake. Then, Soviet 
planners authorized huge diversions of water for farm irrigation from the 
rivers feeding the lake. The Aral's ensuing shrinkage exposed some 3.5 million 
hectares of silty lakebed to the winds, says Micklin.

 Moreover, he notes, another 8 million hectares of irrigated land around the 
Aral Sea is heavily laden with pesticides and highly vulnerable to erosion 
after plowing.

 Indeed, because of a recent switch from cotton to wheat cultivation on that 
land, "they now plow up in June and July, the driest time," observes Sarah 
O'Hara of the University of Nottingham in England. A coincidental switch to 
heavier plows, which unearth more soil, further increased the amount of dirt 
subject to dust generation.

 Today, she notes, soil from the Aral Sea region regularly rains out more than 
1,000 km to the south and east at rates that "are among the highest in the 
world." For instance, her team reported in the Feb. 19, 2000 Lancet that sites 
roughly 400 km south of the region receive up to 1,600 kilograms of Aral 
Sea-area dust per hectare per month. With this dust come high concentrations of 
phosalone. This organophosphate pesticide can impair the cognitive abilities of 
people exposed to it, says O'Hara.

 Together with physicians from the Brussels, Belgium-based organization Doctors 
Without Borders, O'Hara's group is now studying the health of 1,600 children 
living downwind of the Aral Sea. Although the researchers haven't seen an 
excessive incidence of asthma in the group, many of the children exhibit 
diminished lung function.

 Oddly, those with the worst impairments aren't the children who live closest 
to the dust source. Conceding that this "is completely the reverse of what you 
would ordinarily expect," O'Hara surmises that the closer children are exposed 
primarily to coarse dust-particles too big to be deeply inhaled. Heavy dust 
during storms may also prompt residents to stay indoors or to cover their noses 
and mouths.

 People further from the source of the dust are more often exposed to nearly 
invisible, fine dust particles that they can unknowingly inhale deep into their 
lungs, O'Hara speculates.

 Owens Lake

"Owens Lake is our Aral Sea," says Dale Gillette, an atmospheric scientist with 
NOAA in Research Triangle Park, N.C. Once the size of the Sea of Galilee, it 
sat in California midway between Sequoia National Park and Death Valley. But 
around 1900, state bureaucrats decided that the river feeding Owens Lake was 
better used to slake the thirst of the growing population of Los Angeles.

 Within about 10 years, the lake dried up. This uncovered 28,500 hectares of 
briny silt that's tainted with arsenic. Nineteenth-century gold miners had used 
the carcinogenic metal in their operations upstream. Today, Gillette says, 
Owens Lake is the biggest single dust source in the United States."

 Federal rules prohibit airborne concentrations of the smallest, most readily 
inhaled dust particles-those 10 micrometers in diameter or smaller-to exceed an 
average of 15 micrograms per cubic meter over any 24-hour period or 150 
micrograms per cubic meter over any single hour. But 24-hour-average 
concentrations of arsenic-laced soil blowing from Owens Lake into the nearby 
town of Keeler are frequently 150 micrograms per cubic meter.

 During big storms, concentrations of the fine dust can skyrocket to 40,000 
micrograms per cubic meter, notes Ted Schade of the Great Basin Air Pollution 
Control District in Bishop, Calif. "It's indescribable," he says.

 While the arsenic content in the dust isn't high enough to kill anyone 
quickly, it does increase lifetime cancer risk in exposed individuals to about 
1 in 40,000.

 In response to lawsuits over the problem, Gillette notes, the City of Los 
Angeles is now undertaking costly efforts to cover Owens Lake with 
drought-tolerant, soil-grabbing vegetation.

 Hitchhiking microbes

 The presence of a carcinogen in Owens Lake dust and toxic pesticides in plumes 
from the Aral Sea suggests that tiny particles may entrain more than just 
microbes. To date, however, few scientific studies have made even rudimentary 
attempts to scout for such hitchhikers, O'Hara and Garrison observe.

 Both researchers, however, will begin such projects soon. Garrison's 
undertaking, the more comprehensive, is designed to analyze airborne dust in 
Africa and the Caribbean for minerals, such as mercury, arsenic, cadmium, lead, 
zinc, and copper; agricultural pesticides and herbicides; a few common 
antibiotics; combustion products; and plastics ingredients, such as 
hormone-mimicking phthalates.

 Garrison says that she was prompted to examine dust particles for constituents 
beyond microbes by what she witnessed last December on a trip up the Niger 
River to Timbuktu, Mali. She saw people burning plastic bags, human and animal 
wastes, and anything else that would serve as fuel. She remembers thinking that 
it all was seeding the air with soot containing metals and other pollutants.

 Further along on her trip, Garrison saw human and livestock wastes-presumably 
laced with drugs that had been ingested-being dumped untreated for use on 
crops. People were also spreading large amounts of chemicals on their fields.

 After that tainted land is parched by winter, Garrison knew, it would be 
vulnerable to harmattans-huge dry storms that yearly scour the land and fling 
soil high into the air. This dust could end up in the Caribbean.

 The United States and other industrialized nations routinely spew pollution 
that drifts over agrarian nations, says Garrison. Developing countries appear 
to be sending back soil tainted with chemicals and microbes that may be just as 
dangerous.

 Garrison concludes, "It's a very small world."

 Part 1: Dust, the Themostat. Available at 


