Atomic Crowds Tied by Quantum Thread: Science News Online, Sept. 29, 2001

 Atomic Crowds Tied by Quantum Thread

 Peter Weiss

 Scientists have been predicting that the strangeness of quantum mechanics will 
lead to computing and communications devices of unprecedented power. In pursuit 
of those trophies, researchers have struggled to control the frail, fleeting 
quantum states of minuscule particles. Now, a relatively simple and robust way 
of manipulating quantum states may be at hand.

 For years, physicists have been exploiting a quantum phenomenon, known as 
entanglement, to intertwine the quantum states of charged atoms, or ions. 
They've been able to entangle as many as four ions so far (SN: 4/15/00, p. 255).

 Eugene S. Polzik and his colleagues at the University of Aarhus in Denmark 
have now entangled two gas clouds, each of about a trillion cesium atoms. That 
huge leap reflects the team's development of a type of entanglement of atoms 
that's different from that established in earlier work, the researchers say.

 Entangled entities have a coordinated quantum state. For example, if one 
particle in an entangled pair has an upwardly oriented magnetic field, or 
so-called spin, its partner's spin points down. Which partner has which spin 
remains hidden until the spin of one of them is measured.

 In the smaller-scale experiments, each ion was entangled with every other. 
However, in the Sept. 27 Nature, the Aarhus team describes a technique that 
treats large atomic ensembles as single quantum entities.

 In their experiment, Polzik and his colleagues first injected cesium gas into 
a pair of 3-centimeter-long glass capsules. Next, the scientists shot laser 
pulses through each cell to impart a different collective spin state onto each 
cloud. Then, the researchers fired another laser pulse of a carefully chosen 
wavelength through both clouds.

 The orientation, or polarization, of that pulse's electromagnetic field is 
itself a quantum state. Once the pulse entered the capsules, it became 
entangled with the clouds' spins, creating the first photon-atom entanglements, 
Polzik says. Finally, with the act of measuring polarization of the emerging 
pulse, the researchers forced the spins of the clouds to entangle.

"This is a spectacular experiment and a significant advance in experimental 
capabilities in quantum [systems]," comments H. Jeff Kimble of the California 
Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

 The new work departs sharply from earlier research in several ways. To become 
entangled, individual ions must be close together and chilled to nearly 
absolute zero. But the atom clouds became entangled at room temperature and 
while centimeters apart-a vast distance from an atomic perspective. Also, the 
clouds stayed linked for half a millisecond, a duration that looks promising 
for developing practical quantum devices.

 While the technical ease of entangling atom clouds by this method has great 
appeal, using ensembles of particles also has drawbacks, remarks Wolfgang 
Tittel of the University of Geneva. For instance, data stored as quantum states 
could become corrupted more readily in such clouds than in individual particles.

 Several years ago, Kimble, Polzik, and their colleagues entangled beams of 
laser light containing countless photons. They also teleported-or transferred 
via entanglement-a quantum state of one beam to the other (SN: 4/3/99, p. 220).

 Although such transfers could be important in future quantum-communication 
technology, photons aren't matter. Scientists expect both quantum 
communications and information processing to require matter, such as atoms, to 
be the data bits in calculations and memory.

 While researchers have yet to pull off teleportation between separated clumps 
of matter, it looks like the stage is now set, Tittel says.


