Sperm Protein May Lead to Male Pill: Science News Online, Oct. 13, 2001

 Sperm Protein May Lead to Male Pill

 John Travis

 Faced with countless competitors, a human sperm must be a world-class swimmer 
to win the race to an egg and fertilize it first. Scientists have now found a 
protein that helps a mammalian sperm wiggle its long tail to speed along.

 Mutations in the gene for this protein, which appears to permit calcium ions 
to enter the sperm's tail, may account for some cases of male infertility. By 
rendering sperm immobile, a drug that inhibits the protein could serve as a 
male version of the birth control pill.

"Theoretically, [the protein] would be an ideal target for a male 
contraceptive," says David E. Clapham of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at 
Children's Hospital in Boston.

 Clapham and his colleagues came upon this reproductive protein during their 
search for new channels that govern the flow of calcium, sodium, and other ions 
in and out of cells. Such channels are present in every cell in the body and 
are vital to each cell's function.

 While searching through a database of unidentified DNA sequences, the 
researchers found one that appeared to encode a new calcium channel. As an 
initial step to studying the role of the protein, they made antibodies to 
detect it in samples of dozens of mouse and human tissues.

"It turned out to be the most highly localized protein I've ever seen," says 
Clapham. "It's only present in sperm, as far as we can tell."

 The investigators next created mice with inactive copies of the gene for the 
putative ion channel. While the mice were otherwise healthy and the females 
were fertile, the male mice turned out to be 100 percent infertile, Clapham's 
team reports in the Oct. 11 Nature.

 Further investigation revealed that sperm from the mutant mice were poor 
swimmers compared with normal sperm and couldn't fertilize normal mouse eggs. 
"The sperm could not penetrate the layer around an egg, the zona pellucida," 
says Clapham.

 Finally, the scientists used calcium-sensitive dyes to investigate whether the 
ion channel is defective in the mutant mice. When they stimulated sperm tails 
in a way that normally causes an influx of calcium, "there was no rise in 
calcium in the mutant mice's sperm," notes Clapham.

 Infertile men who have immotile sperm may have mutations in the gene for this 
ion channel. "If you can show me that this really causes infertility in humans, 
then I would view it as a more promising target [for a male contraceptive] than 
the other channels we've seen," says Susan Benoff of North Shore University 
Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.

 Benoff has for many years investigated whether calcium channel blockers 
commonly prescribed for high blood pressure and heart disease can serve as male 
contraceptives. The drugs can render men infertile, she has found.

 The prescribed blockers alter cholesterol synthesis in sperm, preventing them 
from penetrating the zona pellucida, Benoff contends. She doesn't think that 
the drugs act upon the newly discovered ion channel because men taking the 
drugs have sperm with normal motility.

 The absence of the protein in normal tissues other than sperm suggests that 
drugs that inhibit the channel wouldn't produce side effects in men. Women 
could take such a blocker to inactivate a partner's sperm, Clapham speculates.

 Still, scientists caution that crafting a safe contraceptive will be an 
arduous process. "It's very hard to design a calcium channel blocker that is 
going to work for just one channel," notes Benoff.

 Nevertheless, the idea of a reversible, nonhormonal method of shutting down 
male fertility is "very appealing," says Tracy Rankin of the National Institute 
for Child Health and Development in Bethesda, Md., which funds research into 
male contraception (SN: 9/30/00, p. 222: ).

"There's a lot of work to be done, but this is an exciting first step," she 
says.


