Another World Hides inside Coral Reefs: Science News Online, Oct. 20, 2001

 Another World Hides inside Coral Reefs

 Susan Milius

 Specialized video equipment snaked into small crevices in coral reefs of the 
Red Sea has revealed a community that rivals the one visible outside.

"The largest habitat is inside," contends Claudio Richter of the Center for 
Tropical Marine Ecology in Bremen, Germany.

 For each square meter of ocean bottom covered by the reefs, cavities inside 
offer 2.4 to 7.5 m^2 of surface area, Richter and his colleagues calculate. 
Sponges make up some 60 percent of that hidden community, capturing small 
plankton that otherwise would wash away. "The internal part of the reef feeds 
the outside," Richter says.

 He explains that scientists have explored caves in reefs but could only guess 
what lay beyond small fissures. Now, an underwater endoscopic video system 
developed by Mark Wunsch, also at Bremen, has allowed the team of Arab, 
Israeli, and German scientists to probe 4 m into crevices. In the Oct. 18 
Nature, the team reports the first systematic survey of reef innards.

"Our main message to the scientific community is that there is much more in the 
reef than what you see on the outside," Richter says.

 Reef biologist Nancy Knowlton of Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La 
Jolla, Calif., compares the research team's work to the early revelations of 
forest canopy richness. The endoscopic survey "gives you a whole new feeling 
for what a reef is," she says.

 The survey team explored crevices at nine sites off Egypt, Israel, and Jordan. 
Cavities, typically with an opening only 20 centimeters wide, riddle up to 40 
percent of the area sampled.

 The team worked out the shape and size of crevices by inserting a device that 
cast a slim hoop of light onto the bumpy interior. As the device advanced, the 
team recorded the series of irregular light rings. A computer analysis stacked 
the rings to recreate the cavity.

 Beyond the zone near the mouth of a cavity which receives some light, sponges 
with sheetlike forms covered half to two-thirds of the inside area. In water 
samples that had flowed over the sponges, signs of micron-scale organisms 
called picoplankton diminished and mineral concentrations increased. "These 
guys are eating a lot, and they're excreting a lot," Richter says.

 He proposes that the abundant sponges inside the reef capture small ocean 
life, such as cyanobacteria, that the external reef species don't use 
efficiently. Such industrious interior feeders could explain what Richter 
describes as the plankton gap, a long-recognized drop in plankton 
concentrations around reefs even though the visible organisms don't seem to be 
trapping many of them.

 The minerals that sponges excrete could provide much nitrogen and other 
nutrients for other reef organisms, Richter says. He proposes that such a bonus 
might explain the so-called Darwin's paradox, which asks how reefs can thrive 
in nutrient-poor waters.

 Reef ecologist Richard Grigg of the University of Hawaii at Manoa remains 
skeptical on that speculation. As a former world-champion surfer, he maintains 
an interest in wave action. He predicts that researchers studying reefs in 
water more turbulent than the Red Sea will find fewer cavities-and fewer 
internal communities. Yet reefs thrive under thundering waves.

 Richter says he's eager to see what the inside of the rest of the reef world 
looks like and is already arranging surveys in the Caribbean.


