Retail meats host drug-resistant bacteria: Science News Online, Oct. 20, 2001

 Retail meats host drug-resistant bacteria

 Janet Raloff

 There's a good chance your grocer's meats are tainted with bacterial germs 
that are relatively invulnerable to antibiotics, a trio of new studies finds. 
As a result, anyone sickened by these microbes could find the arsenal of drugs 
available to fight their infection small to nonexistent.

 Three years ago, the Washington, D.C.-based National Research Council and 
Institute of Medicine jointly published an analysis of the human-health impacts 
of low doses of antibiotics added to livestock feed to promote the animals' 
growth. The report concluded that at least some antibiotic-resistant disease in 
people is due to meat from animals treated with these growth promoters (SN: 
7/18/98, p. 39: ). However, the analysis failed to establish whether such ties 
to human disease were common or just isolated anomalies.

 Taken together, three papers in the Oct. 17 New England Journal of Medicine 
now offer a "proverbial 'smoking gun,'" tying livestock growth promoters to 
risk of serious human disease, according to an editorial in the same journal by 
Sherwood L. Gorbach of the Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston.

 In the first study, a team of microbiologists, including David G. White of the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in Laurel, Md., screened for Salmonella 
enterica in supermarket ground meats. Of 200 packages of chicken, beef, turkey, 
and pork, more than 20 percent contained this microbe. The scientists uncovered 
13 strains. "In four samples, we actually found more than one [strain]," which 
is quite unusual, notes White.

 More importantly, of the 45 salmonella samples isolated, 35 were resistant to 
at least one antibiotic and 24 showed resistance to at least three. Of the 
eight samples tainted with a strain known as Salmonella typhimurium, five of 
the infections were resistant to 6 antibiotics, and two chicken samples bore a 
form of this strain resistant to 12 such drugs. The latter form, White says, 
appears to be "the most resistant salmonella [ever] discovered."

 In a second study, researchers looked for the bacterium Enterococcus faecium 
in chickens purchased at 26 groceries in four states. L. Clifford McDonald of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and his colleagues 
found that 86 percent of the 407 birds they tested carried this germ. In 68 
percent of the tainted chicken, the E. faecium was resistant to a potent 
antibiotic cocktail that goes by the name of Synercid.

"We all carry enterococci bacteria in our gut," explains McDonald, now at the 
University of Louisville, Ky. If people get sick from other causes, however, 
these bacteria can cause disease. Doctors used to prescribe vancomycin for such 
infections. However, heavy use of vancomycin by hospitals has led to many E. 
faecium becoming resistant to it (SN: 4/24/99, p. 268). That's why, starting 2 
years ago, doctors turned to Synercid.

 The widespread resistance to this drug now seen in meatborne bacteria appears 
to stem from farm use since 1974 of a related antibiotic-virginiamycin-as a 
growth promoter, McDonald says.

 There is some good news. McDonald's team found that less than 1 percent of 
human stool samples tested exhibited Synercid-resistant enterococci. However, 
McDonald adds, sometimes a resistant germ will only colonize the gut after 
people have taken a course of antibiotics. As more people take Synercid, he 
worries, their vulnerability to resistant E. faecium may climb.

 In the third study, scientists in Denmark demonstrate that a single tainted 
meal can seed the gut with antibiotic-resistant E. faecium for up to 2 weeks.

 Researchers at the Statens Serum Institut in Copenhagen worked with healthy 
volunteers who showed no evidence of hosting antibiotic-resistant E. faecium. 
Twelve men and women each drank a glass of milk laced with 10 million bacteria 
from pigs and chickens resistant to either vancomycin or virginiamycin.

 Then, the scientists tested the volunteers' stool daily for a week and again 
at the end of a second week. A day or two after drinking the tainted milk, all 
the participants began shedding antibiotic-resistant enterococci. Eight 
continued to shed them through day 6. One continued to do so through day 14.

 The finding lends support to a 1997 move taken by the European Commission to 
ban use of vancomycin-related growth promoters in livestock, asserts 
epidemiologist Dominique L. Monnet, one of the Danish study's authors. That ban 
has led to dramatically lower rates of resistant enterococci in Danish meat 
(SN: 8/5/00, p. 95).

 At some point, enough data accumulate so that people can say, "It's time to 
take action," Gorbach maintains. "And I think we're at that point. It's time to 
put a ban on [growth-promoting] use of antibiotics in animal feed."

 U.S. regulators are investigating the issue. Last year, FDA solicited "a 
request for comments and for scientific data" on human health impacts of 
livestock growth promoters.


