Team locates anthrax-receptor protein: Science News Online, Oct. 27, 2001

 Team locates anthrax-receptor protein

 Nathan Seppa

 Scientists have identified the protein that enables the anthrax toxin to 
attach to cells and trigger disease. Meanwhile, other researchers have mapped 
the molecular structure of the toxin component that does most of the damage to 
cells.

 The findings, slated for release in the Nov. 8 issue of Nature, were unveiled 
this week as infections from letter-borne anthrax spores continue to crop up 
across the eastern United States.

 In hosts such as people and livestock, the anthrax bacterium emerges from its 
protective spore and begins to grow. It releases the three components of its 
toxin-known as lethal factor, edema factor, and protective antigen (PA) -which 
assemble on cell surfaces. First to attach is PA, which binds to a receptor 
protein on a cell. Next, PA is cleaved by an enzyme there. Then, the other two 
toxin components attach to PA and gain entry into the cell. Once inside, lethal 
factor triggers the biochemical cascade that leads to anthrax's symptoms, which 
are most dangerous when the spores have been inhaled.

 Until now, the protein serving as PA's docking station on cells was a mystery. 
John A.T. Young, a geneticist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and his 
colleagues searched for it by inducing mutations in hamster ovary cells. The 
researchers then mixed these mutant cells with PA. They found 10 cell lines to 
which PA couldn't bind, suggesting that these cells' PA receptors were absent 
or had been altered.

 Drawing from a genetic library, the researchers began adding genes back to one 
of the cell lines to see which genes might restore the cell's binding to PA. 
They found such a gene. It encodes a cell-surface protein that the scientists 
dubbed anthrax toxin receptor.

 The team then determined the part of the receptor to which PA binds. When they 
added extra copies of this receptor fragment to a mixture of rodent cells and 
anthrax toxin, the copies "soaked up the toxin and prevented it from attaching 
to the cell surfaces," Young says. If a drug were tailored to occupy this 
receptor site, it might thwart the disease, he says.

 In a separate study, scientists reveal the three-dimensional shape of lethal 
factor and the mechanism it uses to sever a protein in cells, an action that 
triggers the disease. Knowing lethal factor's molecular shape might now enable 
scientists to design compounds that can disable it, says study coauthor Philip 
C. Hanna, a microbiologist at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

 Earlier this year, researchers reported progress on two other potential 
antidotes to anthrax toxin (SN: 5/12/01, p. 296: ; SN: 10/6/01, p. 212: ). All 
these studies are examples of "extraordinary, elegant science," says Anthony S. 
Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in 
Bethesda, Md. "It's incumbent upon us to do as much as we can to translate that 
into something that would [benefit] the public health," he says.


