Fossils Indicate. . .Wow, What a Croc!: Science News Online, Oct. 27, 2001

 Fossils Indicate. . .Wow, What a Croc!

 Sid Perkins

 Newly discovered fossils of an ancient cousin of modern crocodiles suggest 
that adults of the species may have been dinosaur-munching behemoths that grew 
to the length of a school bus and weighed as much as 8 metric tons.

 Paleontologists first found remains of Sarcosuchus imperator-which translates 
as emperor of the flesh-eating crocodiles-in the Tenere Desert of Niger in the 
1960s. The initial description of the species was based on only a few bones and 
a partial skull, says Paul C. Sereno, a vertebrate paleontologist at the 
University of Chicago. Those fragments enabled the scientists to determine that 
the animal was related to today's crocodiles but didn't provide many clues 
about its lifestyle or ultimate size.

 A year ago, Sereno and his colleagues unearthed in Niger the 
110-million-year-old remnants of five super-crocs. The sediments bearing the 
fossils were laid down in an ancient river more than 160 kilometers from the 
nearest coastline. Remains included skulls and partial skeletons of juveniles, 
as well as the complete, 1.5-meter-long skull of an adult. By comparing that 
length with the dimensions of modern-day relatives, the researchers estimate in 
a forthcoming issue of Science that Sarcosuchus could have grown to lengths of 
12 m. Only three or four species of living crocodilians can attain even half 
that size as adults.

 Sarcosuchus' snout is broad and extends about 75 percent the length of its 
skull. The animal's teeth are stout, smooth, and rounded and are therefore 
suited to grabbing prey and crushing bones, says Sereno. Unlike those of 
fish-eating crocodiles, Sarcosuchus' upper and lower teeth didn't intermesh 
when the jaw was closed, which suggests that the animal had a diet of larger 
prey.

 The researchers estimate that one of the juveniles they discovered last year 
was about 80 percent the size of an adult. Microscopic analysis of some of that 
juvenile's scutes-the large bony plates embedded in the skin that provide crocs 
a sort of armor-showed nearly 40 growth rings, which are much like a tree's 
annual growth rings. This finding suggests that the giant crocs may have taken 
50 or 60 years to grow to full size.

 The overlapping scutes stretched without a seam from just behind the head to 
about halfway down the tail, says Wann Langston, a vertebrate paleontologist at 
the University of Texas at Austin. This stiff suit of armor, as well as the 
shape of Sarcosuchus' vertebrae, would have restricted the animal's flexibility 
and speed. "This animal probably wasn't an active fisherman," notes Langston.

 As in many crocodiles, Sarcosuchus' eyes and nostrils are located atop the 
skull. This configuration would have permitted the animal to hide almost 
totally submerged and supports the idea that it was an ambush predator, says 
Sereno. Along with an occasional large fish, Sarcosuchus could have dined on 
turtles and other riverside prey.

" Sarcosuchus could easily have taken a 20-foot-long dinosaur," Sereno suggests.


