Epilepsy article wins award: Science News Online, Oct. 27, 2001

 Epilepsy article wins award

 Julie Ann Miller

 Medical writers labor under an enhanced sense of responsibility. Their stories 
have the power not only to stimulate a reader's imagination but also to affect 
his or her health. We've had readers tell us that while reading a description 
of symptoms in a Science News article, they first recognized that they had a 
disease. Others say that their treatment for a previously diagnosed condition 
was changed after they brought their doctor a copy of a story about a new 
therapeutic approach.

 We are especially pleased when an organization dedicated to the welfare of 
people with a particular medical condition recognizes our writers' contribution 
to public knowledge of medicine. In the most recent example, the Epilepsy 
Foundation on Oct. 26 honored Science News writer Damaris Christensen with its 
magazine award for her article "Endgame for Epilepsy?" (see ).

 The judges noted that the article, published June 3, 2000, "offers the public 
and people with epilepsy a clear and concise summary of current research and 
future direction of the scientific effort to conquer the disorder." They said 
that they were especially impressed by the large number of scientists that 
Damaris had consulted in preparation of the article and "the success with which 
[she has] interpreted this complex topic for the lay reader."

 Damaris has been a biomedical writer for more than 5 years. Before she joined 
Science News as a writer in 1999, she was the Washington correspondent for 
Medical Tribune, a daily wire service. She has a master's degree from New York 
University's Science and Environmental Reporting Program. Her award-winning 
article notes that although drug and surgical treatments have improved over 
many decades of research, seizures aren't completely controlled in about 20 
percent of people with epilepsy. In the article, Damaris describes recent 
advances in genetics, molecular biology, imaging techniques, and bioengineering 
that make scientists optimistic that they're finally on the way to a cure for 
the disease.


