Cholesterol enables nerve cells to connect: Science News Online, Nov. 17, 2001

 Cholesterol enables nerve cells to connect

 John Travis

 While cholesterol has a bad reputation for clogging up arteries and causing 
heart disease, this fatty molecule is an essential part of all cell membranes. 
Scientists have now found to their surprise that cholesterol may also regulate 
when and where nerve cells in the brain form the vital junctions known as 
synapses.

 Equally unforeseen, say investigators, is their finding that non-nerve cells 
called glia seem to provide the cholesterol that controls synapse building.

"We were definitely shocked," says Frank W. Pfrieger of the Max-Delbruck Center 
for Molecular Medicine in Berlin. He leads a French-German collaboration that 
reports the new findings at the Society for Neuroscience meeting in San Diego 
this week and in the Nov. 9 Science.

 Glia make up 90 percent of the cells in the brain, but they have traditionally 
drawn less interest than have nerve cells, or neurons, which relay electrical 
signals by releasing chemicals at synapses. About 4 years ago, however, 
Pfrieger and a colleague noticed that certain nerve cells in the retina had 
little synaptic activity when grown in isolation from star-shaped glia called 
astrocytes.

 In subsequent experiments, researchers added these glia back into the mix and 
found that synaptic activity increased 70-fold. The number of synapses per 
neuron increased by seven times in the presence of the astrocytes (SN: 4/7/01, 
p. 222: ).

 Biologists subsequently determined that glia secrete a molecule that 
encourages synapse formation, or synaptogenesis. They rushed to hunt it down 
because there are few known molecules that regulate that process.

 Initial studies by Pfrieger's group pointed to a protein called APOE, but 
added alone to retinal nerve cells, it didn't promote synapse formation. APOE 
typically ferries cholesterol around in blood, so the investigators tried 
adding cholesterol, without APOE, to purified retinal nerve cells. The cell's 
synaptic activity jumped dramatically. Moreover, when the investigators 
inhibited synthesis of cholesterol in glia, the cells promoted formation of 
fewer synapses than normal.

 The brain doesn't take up cholesterol from the bloodstream, notes Pfrieger. 
Investigators had thought, however, that neurons make all the cholesterol that 
they need. The new findings indicate that glia provide what's needed for 
synapse formation.

 The amount of cholesterol produced by glia "may be a limiting factor for all 
sorts of things in neurons," says Pfrieger.

 Synaptogenesis investigator Craig C. Garner of the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham cautions that the new data don't prove that cholesterol initiates 
synapse formation. He notes that stripping nerve cells of cholesterol causes 
the collapse of synapses, which implies that cholesterol may be merely a 
structural element required for the junctions.

"The signaling function of [cholesterol] is not clear. It may just be building 
material," agrees Pfrieger.

 He and his colleagues now plan to test cholesterol's importance to synapse 
formation in other kinds of nerve cells. To extend their test-tube experiments, 
they will also examine whether glia-derived cholesterol governs synaptogenesis 
in live animals.

 Moreover, they intend to explore a link between APOE and Alzheimer's disease. 
Having the gene for one variant of APOE predisposes a person to the 
memory-robbing brain disorder (SN: 8/14/93, p. 108). That variant's 
interactions with cholesterol may make synapse formation more difficult and 
somehow cause a brain to become vulnerable to Alzheimer's disease, speculates 
Pfrieger.

 In general, the discovery that glia provide vital cholesterol could lead to 
new ways of treating a variety of brain disorders, say researchers. "If you 
want to repair nervous systems, you need to know what critical factors control 
synapse formation," notes Philip G. Haydon of the University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine in Philadelphia.


