Exploding wires open sharp X-ray eye: Science News Online, Nov. 3, 2001

 Exploding wires open sharp X-ray eye

 Peter Weiss

 Some coffee-table books feature hair-raising microscopic views of insects, 
dust mites, and other minimonsters. Taken with optical and electron 
microscopes, those pictures typically show only surface features of their 
subjects. Now, a novel X-ray camera peers into the interiors of tiny creatures 
and objects with micrometer-scale resolution over exceptionally large areas.

 The new device faces stiff competition, however. Microscopists at huge 
electron accelerators called synchrotrons already make higher-resolution X-ray 
images of insects and other small objects. Nonetheless, the camera, which is 
the size of five refrigerators, should beat those mammoth machines hands down 
in comparisons of the machines' cost and speed of imaging, says David A. Hammer 
of Cornell University.

"It's a neat little imaging tool," comments Jonathan B. Workman of Los Alamos 
(N.M.) National Laboratory.

 Hammer and his colleagues displayed high-resolution micrographs of flies and 
dandelion-seed filaments at the American Physical Society's Division of Plasma 
Physics meeting this week in Long Beach, Calif. The team now plans to work with 
Cornell agricultural researchers and veterinarians to test how well the camera 
differentiates tissues of germinating seeds, minute parasites in worms, and 
incipient tumors in mouse flesh. Hammer's group developed the imager jointly 
with scientists at Russia's Lebedev Physical Institute in Moscow.

 The camera generates X rays when 100,000 amperes of electric current surge 
through each of two thin wires that cross. The wires vaporize. In this process, 
called an X-pinch, potent electrically generated magnetic fields compress tiny 
pockets of the resulting metal vapor to act as X-ray emitters just a micrometer 
or so across. The team created the camera to visualize similarly disintegrating 
wires for the so-called Z machine-a massive X-ray source and experimental 
fusion-energy device at Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque (SN: 
1/23/99, p. 63).

 Soft tissues show up in the camera's biological images because the X-pinch 
device generates only low-energy beams, Hammer says. It also takes each picture 
with just a single X-ray pulse of about a nanosecond. The brief irradiation is 
so benign that the team has been able to image living specimens, such as ants, 
without killing them. With a synchrotron, Hammer notes, that would be a lethal 
experiment.


