Brain may forge some memories in waves: Science News Online, Nov. 10, 2001

 Brain may forge some memories in waves

 Bruce Bower

 Although people effortlessly remember all sorts of everyday events, scientists 
are struggling to explain how the brain makes this possible. In two critical 
brain areas, such memory may hinge more on the timing than on the strength of 
neural activity, according to a team of neuroscientists.

 As volunteers study word lists, clusters of neurons in the rhinal cortex and 
the hippocampus-adjacent brain areas already implicated in memory-fire 
synchronized electrical bursts that pave the way for remembering those words 
later, argue Jurgen Fell of the University of Bonn in Germany and his 
colleagues.

 Moreover, the coordination of cell activity in the same two brain regions 
plummets for a fraction of a second just after participants remember a word 
from the list, possibly signaling an end to a coordinated neural effort, Fell's 
team proposes in an article slated to appear in Nature Neuroscience.

"These are enticing data," says neuroscientist Anthony D. Wagner of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "Memory may emerge when rhinal and 
hippocampal neurons synchronously oscillate and then desynchronize."

 Some scientists theorize that synchronized neural firing, which generates 
brain waves, lies at the root of perception and memory (SN: 2/20/99, p. 122). 
Attention has focused on gamma waves, which are the result of thousands of 
neurons emitting equivalent electrical pulses about 40 times a second.

 Fell's group studied gamma waves in nine epileptic adults in whom surgeons had 
temporarily implanted electrodes to find seizure sites. None had suffered a 
seizure for at least 1 day. In the investigation, the volunteers studied a word 
list, performed a brief distracting task, and then tried to recall words from 
the list.

 About one-quarter second and again one-half second after viewing words that 
they would later remember, participants displayed bursts of gamma activity in 
the rhinal cortex and the hippocampus. One second after they recalled a word 
from the studied list, synchronized neural firing declined sharply for a 
fraction of a second.

 No distinctive type of gamma activity occurred while participants viewed words 
that they later failed to recall or when they tried to recall a word in vain.

 It's unclear how the waxing and waning of gamma activity in the rhinal cortex 
and the hippocampus boosts memory, the researchers note. Preliminary evidence 
suggests that gamma waves in the hippocampus render cells more capable of 
receiving incoming messages, they say.

 The origins of synchronized firing in the rhinal cortex and the hippocampus 
are also unknown, Wagner remarks. Another brain area, the prefrontal cortex, 
may regulate memory-related gamma activity elsewhere, in his view.

 Another open question concerns the type of memory fostered by rhinal 
cortex-hippocampus cooperation. Fell's team examined conscious recall, which 
has often been attributed to the hippocampus. In contrast, many neuroscientists 
suspect that the rhinal cortex supports a sense of familiarity that falls short 
of conscious recall of previously encountered information.


