The Mountain: Science News Online, Nov. 24, 2001

 The Mountain

 Take a look at Mount Rainier, America's most dangerous volcano

 Sid Perkins

 Just after dusk on Aug. 14, at an amphitheater in Mount Rainier National 
Park's Cougar Rock campground, a deep grumbling sound began to drown out a park 
ranger who was regaling visitors with an interpretive lecture about the park's 
natural wonders. The rumble quickly grew to a freight-train-like roar. That's 
when the ranger ran to a creek near the amphitheater and saw a large flow of 
mud and debris surging down the normally placid channel.

"It rumbled up on the ridge until about 10:30 [p.m.]," says Jill Hawk, chief 
ranger at the national park. Although the campground was never threatened, 
large pulses of rocky mud continued to sweep down the mountainside for more 
than 5 hours that evening, and smaller clumps followed for the next 5 days. It 
was a natural wonder all right.

 Park rangers and scientists flew over the area on Aug. 15 and determined that 
the event was simply a landslide, not something worse-like an earthquake or 
volcanic eruption. A week or more of hot, sunny weather had accelerated the 
melting of a glacier on the south side of the mountain. The excess water had 
saturated a steep slope of earth and rock. The soggy mix eventually broke away 
and raced downhill.

 The landslide was small in geologic terms, says Hawk, but it was plenty big 
enough to scare campers. She notes that the ranger's interpretive lecture that 
balmy evening turned into an opportunity to discuss the hazards of living in 
the shadow of a glacier-covered volcano.

 Mount Rainier, locally known simply as "the mountain," is the tallest peak in 
the Cascades, a chain of mountains that parallels the Pacific Coast from 
British Columbia to northern California. Mount Rainier's summit bears the 
largest crest of glacier ice on any mountain in the lower 48 U.S. states.

 Scientists say the height, steepness, and cubic mile of ice make the 
steep-sloped peak worth watching. However, they're most concerned about the 
rapidly growing population in the picturesque valleys of the region, which 
earns the currently dormant Mount Rainier the title of most dangerous volcano 
in America.

 Powerful surprises

 The landslide of Aug. 14 provides an example of the many powerful surprises 
that mountains like Rainier can drop on those nearby. The slump of debris began 
at an altitude of about 2,740 meters above sea level and didn't halt until it 
had dropped to an altitude of about 762 m, says Patrick T. Pringle, a geologist 
with Washington State's Department of Natural Resources.

 Similar but larger phenomena, called glacial outburst floods, also strike from 
on high. These torrents, which are sudden releases of water stored within or at 
the base of glaciers, can contain about 100,000 cubic meters of water, says 
Joseph S. Walder, a hydrologist with the U.S. Geological Survey's Cascades 
Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash. That's the volume of several dozen 
Olympic-size swimming pools. At peak discharge, these glacial outbursts often 
match stream flow rates experienced only in the worst of floods.

 At least three dozen glacial outburst floods have occurred in Mount Rainier 
National Park during the past century. Bridges, roads, and park facilities have 
been damaged or destroyed on at least 10 occasions. Even so, Walder notes, the 
effects of such floods don't normally reach beyond the boundaries of the park.

 Mount Rainier's most far-reaching and therefore most dangerous threats derive 
not from landslides and glacial outburst floods but from its volcanism.

 As with most volcanoes, the mountain's past behavior gives a preview to its 
future hazards. Written history in the area goes back only about 180 years-a 
period much too short to adequately represent the activity of a volcano that's 
hundreds of thousands of years old. Indeed, the documentary evidence includes a 
record of only one eruption, in the 1840s. But the sedimentary 
evidence-including deposits rife with pumice and volcanic ash, or 
tephra-suggests that Mount Rainier has erupted at least 11 times in the past 
10,000 years.

 The 1980 eruptions of southwestern Washington's Mount St. Helens showed that 
even relatively thin accumulations of tephra can disrupt social and economic 
activity over a broad region. Downwind, in the eastern part of the state, the 
communities of Yakima, Ritzville, and Spokane received between 1 and 8 
centimeters of ash and came to a near standstill for up to 2 weeks.

 More dangerous than tephra are so-called pyroclastic flows, which roll down a 
volcano rather than towering above it (SN: 1/13/01, p. 21: ). The hot gases, 
ash, and rock particles form a dense fluid that travels at 10 to 100 m per 
second and typically hosts temperatures above 300@C. The flows' high densities, 
velocities, and temperatures blow down, bury, or incinerate everything in their 
path.

 Scientists have found only a few deposits near Mount Rainier that resulted 
from pyroclastic flows. One such layer that's about 2,500 years old shows up 
about 12 kilometers southwest of the volcano's summit, and another, 1,000 or so 
years old, appears about 11 km northeast of the mountain. However, pyroclastic 
deposits near the mountain may be rare only because the ash flows were often 
converted into something more dangerous before they left the mountainside, 
Walder says.

 Like wet concrete

 When the hot ash in ground-hugging pyroclastic flows sweeps across glaciers, 
it can melt prodigious amounts of ice and snow. This water mixes with the ash 
and other debris to form a lahar, which looks and flows like wet concrete. 
Lahars can travel at speeds up to 100 km per hour on steep slopes near the 
volcano and can reach much farther from the volcano than pyroclastic flows can. 
In 1998, the U.S. Geological Survey issued a report stating that lahars pose a 
greater threat to communities around Mount Rainier than any other volcanic 
phenomenon.

 More than a dozen volcanic lahars have spewed from Mount Rainier in the past 
6,000 years. About 1,200 years ago, a lahar that spilled down valleys on the 
northeastern slopes of the volcano filled both forks of the White River with 20 
to 30 m of debris. The lahar's front edge flowed more than 100 km to reach the 
spot where the city of Auburn sits today. About 1,000 years before that, a 
similar lahar filled the Nisqually River southwest of the mountain to depths as 
great as 40 m and flowed all the way to Puget Sound.

 Scientists have discovered the deposits from more than 60 lahars that occurred 
in the past 10,000 years. Many of these have been so-called cohesive lahars, 
which form avalanches that consist primarily of ancient volcanic rocks weakened 
by exposure to the elements. In particular, sulfur gases spewed by the volcano 
react with rainwater to form sulfuric acids, which gradually break the rocks 
down into clay.

 The largest of Mount Rainier's post-Ice Age lahars was the Osceola Mudflow, 
which struck more than 5,600 years ago and inundated the White River valley 
with more than 3.8 cubic kilometers of material. Its leading edge reached all 
the way to Puget Sound. Deposits from this event now cover about 550 square 
kilometers and extend as far as the Seattle suburb of Kent.

 Another cohesive lahar, dubbed the Electron Mudflow, was spawned by the 
collapse on the west flank of the volcano about 600 years ago. This lahar was 
more than 30 m deep when it entered the Puget Sound lowlands near the 
present-day town of Electron, more than 60 km away.

 All of the major river valleys that drain Mount Rainier have been inundated 
with lahars, says Pringle. Many of the communities northwest of the volcano 
have been built in whole or in part atop these sediments. The town of Orting, 
northwest of the volcano, sits on deposits from both the Osceola and the 
Electron Mudflows.

 Evidence of lahars' potential to destroy is directly underfoot. When the 
debris from these lahars comes to rest, it often swallows entire forests. In 
the area surrounding Orting, for example, the Electron Mudflow entombed a stand 
of mature Douglas firs. Excavations during construction of subdivisions and 
sewers around the town in the past 9 years have exhumed the deeply buried 
stumps of more than 100 trees. The most impressive stump, Pringle notes, 
measured more than 7.5 m in circumference about 1 m above the ancient ground 
level. It would be one of the largest Douglas firs in Washington State if it 
were still alive today.

 The relentless growth of populated subdivisions shows that residents-to-be 
either don't realize they're in an ashflow-prone zone or aren't worried about 
it.

 Some members of the emergency-response community have a different view. "I 
wouldn't build a home or a school there," says Ed Reed, a program manager with 
the Pierce County Department of Emergency Management in Tacoma.

 Assessing risk

 To assess the risk from Mount Rainier, scientists have combined remote 
sensing, geologic mapping, and computer modeling into an evaluation of 
materials that might be swept up into a lahar.

 Volcanic rocks are poor conductors of electricity when they are newly formed, 
but as they weather and become saturated with water, they conduct electricity 
up to 300 times better, explains Thomas W. Sisson, a volcanologist with the 
U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif. Also, fresh volcanic rocks are 
slightly more magnetic than ones that have been weathered and weakened, he 
notes. Sisson and his colleagues have flown helicopters equipped with 
electromagnetic detectors at low altitude over the mountain to locate such 
degraded rocks, which might crumble and contribute to a mudslide.

 By broadcasting radio waves along flight paths about 250 m apart, the 
researchers mapped the mineral degradation on Mount Rainier. They found that 
only the upper, west slope of the volcano has an appreciable thickness of 
weakened rock. Most material of this kind fell off the mountain 5,600 years ago 
in the Osceola Mudflow, says Sisson. The horseshoe-shape crater left 
behind-similar to the one left by Mount St. Helens' 1980 eruption-faces east, 
he notes, and it filled up with fresh lavas that today form a relatively 
strong, stable core. Sisson and his team reported their findings in the Feb. 1 
Nature.

 He and another group of USGS colleagues recently extended that research. By 
combining the distribution of weakened rocks with geologic maps that show the 
steepness of the terrain, they constructed a computer model of the mountain. 
Then they sliced the model at nearly 30 million different combinations of angle 
and depth and calculated the capability of the rocks below the slices to resist 
the force of gravity and hold up the mass of rocks above. In other words, they 
estimated whether the rocks could prevent a landslide.

 Even though the mountain's north face is the steepest, Sisson and his team 
found that the upper, west side of the volcano would be most likely to produce 
lahars that contained more than 0.1 cubic kilometer of material, an amount 
about one-third the size of the Electron Mudflow. The team published its 
results in the September Geology. These findings may allow emergency-response 
officials and scientists to concentrate their monitoring on the portions of 
Mount Rainier that most threaten the surrounding population.

 Sisson and his colleagues are now turning their remote sensors to Mount Adams 
and Mount Baker, two other Washington State volcanoes in the Cascade range. 
Some of the rocks on Mount Adams are about 30,000 years old, and some of those 
on the slopes of Mount Baker were deposited there about 18,000 years ago. By 
comparing the depths to which the minerals are weathered, it may be possible to 
accurately estimate the rate at which rocks lose their strength and capability 
to support the material upslope.

 Lahars can be triggered by seismic activity or the movement of magma inside a 
volcano as well as by ash flows sweeping across glaciers. Scientists want to 
find out how often these debris flows sweep down a mountainside without 
warning. Sisson says that with one exception-the Electron Mudflow, about 600 
years ago-all of Mount Rainier's lahars occurred during periods associated with 
volcanic activity, when eruptions also laid down tephra deposits.

 Maybe an eruption also stimulated the Electron Mudflow but left no evidence, 
he adds. It's possible that the eruption produced little or no ash, that the 
tephra fell in winter and then washed away with the spring melt, or that 
scientists just haven't found the ash deposit yet.

 A definite link between lahars and volcanic or seismic activity would be good 
news for those living in the mountain's shadow. Fortunately, remarks Sisson, 
"volcanoes usually give warning signs that an eruption's on the way."


