Gadgets from the Quantum Spookhouse: Science News Online, Dec. 8, 2001

 Gadgets from the Quantum Spookhouse

 Navigation devices and other technologies may gain from queer quantum effects

 Peter Weiss

 Computers exploiting the oddities of quantum mechanics may eventually put 
conventional computers to shame. Theoretically, full-fledged versions of those 
quantum machines will someday master in an eye blink mathematical puzzles and 
secret codes that current supercomputers wouldn't crack with a billion years of 
number crunching.

 The exotic innards of such quantum computers may prove to be unlike anything 
used in computers today (SN: 8/26/00, p.132: ). Instead of chips with billions 
of transistors, just a few hundred charged atoms, or ions, in an ultracold 
refrigerator may carry out the complex computations. Or perhaps laser beams 
bouncing around a maze of lenses and mirrors will do the job. Alternatively, 
vials of liquid chemicals under the control of devices similar to hospitals' 
magnetic resonance imaging scanners may also serve as quantum processors.

 Quantum computing specialists face many avenues to explore, each of them 
extremely challenging in its own right. One expectation that many of these 
scientists share is this: Practical quantum computers won't be built for 
decades, at least.

 With success still so distant, and perhaps unattainable, some quantum computer 
investigators have begun to wonder what other, perhaps easier, targets they 
might hit along the way. Among the most peculiar properties that quantum 
computing would harness is a relationship among particles known as entanglement 
(SN: 9/29/01, p. 196: ). So strange is entanglement that physicists including 
Albert Einstein battled for years to discredit the idea. Now, the concept is 
hotter than it's ever been, and scientists are beginning to work out its uses 
in a variety of technologies.

 Entanglement remained a curiosity of quantum mechanics until the 1970s, when 
theorists started to get an inkling of just how powerful 
entanglement-exploiting computers might be. "With the growth and interest in 
quantum computers, people started to ask, How do you quantify entanglement and 
how do you make it? With all that attention, people started to think about 
applications," says Richard J. Hughes of Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory.

 During the past few years, theorists have begun to work out ways to use 
entanglement and other extraordinary quirks of the quantum world to tackle 
important technological problems. Scientists have begun to experimentally test 
a few of those schemes, and some of them seem feasible.

 The potential payoffs are many. Entanglement and other quantum weirdness may 
boost the accuracy of radar, Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers, and 
other navigation devices. It may improve manufacturers' ability to lay down 
tiny structures on microchips, expedite explorations for oil, improve the 
vision of telescopes, and increase the accuracy of atomic clocks. Quantum 
technology might even enable us to see objects without actually looking at 
them-and without being seen ourselves.

 Already close to realization are communications systems secured against 
eavesdropping by means of certain less-exotic features of quantum mechanics 
(SN: 6/17/00, p. 388). And experiments have already shown that entanglement 
mechanisms improve these so-called quantum cryptography systems, their 
developers say.

"There are potentially many other types of applications, as well. We just 
haven't thought of them yet," says Seth Lloyd of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT).

 Entangled photons

 It all comes down to the seemingly magical ways of quantum mechanics. 
Physicists have discovered that if they shine a laser beam into a certain type 
of so-called nonlinear crystal, roughly one in ten billion of the photons that 
pass through it will come out transformed into two photons. What's more, that 
photon pair will have the quality called entanglement.

"Entanglement is the quintessential quantum phenomenon," says Daniel Abrams of 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, Calif. By using laser beams 
or other prods to make atoms, ions, or molecules interact in distinctive ways, 
scientists have also managed to entangle those diminutive denizens of the 
quantum world. What's more, quantum mechanics sets no limit on how many 
particles can be entangled with each other or how far apart they can be and 
still maintain their peculiar, intimate correlation.

 When particles become entangled, one or more of their traits become 
complementary. In that sense, pairs of entangled photons are like pairs of 
gloves in which there's always a left-handed and a right-handed partner. 
However, for quantum particles-which are also waves, according to quantum 
theory-traits that can be entangled include energy or wavelength, positions or 
trajectories in space, and the properties known as spin and polarization, which 
are related to the spatial orientations of electromagnetic fields.

 Now for the weirdness. If no one measures the particular trait that has become 
entangled within some group of particles, all those particles exist in a 
twilight state in which they have no particular value of that trait. Measure 
the trait for any one of those particles, however, and all the particles 
instantly acquire specific, complementary values of the trait, no matter how 
far apart the particles are.

 Decades ago, scientists were troubled by that idea. Einstein rejected this 
"spooky action at a distance," as he called it. Now, however, scientists and 
engineers are learning to embrace it, and their technological imaginations are 
getting quite a workout.

 Funky quantum correlations

 Equipped with atomic clocks, a fleet of 24 GPS satellites orbit Earth and 
continuously beam down signals marking the spacecrafts' positions and the time 
the signals were dispatched. When a GPS receiver on the ground collects those 
signals from four satellites simultaneously, it can calculate its own position 
to within as little as a few meters.

 Much greater precision is possible by means of "funky quantum correlations," 
such as entanglement, Lloyd says. In the July 26 Nature, he and his MIT 
colleagues Vittorio Giovannetti and Lorenzo Maccone described quantum schemes 
for measuring the time of arrival of radio-frequency bursts from satellites 
more precisely than can be done today. Because the arrival time gives 
information about each satellite's distance from the receiver, improving the 
precision of that measurement better pinpoints the receiver on Earth.

 When a satellite signal arrives at a conventional GPS receiver, it shows up as 
an extended bunch of photons. To designate a time at which the signal can be 
said to have arrived, the receiver records the entire incoming radiation pulse 
and figures out its midpoint. The more photons received, the greater the 
measurement's precision.

 Now, suppose that the transmitted photons are entangled, Lloyd proposes. A 
late-1980s experiment using beams of entangled photon pairs showed that they 
spread out more than unentangled photons do, but they straggle in with an 
enhanced degree of symmetry. For each particle that arrives 10 picoseconds 
late, another will arrive precisely 10 picoseconds early. "Although the 
individual arrival times are smeared out, the average time is better defined 
than it is classically," Lloyd says.

 A typical radiofrequency signal might contain a million trillion photons, 
Lloyd says. If all could be entangled and detected, the receiver theoretically 
could locate itself from each satellite to within the span of a hydrogen atom's 
diameter.

"That [huge] increase in accuracy should clue you in to the fact that that's 
going to be damn hard to do," Lloyd cautions. However, more modest but still 
substantial improvements over current GPS accuracy may be attainable by 
entangling just a few photons, he says. He and his coworkers have just begun 
experiments on the simplest case-entangling two photons to achieve a 40 percent 
accuracy gain compared with unentangled two-photon pulses.

"Simple demonstrations of quantum GPS and things like that are definitely on 
the horizon," says Lloyd. "The technical challenges are considerable but not 
significantly greater than building the first small-scale quantum computers."

 He and his colleagues suspect their approach could benefit not only GPS 
technology but also other navigational and ranging methods, such as radar and 
perhaps even sonar. While GPS and radar use photons, sonar systems send beams 
of acoustic vibrations, which physicists think of as particles called phonons. 
"To make entangled phonons would be hard," Lloyd notes. "But, hell, there's 
nothing that says you can't do it."

 Besides promising greater precision in satellite-based systems that span 
thousands of kilometers, quantum correlations may also offer a new way to 
tighten tolerances in the realm of microelectronics manufacturing.

 To make microcircuits with ever-smaller components, microelectronics makers 
and federal laboratories are pumping billions of dollars into new 
chip-fabrication methods using light with ever-shorter wavelengths (SN: 
11/8/97, p. 302: ).

 Light plays a role in the industry because it projects patterns of wires and 
components onto the surface of a semiconductor wafer-a procedure known as 
lithography. But light of a given wavelength can define lines no thinner than 
half that wavelength, at least according to classical physics (SN: 5/5/01, p. 
286: ).

 There's a quantum way around that law, says Jonathan P. Dowling of JPL. Last 
year, he and his colleagues at JPL and the University of Wales in Great Britain 
showed theoretically that a pair of entangled photons of a certain wavelength 
could "conspire," as he puts it, to act as a single photon of half that 
wavelength.

 This, in principle, would double both the horizontal and vertical resolution 
of the circuitry pattern projected onto a chip, reducing the area occupied by 
circuit elements to one-fourth of today's requirement. Ensnaring additional 
photons into the web of entanglement compounds the benefits. For instance, 
entangling three photons would provide a threefold improvement in linear 
resolution, leading to a ninefold increase in circuit density.

 This scheme is no longer just an idea. Recently, Yanhua Shih of the University 
of Maryland in Baltimore and his colleagues have experimentally confirmed that 
entangled photon pairs can interact to generate light with half the wavelength 
of the entangled members. The team described its results in the July 2 Physical 
Review Letters.

 Interferometer approach

 Even with such advances, there is no guarantee that quantum GPS or quantum 
lithography will ever take off. The approach underlying them, however, can be 
exploited in many other ways. That approach, known as interferometry, depends 
on measuring minute differences in distance or time by examining interference 
patterns of waves-usually waves of light-that take different paths to a 
detector.

 Interferometers are already ubiquitous in laboratories and industry. "Whenever 
you want to do some sort of measurement, you usually begin with an 
interferometer," Dowling says. For example, optical engineers take advantage of 
interferometry to monitor the shape of a lens as it's being manufactured.

 To do so, the engineers first split a beam of laser light into two. They shine 
one part through the lens and then mix it back into the other part of the 
original beam. Light passing through the lens travels more slowly than the 
light moving through the air, so the two beams arrive at slightly different 
times at a detector. This difference produces a pattern of dark and light 
interference fringes. Irregularities in those can pinpoint distortions in the 
lens surface.

 In a famous example of interferometry gone awry, a misaligned part in an 
interferometer used to test the mirror for the Hubble Space Telescope caused 
engineers to distort that mirror's shape, initially saddling the billion-dollar 
instrument with fuzzy vision. A subsequent space shuttle mission installed 
corrective lenses (SN: 1/22/94, p. 52).

 Even when classical interferometry is at its best, however, quantum 
correlations such as entanglement can enable it to do better. Moreover, the 
potential improvement in precision increases markedly with the number of 
photons in each signal.

 That may prove especially helpful as astronomy moves beyond individual 
telescopes like Hubble to interferometric telescopes and other detectors, Lloyd 
says. In such instruments, two or more telescopes some distance apart on Earth 
bring together the light they collect from the same object, such as a star, to 
generate interference fringes. By interpreting those fringes, scientists can 
resolve details on celestial objects as if the multiple scopes were one huge 
telescope as big across as the distance separating the individual instruments.

 Astronomers are even discussing the notion of placing telescopes far apart in 
space to serve jointly as a super-telescope that could examine distant objects, 
such as black holes and planets orbiting neighboring stars (SN: 10/28/00, p. 
282). Reconnaissance agencies are also considering similar techniques to better 
spot minute features of interest on Earth, Lloyd speculates.

 Researchers around the world are also pursuing the promise of quantum 
improvements for other instruments, including gyroscopes used in navigation 
systems, atomic clocks, and gravity-measuring devices, or gradiometers, that 
guide oil exploration and geophysical research.

 All these devices are interferometers of one sort or another. Some "are 
analogous systems that might not look to you like . . . an interferometer. But 
when you do the mathematics, it turns out to be the same," Abrams explains.

 None of them will be easy to build because they require control of notoriously 
fragile quantum phenomena. "Unless you're quite careful, the loss of a single 
photon can mess up the entire procedure," says Lloyd.

 Strange pictures

 Still, the incentives for confronting such challenges continue to grow. 
Consider this one, which seems straight out of Star Trek. Researchers at Boston 
University have come up with a quantum way to make a picture of an 
object-actually a three-dimensional image, or hologram (SN: 10/26/96, 
p.270)-from light that doesn't even hit that object. It's like seeing something 
without looking right at it or even its reflection. The effect is impossible 
without entanglement, the scientists claim.

 In the making of an ordinary hologram, a beam of classical, unentangled laser 
light is split in two. One part bounces off a target and then interferes with 
the other part-the so-called reference beam. The interference pattern recorded 
in a photographic emulsion harbors the 3-D image of the target.

 In contrast, the Boston researchers propose a scenario in which the object of 
interest is surrounded by an opaque surface that has only a small aperture for 
light to enter. Light illuminates and bounces off the object inside but can't 
get back out. Only electric pulses, marking each time a photon hits the inner 
walls, come from the enclosure.

 If that incoming light first emerges from a nonlinear crystal to create 
entangled photon pairs, one photon of each entangled pair can be directed into 
the enclosed area while its entangled partner bypasses the enclosure on its way 
to a photodetector. That makes it possible to record a hologram of the object 
even though the photons that actually shine on the object stay in the 
enclosure. Entangled partners of those enclosed photons serve as 
outside-the-box messengers that can record some of the object's visual features.

 Ayman F. Abouraddy, Bahaa E. Saleh, and their colleagues present the new 
finding in the Nov. 5 Optics Express. As an experimental test of what they have 
dubbed "quantum holography," the researchers are currently trying to image a 
flat object, like a photographic slide, with the entangled pairs.

 At a conference last summer where Saleh first brought up the idea, "there was 
a great deal of interest from the reconnaissance people," he recalls. The 
technique might lead to novel spying methods, he explains.

 The quest for quantum computing has laid the groundwork for these various 
quantum-enhanced technologies, scientists say. "The buildup of excitement about 
quantum computers gave people a new language for thinking about entanglement 
and things like that," Hughes says. "When you develop a new language you tend 
to get new ideas."


