Fly lends an ear to microphone design: Science News Online, Dec. 8, 2001

 Fly lends an ear to microphone design

 Peter Weiss

 In the past decade, biologists discovered a new mechanism by which animals 
locate sounds. The finding emerged from the observation that a parasitic fly 
stalks crickets by sound, even though the fly's head is too small for any of 
the previously known sound-localization mechanisms to work. Now, engineers are 
creating a micro-microphone inspired by the fly's extraordinary ear.

"The fly has given us an entirely different way of looking at microphone 
design," says Ronald N. Miles of the State University of New York at Binghamton.

 For one thing, the new design strategy could lead to hearing aids that hide 
within a person's ear canal yet gather sound primarily from the direction the 
listener is facing, its developers say. It may also find use in 
battlefield-surveillance devices and yet more compact substitutes for 
microphones now used in cell phones and other communications gear.

 Last year, a Canadian study showed that female flies of the species Ormia 
ochracea pinpoint sounds to within 2 compass degrees-as precisely as an owl 
does (SN: 11/11/00, p. 308). Owls, however, have large heads and ear-to-ear 
spacings big enough to exploit time delays and other indicators of a sound's 
direction, says Ronald R. Hoy of Cornell University, codiscoverer of the fly's 
unusual hearing apparatus.

 The side-by-side eardrums of the fly span only about a millimeter. Unlike any 
other known ear structure, there's a bridge of stiff material connecting the 
two membranes almost as a hinge might, Hoy notes. Other small-headed animals, 
including birds and frogs, use an internal air tube between ears to discern 
direction information, he adds.

 Vibration studies by Miles, Hoy, and their colleagues have revealed that, 
because of its bridge, the fly ear responds to sound with mixtures of two 
motions: rocking like a teeter-totter and flapping like a wing. What's more, 
the location in the fly's ear structure of the peak amplitude from the 
vibrations reveals the direction of the sound source.

 Using techniques for making microchips, the researchers have made a 
1-mm-by-2-mm silicon diaphragm with a mechanical structure that resembles the 
fly ear's. While the device still lacks electrical pickups, it mimics the fly 
ear's motions, Miles says. He described the new device on Dec. 4 at the annual 
meeting of Acoustical Society of America in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.

 The fly-inspired design "is breaking new ground in the area of acoustic 
sensing," says Edgar J. Martinez of the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency in Arlington, Va., which helps fund the work.


