Human-cloning claim creates controversy: Science News Online, Dec. 1, 2001

 Human-cloning claim creates controversy

 John Travis

 Public relations ploy or scientific breakthrough? That's one of the questions 
swirling around a biotech firm's disclosure this week that it has cloned human 
embryos, although they never grew larger than a few cells.

 The goal of these experiments is not to create a cloned person but to grow 
such embryos long enough that stem cells can be harvested, say scientists at 
Advanced Cell Technology (ACT), the Worcester, Mass., company that did the 
work. ACT investigators and other researchers contend that human embryonic stem 
cells, immortal cells that can develop into any cell type in the body, will one 
day help treat a wide range of medical conditions (SN: 11/7/98, p. 293).

 However, scientists fear that a patient's immune system may reject stem cells 
unless they are genetically identical to the patient's other cells. ACT says 
that cloning technology can produce such individually matched stem cells.

 This latest embryo research "represents the dawn of a new age in medicine by 
demonstrating that the goal of therapeutic cloning is within reach," ACT 
president Michael West and his colleagues write in the January 2002 Scientific 
American.

 The ACT scientists stripped the DNA from 19 human eggs and implanted in each a 
DNA-containing nucleus from another person's cell. They then applied chemicals 
to trigger the eggs to begin dividing as if they had been fertilized by a sperm.

 Only 3 of the 19 eggs undergoing this procedure actually started to divide. 
One reached the two-cell stage, another the four-cell stage, and the third egg 
developed into six cells.

 The company's work drew predictable outrage from political and religious 
leaders who find such human-embryo research immoral, but the experiments also 
drew criticism from biologists who were less than impressed.

"Scientifically, in terms of a breakthrough, it's a very minimal one," says 
developmental biologist Brigid L. M. Hogan of Vanderbilt University in 
Nashville. "It's obviously a publicity stunt."

 Hogan and other researchers contend that ACT's work offers little scientific 
information about the feasibility of human cloning, whether intended to produce 
a person or stem cells. The egg would have to develop into a ball of about 100 
cells before researchers could harvest stem cells or implant the embryo in a 
woman's uterus.

 The cloned embryos didn't even survive to the eight-cell stage, in which they 
would have started to make use of genes. That fact suggests that the DNA 
transfers performed by the ACT scientists were a failure, says Hogan.

 William A. Haseltine, editor of the Journal of Regenerative Medicine, the 
peer-reviewed publication in which ACT details its experiments, defends the 
work as the beginning of a long-term effort to make replacement cells and 
tissues for people. "This is not a big step, but it's the first step," he says.

 Not surprisingly, that step has reinvigorated a debate in Congress over 
whether or not to ban all or some types of human cloning. The House of 
Representatives has already approved a full ban, but the Senate has yet to act.

 The work by ACT researchers "activates the debate again, but it would have 
been nice to do that with good science," says Hogan, who sits on a National 
Academy of Sciences panel that has been considering the merits of human cloning 
(SN: 10/20/01, p. 250: ). The panel's report, due out soon, is widely expected 
to recommend a ban on cloning intended to create a person.


