Low Radiation Hurts Bystander Cells: Science News Online, Dec. 8, 2001

 Low Radiation Hurts Bystander Cells

 Ben Harder

 Particles that radiate from decaying radon atoms can ravage the living cells 
they strike and increase the likelihood that those cells will later become 
cancerous. Researchers have now directly demonstrated that neighboring cells 
not suffering direct hits can be harmed, too. They've also taken a step toward 
showing how this type of radiation, called alpha particles, indirectly hurts 
those bystanders.

 Radon derives from the decay of uranium and seeps naturally into the air from 
the ground. It's the primary environmental source of alpha particles, which 
contribute to cancer risk by causing aberrations in DNA. Alpha particles from 
inhaled radon are second only to smoking as a cause of lung cancer (SN: 3/7/98, 
p. 159).

 Because a person's exposure to alpha particles typically is low, researchers 
have had to estimate public health threats from radon by extrapolating from the 
effects of higher doses of alpha radiation. Such data comes primarily from 
studies of survivors of the atomic bombs that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
in Japan. The customary extrapolation, called the linear no-threshold model, 
assumes that cancer risk is proportional to the dose of radiation even at low 
doses.

 According to a team of scientists led by Tom K. Hei of Columbia University, 
that model underestimates the risks from low-dose radiation. In the Dec. 4 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the researchers demonstrate 
more clearly than before that alpha particles striking and damaging the nuclei 
of a small fraction of the cells in a population can do enough indirect damage 
to nearby cells to increase cancer risk almost as much as if all the cells had 
been hit.

 The researchers used a precision microbeam device to fire alpha particles into 
nuclei of human-hamster hybrid cells in petri dishes.

 When the researchers irradiated all the nuclei with exactly one alpha particle 
each, 98 mutations of a certain gene occurred per 100,000 surviving cells. 
Zapping only 5 percent of the nuclei produced 57 such mutations per 100,000 
cells, rather than the 5 mutations that a linear model predicts. Irradiating 20 
percent of the nuclei produced more than 80 mutations, almost as many as 
resulted from 100 percent irradiation. Those data "suggest the need to 
reconsider the validity of the linear extrapolation," the researchers say.

 Cell-to-cell communication channels called gap junctions appear to play a role 
in causing mutations in bystander cells. When the researchers bathed cells in a 
chemical that inhibits gap-junction communication and then irradiated the 
nuclei, they found fewer mutations among bystanders. Almost no bystanders were 
damaged in another experiment in which the cells lacked gap junctions.

"It's unequivocal that there's a bystander effect," says Eric J. Hall, the 
director of radiation research at Columbia, who wasn't an author on the paper. 
"The beauty of the microbeam technique is that you know which cells have been 
hit" and can observe mutations in nontargeted cells, he says. Previous studies 
using other techniques have found a bystander effect, but this is the first to 
directly demonstrate mutations, which are a cancer risk.

 Philippe Duport, a radiation researcher at the University of Ottawa in 
Ontario, calls the study "very well designed and conducted," but sees "reasons 
to doubt" that risks are disproportionately high at low doses.

 Radiation's effects in cell cultures don't necessarily reflect what happens in 
"a whole organism, with its full range of defense-repair mechanisms," says 
Duport. Processes such as DNA repair and cell death triggered by radiation 
damage could cancel the effect on bystander cells observed in the lab, he 
suggests.

 Furthermore, while a bystander effect can contribute to cancer, other 
cell-to-cell interactions in living tissues "may mitigate against increased 
risk," says Barry D. Michael, a radiation biophysicist at the Gray Cancer 
Institute in Northwood, England. One of these interactions halts cell division 
and hence cancer. "The jury is still out on whether [cell-to-cell] effects lead 
to a greater or lower risk," Michael says.


