Tough Choices: Science News Online, Dec. 1, 2001

 Tough Choices

 Endangered species are keeping some landowners thirsty

 Janet Raloff

 In the arid West, water has always been scarce. To limit wars over this 
lifeblood, states during the 19th-century mining era began issuing to some of 
their landowners legal entitlements to a share of the water flowing through 
rivers and lakes. Called water rights, these formal entitlements now pass down, 
with the land, from owner to owner as a form of property.

 The entitlements establish that when water supplies begin drying up, 
landowners holding the oldest claims are to get their full allotment of water 
before any is dispensed to holders of more recently established water rights. 
Legally, therefore, those who inherit or purchase land carrying the oldest 
water rights stand at the head of the line to the public water trough.

 In practice, however, a new family of claimants-fish in danger of 
extinction-has begun trumping even the oldest water rights. These animals are 
protected by a federal law that is every bit as inflexible as the state laws 
protecting a landowner's water right.

 Over the past decade, a continuing drought has diminished western water 
resources, at times leaving only enough in rivers to keep the fish alive. When 
flows are better, gates to canals or water pipelines may open, giving farmers 
some of their allotted water-but it frequently hasn't been enough or at the 
right time to slake the thirst of crops and livestock.

 It's come to a point in the West where "endangered species [protection] is the 
most significant factor in water shortages," argues David Haddock, an attorney 
with the Pacific Legal Foundation in Sacramento, Calif.

 An escalating conflict between the water rights of landowners and fish has 
begun spawning lawsuits that could redefine policy on endangered species 
protection. Although the science of how best to protect endangered fish remains 
controversial, it plays almost no role in the new legal face-offs. They focus 
instead on whether federal agencies are, in effect, stealing private assets-the 
water, that is-or illegally meddling with state sovereignty.

 Such clashes are causing some resource analysts to question whether the laws 
are too simplistic to deal with an increasingly complicated problem. Others are 
looking to use the marketplace for end-runs around the laws' limitations.

 How the problems are resolved could have implications for river management 
well beyond the arid West. Already, global warming and the demands of growing 
urban populations have strained the carrying capacity of many eastern U.S. 
rivers.

 These factors may expand the previously circumscribed conflict between 
wildlife and thirsty consumers to a near-continental scale.

 Inviolable rights

 The conflict began with environmental issues, but it's the laws that now bring 
it to a head. Whenever federal biologists list a species under the Endangered 
Species Act (ESA), a host of rules goes into effect. When the listed species 
are aquatic, the federal government can step in and restrict what had been seen 
by many for generations as inviolable water rights.

 Technically, the federal government has a legal right to take private assets, 
such as rights to water, when, say, national security or some public good would 
otherwise be threatened, observes Haddock. However, the Fifth Amendment to the 
Constitution requires that the government offer "just compensation" for any 
private property seized. So far, Haddock notes, Uncle Sam hasn't been offering 
compensation for the increasingly common takings of water rights to protect 
endangered species.

 Consider what happened in California several years ago, when the federal 
government instructed some of that state's water agencies to withhold water 
from farmers. A preliminary ruling earlier this year in what has come to be 
known as the Tulare Lake case threatens to make protection of endangered 
species more expensive than anyone had anticipated, Haddock told reporters in 
October in Portland at the Society of Environmental Journalists annual meeting.

 Owing to droughts during the early 1990s, water in the Tulare Lake basin in 
south-central California became scarce. When river levels began plummeting, the 
federal government told certain water agencies to limit sharply the amounts 
they diverted to rights holders. According to the National Marine Fisheries 
Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, a failure to keep significant 
amounts of water in streams would jeopardize the survival of winter-run chinook 
salmon and delta smelt. Both species are locally threatened with extinction.

 Farmers who irrigate their land measure water in acre-feet. Each acre-foot 
corresponds to 325,851 gallons, or the amount of water needed to cover an acre 
of ground to a height of 12 inches. One of the California water districts held 
back nearly 320,000 acre-feet of water from 1992 through 1994.

 For many farmers, these cutbacks amounted to between 40 and 50 percent of the 
water to which they had been entitled. Moreover, none received compensation, 
explains Haddock, who helped argue the case on behalf of the affected 
water-rights holders.

 On April 30, Judge John P. Wiese of the U.S. Court of Federal Claims in 
Washington, D.C., ruled that "the federal government is certainly free to 
preserve the fish; it must simply pay for the water it takes to do so."

 Within a year, the court is expected to decide how much the U.S. Treasury must 
give to the aggrieved parties. It could "easily" total billions of dollars, 
Haddock says. If this case sets a precedent, many thousands of Western 
landowners may make claims for monetary compensation in subsequent lawsuits.

 Endangered salmon

 Last month, water-rights holders in Oregon and California filed a lawsuit, 
also in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, federally mandated water curtailments 
in the drought-damaged Klamath Basin, where irrigators get water through 
contracts with the federal Bureau of Reclamation.

 Citing concerns over endangered coho salmon in the Klamath River and 
endangered sucker fish in Upper Klamath Lake, the bureau had warned early this 
year that as many as 90 percent of water-rights holders might not receive any 
water whatsoever in the summer. Conditions proved less dire than predicted, so 
the bureau reopened its spigots in midsummer. Even so, Haddock says, "it was 
late in the season, and not all that helpful for growing crops." Estimates of 
economic losses range well into the millions of dollars. Buoyed by the Tulare 
Lake decision, irrigators in the Klamath Basin are now suing for monetary 
compensation.

 Calling this summer's conflict in the Klamath Basin "the Perfect Storm of 
water-rights problems," Donna M. Cosgrove of the University of Idaho's Water 
Resources Research Institute in Idaho Falls says that the confrontation "has 
sent a ripple throughout the whole Pacific Northwest."

 This year ranks as perhaps the driest of the past quarter-century for much of 
the Klamath Basin. Even in the absence of endangered species regulations, the 
collective volume of water earmarked for use to fulfill water rights was more 
than the water available. Moreover, the recently reconstituted Klamath Indian 
tribe exercised water rights that legally supercede those of other rights 
holders.

 This basin "probably couldn't-in anything but a wet year-have [satisfied] all 
of the appropriations that were to have been made," Cosgrove notes. "I can't 
think of any other single basin that underscores Western water issues better."

 More legal skirmishes

 There are yet more legal skirmishes involving the Endangered Species Act, 
notes attorney Galen G. Schuler of Perkins Coie, a law firm in Seattle. In 
mid-June, he filed suit against the National Marine Fisheries Service on behalf 
of irrigators in Okanogan County, Wash., 130 miles northeast of Seattle.

 Those farmers get their water from the Methow River. However, to reach their 
fields, the water must pass across federal land in canals and conduits. The 
U.S. Forest Service has been issuing permits to cross this right-of-way for 99 
years.

 Four years ago, the federal government changed its permitting process. On the 
basis of its assessments of how the diverted water might affect river life, the 
government ruled that it would prohibit the passage of water across federal 
land when water levels in the Methow River were low. The action was taken to 
protect the river's endangered chinook and steelhead trout and its threatened 
bull trout.

 The irrigators' complicated case alleges four major procedural and 
interpretive problems. Among them is a claim that the federal government has 
attempted to usurp state sovereignty by involving itself in state-issued water 
rights. Schuler says that the federal actions also made an assessment of risks 
to protected species that appears to violate the Endangered Species Act.

 Previously, he says, actions such as the diversion of water for irrigation 
would be prohibited only if they jeopardized the continued existence of an 
entire species in the wild or adversely modified habitat critical to the 
conservation of the species. The National Marine Fisheries Service jettisoned 
such standards in favor of a far less restrictive one, Schuler argues. Now, it 
finds a risk "in any action that doesn't help a [threatened or endangered] 
species to recover," he says. Applying this new standard amounts to rewriting 
the law, the Okanogan lawsuit contends.

 The science that the National Marine Fisheries Service and the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service recently offered in support of withholding water also appears 
flawed, Schuler says, noting that even a 1992 federal study of the Methow 
concluded that diversions of water for irrigation help the river ecosystem by 
keeping water levels relatively constant.

 But that subtlety wasn't relevant this year. During late October in at least 
one stretch of this major river, "there wasn't a drop of water," observes Doug 
McChesney of the Washington Department of Ecology in Olympia.

 Schuler notes that three cases similar to Okanogan County's are now wending 
their way through the courts in Idaho, Arizona, and Colorado. Two of the cases 
have been filed since June. All charge that the federal government misapplied 
the endangered species law. At least one of these other cases pits 
endangered-species protection against stream diversions to provide 
municipalities with drinking water.

 Competing claims

 The lawsuits, Cosgrove says, demonstrate "that water law was never written for 
the complexity that we have today"-such as competing claims of landowners, 
tribal communities, and protectors of endangered species. She points to a host 
of unforeseen technologies, from hydroelectric dams to groundwater pumping, 
that further complicate water management.

 But to George Landrith, executive director of Frontiers of Freedom, a think 
tank based in Fairfax, Va., the problem rests largely with the Endangered 
Species Act. It's so rigid and restrictive that "it makes people hostile to 
endangered species," Landrith says.

 Almost any government policy "requires that you weigh two competing goals" and 
then decide which provides the most benefits and least harm, Landrith says. ESA 
doesn't do that, he argues. Once a species is listed under the law, it must be 
protected-often using "draconian sanctions" with high social and economic 
costs, he contends. With no water, some of the lands currently farmed and 
ranched would just dry up.

"I don't see how it's good for the environment to turn that region into a 
Depression Era dust bowl," Landrith told Science News. Instead, he would prefer 
to see the conservation of endangered species encouraged with the proverbial 
carrots-perhaps grants or tax breaks to rights holders for conserving water.

 McChesney says "a movement to roll back ESA" is being widely talked about by 
states'-rights advocates and farmers. It doesn't help, he and Cosgrove note, 
that the science used to support actions under ESA is complex and often open to 
various interpretations.

 Cosgrove suspects that "what would work the best would make all sides unhappy" 
- both permanent cutbacks for irrigators and other water-rights holders and a 
concession that "there are going to have to be some endangered species that we 
won't try to sustain."

 In many ways, amending ESA may prove easier than trying to rewrite water laws. 
In western states, McChesney explains, "virtually every piece of legislation 
affecting water rights says that existing rights will not be affected by 
subsequent legislation."

 Western water law also generally embodies the principle of use it or lose it. 
If landowners don't use their full allotment of water, the state can 
permanently cut their quota. As such, McChesney notes, users receive little 
incentive to conserve water or to apply their water to the highest-value 
uses-growing crops, for instance, instead of watering golf courses.

 Win-win solutions

 Some people are attempting to solve the problem with end runs around the legal 
line of scrimmage. Several water-marketing groups have sprung up over the past 
few years with the aim of bypassing litigation to create "win-win solutions for 
both the landowner and fisheries," notes Clay Landry of the Political Economy 
Research Center in Bozeman, Mont.

 Usually referred to as water trusts, these groups collect money from private 
and public donors-including state governments-to lease or buy an individual's 
water rights. In Oregon, property owners may permanently trade away all or part 
of their rights to irrigation water for about $350 per acre-foot, Landry notes. 
In Colorado regions where the population is rapidly growing, each acre-foot 
retired can cost 10 times as much. The purchased water then remains in streams 
to support fish and other wildlife.

"We'll likely have about 75 agreements-both permanent and temporary-in place 
this year that preserve about 50 cubic feet per second of flow in-stream," or 
about 33 acre-feet of water, notes Andrew Purkey, executive director of the 
Oregon Water Trust in Portland. That's enough to save some of the smaller 
waterways, he says.

 In most cases, farmers sell their rights as they retire from farming, switch 
to growing nonirrigated crops, or reduce their use of water through 
conservation measures, notes Rachael P. Osborne, a Spokane attorney and board 
member of the Washington Water Trust. Typically, she says, these water trusts 
achieve the biggest impact by buying rights to water from small tributaries, 
where in some cases the entire stream flow can be saved. Such innovative 
solutions can work faster than passing new legislation.

 Sandra Postel, director of the Global Water Policy Center in Amherst, Mass., 
says that current laws are proving anachronistic as "we try to figure out how 
to protect newfound values" such as endangered species and recreational waters.

 In a few isolated places, she notes, federal-government incentives have 
encouraged farmers to embrace drip irrigation and other water-conserving 
techniques. That's what happened in California's Central Valley, a region that 
raises 68 percent of the state's crops-produce valued at $13.7 billion a year. 
"But if we address the problem on such a piecemeal basis," Postel argues, "it's 
going to take forever to increase the efficiency of water use in the West."

 Growing urban centers in eastern states are placing similar pressures on local 
water and its denizens. As a result, Postel says, "we're starting to see some 
of the same issues and the same kinds of litigation pop up" as these eastern 
rivers run dry in drought periods, "stranding fish and destroying ecosystems."

 For the time being, resolution of most disputes over water tend to be battered 
out with anger and litigation. Landry says, "If we continue down the path of 
using this hammer, we'll find it increasingly difficult to persuade people to 
experiment with market forces." But stakeholders may have few alternatives 
unless and until the current laws change.


