Science News of the Year 2001: Science News Online, Dec. 22, 2001

> Science News of the Year 2001

 Compiled by the staff of Science News

 The year 2001 will be remembered sadly for a single date: Sept. 11. The 
horrific loss of lives to terrorism on that day overshadows all earlier events 
of the year. The fear instilled on Sept. 11 was soon exacerbated by 
bioterrorism, as anthrax spores sent through the mail caused additional deaths 
and provided a threat that seemed it might reach into any home or workplace. 
People immediately looked to science for tools to protect them against 
terrorism.

 Researchers who study microbes have been called upon to help investigators 
identify anthrax spores, to come up with effective means to decontaminate 
office buildings, to design therapies for people who may have been exposed to 
anthrax and those showing symptoms of infection (), and to develop plans to 
guard the public against future attempts at mass murder. Attention turned to 
recent results exploring the basic biology of anthrax () and potential 
antidotes ().

 Data being collected from the devastation of the World Trade Center could lead 
to building codes that make structures safer for their occupants (). Designing 
a building to withstand the impact of a jet plane moving at full speed is a 
challenge that previously had been inconceivable.

 The threat of terrorism also makes people worry about misuse of scientific 
findings. There's fear that terrorists will steal microbes from research labs 
or use published data to create deadly agents. Iowa State University chose to 
destroy its anthrax collection rather than find a means to protect it 
adequately. Some scientists worry that terrorists could create a microbe de 
novo from published DNA sequences, while others regard that possibility as 
far-fetched.

 Despite its tragic events, 2001 should also be remembered for its scientific 
achievements. We list here some of the most important ones.

 This is a review of important science stories of 2001 reported in the pages of 
Science News. The reference after each item gives the date and the volume and 
number of the page on which the main article on the subject appeared (vol. 159 
is January^-June; vol. 160 is July^-December). An asterisk (*) indicates that 
the text of the item is available to any visitor to Science News Online. 
Registered Science News subscribers, once signed in, have access to the full 
text of all articles. The full text of an article can also be purchased for 
$2.50 from ProQuest ().

 Back issues are available for $3 (prepaid). Send orders to Science News, 1719 
N Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20036.

 In Ethiopia, fossils emerged that traced to more than 5 million years ago and 
appeared to belong to the earliest known member of the human evolutionary 
family (). The discoverers of a 3.5-milllion-year-old skull in Kenya said that 
the find came from a previously unrecognized line of ancient human ancestors 
(). A 4,000-year-old Peruvian site yielded the remains of the oldest known city 
in the New World (). About 1.5 million years ago, a group of humanity's 
ancestors reached southeastern Asia () and others ventured into frigid 
northeastern Asia (). Radiocarbon data inspired a theory that Middle Eastern 
farmers rapidly colonized southern Europe 7,400 years ago (). African-looking 
features of prehistoric human skulls unearthed in Brazil raised questions about 
the origins of the first Americans (). Scientists probed ancient fossils for 
clues to the evolution of human growth patterns (). One study suggested that 
Neandertals' skulls developed differently from those of modern humans (). 
Another project indicated that slowed-down tooth growth may have emerged 
relatively recently among our fossil ancestors (). Fossil teeth found at a 
30-million-year-old site in Pakistan suggested that lemurs have Asian roots (). 
Fierce debate arose over the ethics and implications of fieldwork with South 
America's Yanomami people (). Genetic data indicated that female chimps mate 
outside their home groups less often than researchers had previously thought 
(). A fossil jaw offered a look at the caring side of Neandertals (). Far-flung 
goat populations revealed a surprising amount of genetic unity that may reflect 
widespread trading of these animals in ancient times (). New finds showed that 
people adapted to harsh environments at the end of the Stone Age ().

 For the first time, researchers detected the atmosphere of a planet that lies 
beyond the solar system (). Discovery of a trove of planets orbiting stars 
other than the sun suggested that astronomers had finally found a planetary 
system similar to our own (, ). Two other newfound planetary systems feature a 
bizarre entourage of orbiting bodies and may provide fresh insight into planet 
formation (). One team of researchers retracted a controversial claim that some 
extrasolar planets were, in fact, much heavier bodies (). A spacecraft for the 
first time landed on the asteroid 433 Eros (). Data collected before and after 
the landing shed new light on the rock's origins and composition (; , , ). 
Experiments examining the relic radiation from the Big Bang confirmed 
cosmologists' basic model of how the universe evolved (). Astronomers detected 
signs of one of the earliest eras in the universe, just before the first stars 
and quasars flooded the cosmos with light (). Scientists reported that they had 
measured the age of the cosmos with unprecedented accuracy (). According to a 
controversial new theory, the Big Bang was ignited when a parallel universe 
moving along a hidden dimension smacked into our cosmos (). Scientists found 
additional evidence that some mysterious force is pushing galaxies apart at an 
ever-faster rate (, ). Researchers found a clump of stars that may be one of 
the first building blocks of a galaxy (). Telescopes tracked the rise and fall 
of the largest dust storm observed on Mars in 25 years (, ). A body as massive 
as Mars may once have resided in a region of the solar system far beyond the 
nine known planets and might still reside there (). Astronomers found evidence 
of a star that has swallowed one or more of its planets (). Some planets may be 
free-floating in space rather than orbiting a star (). Astronomers may finally 
have glimpsed a key step in the construction of a planet () and found what may 
be the youngest star known to have formed the building blocks of planets (). A 
nearby star appeared to have its own asteroid belt (), whereas another may 
possess comets (). Theorists proposed that the cell-like envelopes in which 
life on Earth evolved literally dropped from the sky (). Simulating 
extraterrestrial impacts on Earth, researchers fired away at the question of 
how life started (). Researchers discovered sugars and sugar-related compounds 
in meteorites, bolstering the view that rocks from space delivered key 
ingredients for life on Earth (). An X-ray outburst provided compelling new 
evidence that a monster black hole lurks at the Milky Way's core (). A new 
analysis of a Mars meteorite suggested that water once flowed on the surface of 
the Red Planet and came from eruptions of molten rock deep within the planet 
(). A new study added to the evidence that past volcanic activity could have 
briefly created a warmer, wetter Mars (). A spacecraft took the first X-ray 
image of Venus (). The 11-year cycle of solar storms reached its peak and 
disturbed satellites as well as electric-power systems on the ground (, , ). 
Astronomers obtained the first clear picture of the structure beneath a sunspot 
(). Observations challenged the notion that supermassive black holes stopped 
growing soon after their host galaxies formed, and the data suggested new ways 
to find and measure these black holes (). Studies provided evidence of event 
horizons, the one-way membranes that surround black holes (). Observations 
suggested that black holes spin like dervishes () and that energy flows out 
from the vicinity of a black hole (). For many skywatchers in North America, 
Asia, and Australia, this year's Leonid meteor shower was a true dazzler (, ). 
Two spacecraft jointly spotted towering new volcanic plumes on Jupiter's moon 
Io (). One plume was 500 kilometers- high, the tallest ever seen on Io (). 
Astronomers imaged the largest known member of a reservoir of comets in the 
outer solar system; the icy body is bigger than Pluto's moon Charon ().

 Scientists uncovered a rare aspect of brain development that may be unique to 
people (). A genetic mutation identified in members of a British family 
appeared to influence language capability (). Deaf kids who invented their own 
sign language contributed to the debate over language and grammar origins (). 
Behavior training combined with a low dose of Ritalin showed promise as a 
treatment for teenagers with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (). 
Nicotine addiction showed signs of increasing over the past 20 years among 
young cigarette smokers (). In separate studies, depressed people exhibited the 
same brain changes in response to either psychotherapy or antidepressant drugs 
(). Babies' penchant for conversing wordlessly with their caregivers may 
influence later social and emotional development (). Scientists tied 
schizophrenia to the activity of a particular brain chemical () and a virus (). 
European and U.S. schizophrenia treatment expanded beyond medication alone (). 
An emerging field of study mined the intuitive strategies that children use to 
understand math and grasp other types of knowledge (). New studies tapped into 
extensive interactions among brain cells involved in sight, hearing, and other 
senses (). Long-term data linked a positive outlook () and healthy habits early 
in life () to longer survival in old age. Brain researchers probed the vexing 
domains of dreaming () and mystical experience (). Math anxiety showed signs of 
harming college students' memory, thereby dragging down their math performance 
(). Controversial studies explored the possibility that people have an innate 
ability to recognize faces (). Some police officers displayed a surprising 
aptitude for lie detection, whereas others were often duped ().

 President Bush decided to permit limited research on human embryonic stem 
cells (). Scientists learned how to transform those cells into 
insulin-secreting and heart cells () and blood and bone marrow cells (). A 
compound called polyvalent inhibitor, tested in rats, disabled the toxin that 
causes the deadly symptoms of anthrax (). Also, scientists located the protein 
to which the anthrax toxin attaches when it attacks a cell (). A protein-based 
drug injected into people with early signs of diabetes stopped the disease in 
its tracks (). Drugs for high blood pressure showed signs of forestalling 
kidney damage in people with type II diabetes (). Data indicated that blood 
pressure on the high end of normal should be treated to prevent heart problems 
or stroke (). A cell-surface molecule that normally binds to the vitamin folate 
permits Ebola virus to invade cells (). Transplanting muscle cells or stem 
cells into ailing hearts showed promise of curing heart failure (). 
Investigators learned how to transform fat cells into cartilage, the 
oft-injured joint tissue (). Scientists seeking links between obesity, 
diabetes, and heart disease implicated a protein called resistin ()* and a 
family of proteins that regulate fat (). Among people in intensive care units 
who require assistance breathing, keeping blood concentrations of sugar within 
normal limits nearly doubled survival (). Cholesterol-lowering drugs known as 
statins may fight Alzheimer's disease (). Surprising evidence suggested that 
amyloid plaques in the brain aren't the main culprit in this illness (). A drug 
that blocks a protein called HER2 helped women with aggressive breast cancer 
live longer (). The drug anastrozole outperformed tamoxifen against some breast 
cancers (). Researchers began identifying genes and lifestyle factors that 
enable some people to live more than 100 years (). An increased capability to 
make the cancer-suppressing protein p53 could explain why women who have had a 
full-term pregnancy at an early age are less likely to get breast cancer (). A 
gene therapy thwarted sickle-cell disease in mice (). Two new drugs tested in 
monkeys stopped menstrual bleeding and suggested a treatment for severe monthly 
bleeding that causes anemia (). Scientists gained insight into how cancer cells 
spread in the body (). Women who bear sons in a pregnancy complicated by 
preeclampsia convey risk of the condition to their future daughters-in-law (). 
Neuroscientists showed that the hormone secretin, a controversial autism 
therapy, has a role in the brain (). Scientists sought to explain why women are 
more susceptible to autoimmune diseases than men are (). Genes implicated in 
Crohn's disease () and lung cancer were identified (). Blindness in premature 
infants could stem from a shortage of a protein called insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (). An antimicrobial chemical common in soaps and mouthwashes showed 
that it might help fight malaria (). Scientists tracked how variants of the 
disease have spread across the globe (). Scientists worked to understand what 
underlies the placebo effect-if there is one (; ). A study found that the 
body's reaction to sleep deprivation resembles insulin resistance, suggesting a 
link between sleep loss and type II diabetes (). Medical histories of 
HIV-positive people suggested they face an increased risk of coronary artery 
disease (). By unraveling the molecular signals that guide hair growth, 
scientists moved toward helping people avoid growing too much or too little 
hair (). Scientists engineered a poliovirus to make it attack brain tumors (). 
Researchers tricked leukemia cells into committing suicide by trapping cancer- 
promoting proteins in the cells' nuclei (). Antioxidant vitamins didn't appear 
to prevent heart disease (, ). Chronic jet lag shrinks parts of the brain, a 
preliminary study suggested (). Although some people claim child vaccinations 
are risky, studies indicated that the shots are broadly beneficial ().

 The first systematic survey of the inside of a coral reef revealed abundant 
filter feeders, which may be as important to reef function as the outside 
creatures are (). Scientists cloned the rare, oxlike gaur, but a common 
infection killed the calf (). A second cloned rarity, a mouflon sheep, has 
survived (). A magnetic field simulating the takeoff point for birds flying 
over the Sahara cues them to fatten up (). Scrub jays that have stolen food 
from other birds' caches hide their own with extra care, which suggests that 
birds have surprisingly fancy cognitive processes (). A test on working 
longline fishing boats found that an inexpensive array of streamers reduces 
accidental killing of seabirds more than 90 percent (). Greenish warbler 
populations encircling the Tibetan Plateau were viewed as evidence of a 
long-sought evolutionary phenomenon called a ring species (). Merely handling a 
plant's leaves may skew studies of its reactions to predators (). Invading 
Argentine ants can, by themselves, shift the mix of plant species in a South 
African ecosystem (). A fungus on tree roots kills soil insects and passes 
nitrogen to the tree (). The largest review yet of wild parrot nesting found 
both frequent poaching and evidence that a U.S. law curbs trade (). A genetic 
study of African elephants suggested that forest dwellers are a species 
separate from those roaming savannas (). And as more insight for managing 
elephants: Older matriarchs tell friends from strangers far better than younger 
females do (). A second kind of bacterium, besides Wolbachia strains, causes 
arthropod versions of virgin birth (). The infection switches mite males' 
gender so that they reproduce as virgins-creating the only animal species yet 
discovered to live and reproduce with only one set of chromosomes ().

 Two teams presented the first analyses of the full human genome and estimated 
that it contains only about 30,000 genes (). A biotech firm's claim to have 
created the first cloned human embryos reignited scientific and political 
controversy (, ). Scientists created the first genetically engineered primate, 
a rhesus monkey (). Geneticists deciphered all the DNA of several 
disease-causing bacteria- including ones that cause typhoid fever, food 
poisoning, and the plague (, ; )-and two species of puffer fish (). 
Neuroscientists established that brain cells called glia have several crucial 
roles (), such as providing the cholesterol that nerve cells need to form 
connections with each other (). Microbiologists unexpectedly revealed that 
bacteria have an internal protein skeleton similar to that of human cells (). 
Taste researchers identified a gene encoding a protein that enables the tongue 
to sense sweets (). Obscure chemicals called trace amines have receptors on 
brain cells and may play a role in depression and schizophrenia (). Scientists 
identified a new potential contraceptive target-a protein that helps mammalian 
sperm wiggle their tails (). A hormonal derivative of vitamin A helps 
coordinate the body's internal clocks (). Agricultural scientists created the 
first salt-tolerant tomato plant (). Developmental biologists observed that 
nascent blood vessels provide signals that help spark the creation of organs, 
such as the liver (), and identified genes controlling the heart's creation (). 
Human sweat proved to contain a microbe-killing protein (). Investigators found 
that a stress hormone shields an embryo from its mother's immune system () and 
identified cell-surface proteins, called toll-like receptors, that recognize 
microbes (). Aging cells can stimulate their neighbors to become tumors ().

 New calculations showed that quantum mechanics determines ethane's most stable 
structure (). Researchers found that the common mineral calcite can segregate 
amino acids into right- and left-handed varieties (). Other experiments 
revealed how the orientation of amino acids can make a crystal take on either a 
right- or left-handed form (). A new ceramic stretches to 10 times its original 
length in record time (). Water droplets sprint across a surface under the 
influence of a unique chemical coating (). A surface material demonstrated a 
built-in ability to kill bacteria (). Researchers made individual 
superconducting carbon nanotubes just 0.4 nanometers wide (). A new catalyst 
reduces pollution from a chemical reaction widely used in industry (). 
Researchers created tiny bar codes to label molecules (). New films indicate 
the presence of airborne chemicals by changing color (). A fresh technique for 
treating paper pulp emerged, and it could help clean up the papermaking 
industry (). Researchers made crystals that reversibly change their surface 
shape when exposed to light (). Unusual titanium dioxide coatings break down 
toxins and keep mirrors from fogging (). Some nonstick coatings such as Teflon 
break down at high temperatures into undesirable compounds that persist in the 
environment (). By applying a coating that releases nitric oxide, scientists 
prevented bacteria from building up on materials (). A new detector rapidly 
distinguishes between almost identical DNA molecules (). Researchers reported 
that bones' resilience could result from so-called sacrificial bonds-easily 
broken bridges in or between collagen molecules ().

 The discovery of a new type of undersea hydrothermal vent system suggested 
that such outlets may be surprisingly widespread (). Occasional sediment-rich 
plumes of fresh water dumped into the ocean by rivers may convey pesticides and 
nutrients to the seafloor (). Ocean-floor sediments drilled from Antarctic 
regions once covered by ice shelves provided evidence that those shelves are 
much younger than scientists had held (). A newly discovered group of 
hydrothermal vents in the Indian Ocean is surrounded by ecosystems that differ 
significantly from those at other vent systems (). Comparisons of satellite 
data provide direct evidence that the atmosphere's greenhouse effect increased 
significantly between 1970 and 1997 (). Analysis that includes a forest's 
moisturizing effect on regional climate indicated that the Amazon rainforest 
could disappear in the next 3 decades (). Building the Three Gorges Dam across 
the Yangtze River in China may lead to warmer temperatures in Japan (). Ground 
vibrations produced by the collapsing twin towers of the World Trade Center in 
lower Manhattan were recorded by instruments up to 425 kilometers away (). 
Large-scale deforestation in the eastern lowlands of Central America is 
affecting weather in the mountains downwind and imperiling ecosystems there (). 
New observations of the atmosphere over polar regions may require scientists to 
revamp their models of environmental conditions at high altitudes (). The 
inactivity of a single enzyme in peat might alone be preventing massive 
releases of carbon dioxide from peat lands (). In a previously unrecognized 
phenomenon, microorganisms found in Kentucky shale are eating the carbon locked 
within the rocks' kerogen (). Above-average hurricane activity in the North 
Atlantic during the past 6 years may signal a threatening weather trend (). 
Better measurements of a radioactive-decay rate suggested that Earth may have 
had a crust up to 200 million years earlier than geologists had expected (). 
Principles of quantum physics may explain why seismic waves travel at different 
speeds in different directions across Earth's inner core (). Researchers 
monitoring small ground motions along faults in Southern California also 
detected the ground's rise and fall when local governments pumped water into 
and out of the region's aquifers (). Computer models developed to analyze 
seismic vibrations traveling through uneven terrain can also identify and track 
heavy vehicles, such as tanks ().

 The United States and 126 other nations signed a treaty to phase out major 
persistent, toxic pollutants (). Negotiators in Bonn, Germany, without input 
from U.S. representatives, resolved controversies blocking an international 
treaty to limit greenhouse gases (). At exposures well below those deemed 
acceptable by the U.S. government, lead impairs a child's learning (). 
Treatment to remove that lead fails to curb impairment, even in kids who'd been 
only moderately exposed (). Some river pollution spawns body-altering steroids 
(). Research suggested that long-range movement of dust can sicken wildlife, 
crops, and people a continent away (, ). After a heavy die-off, Caribbean 
urchins are poised for a comeback, which could help save area corals (). New 
studies showed coastal no-fishing zones aid the recovery of fish stocks, to the 
benefit of fishing fleets (). Breathing fine airborne dust triggers adverse 
heart changes in even strong, healthy workers (, ). Landfill disposal of 
mercury can transform the pollutant, making it more toxic and likely to enter 
the air (). Government agencies began developing joint policies to reduce the 
huge, seasonal dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico (). New findings indicated that 
by using a little less fertilizer, farmers could play a role in limiting the 
zone (). Regional climate changes triggered by large-scale deforestation in 
some Central American lowlands are affecting weather-and imperiling 
ecosystems-in the mountains downwind (). A major report concluded that 
genetically engineered Bt corn poses a "negligible" risk to butterflies (). 
However, bits of genes put into bioengineered corn turned up in old types of 
maize in remote parts of Mexico (). Studies linked elevated residential 
electromagnetic fields to reduced production of the hormone melatonin (). Women 
who work the graveyard shift increase their chance of developing breast cancer, 
apparently by suppressing that hormone (). Hatchery fish appeared to be not 
only replacing some wild populations of their species () but also spreading a 
deadly fungus to wild amphibians (). The European Union provisionally voted to 
ban use of most polybrominated diphenyl ethers, a family of flame retardants 
(). U.S. studies found these potentially toxic pollutants in people and the 
environment (). Adults who had eaten fish tainted with polychlorinated 
biphenyls had problems with learning and memory ().

 A large share of meats and seafood comes from the grocery store bearing 
bacteria invulnerable to many drugs, so these microbes could cause serious 
infections (; ). New food labeling will identify foods rich in choline, a 
nutrient that can play an integral role in learning and brain health (). One 
arcane family of trans fats may be tapped to treat or prevent a host of 
diseases (). Researchers are finding ways to reduce the presence of other, 
unhealthful trans fats in food (). In animals, foods that break down quickly 
into simple sugars appeared to foster obesity and diabetes (). Largely ignored, 
dietary boron may play a role in preventing diseases such as arthritis and 
prostate cancer (). How the body metabolizes fat depends on whether the mouth 
got a taste of it, a new study found (). Tainted livestock feed can lead to 
residues of PCBs and related pollutants in meat (). Calcium supplements may 
limit the body's uptake of lead, a toxic heavy metal (). Norwegian scientists 
linked high milk consumption to a low incidence of breast cancer (). 
Researchers suppressed the growth and spread of breast cancer in animals by 
removing two antioxidant vitamins from the diet (). Lutein, a yellow pigment in 
many fruits and vegetables, may inhibit processes that jump-start 
atherosclerosis (). Vitamin E warded off osteoporosis in mice and served as an 
immunity-enhancing growth promoter in cattle (; ). Drinking just 1 to 3 cups of 
coffee daily may adversely affect blood concentrations of cholesterol and 
homocysteine ().

 A tantalizing link between number theory and chaotic dynamics offered a 
potential path to a proof that every decimal digit of pi occurs with the same 
frequency (). Two mathematicians established a ceiling on the number of 
so-called Reidemeister moves required to unravel a tangled circle (). 
Researchers discovered a remarkable formula relating the curvatures and 
coordinates of tangent circles packed within a circle (). Scientists 
demonstrated that the procedures governing communication between computers 
linked to the Internet can be co-opted to perform computations without the 
consent of the targeted computers (). Several government initiatives aimed to 
develop computing power in the range of 12 trillion operations per second or 
more for research use (). Mathematicians made substantial progress in 
developing new formulas for enumerating representations of numbers as the sums 
of squares (). Damage caused by the Code Red worm and several other viruses in 
July and August focused new attention on rogue computer programs that could 
bring down the Internet (). A computer program sorted through amino acid 
sequences to pinpoint telltale proteins in troublesome bacteria (). A new 
interpretation of the famous Mesopotamian clay tablet known as Plimpton 322 
suggested that it's a list of examples that a teacher would use to quiz 
students about squared numbers and their reciprocals (). A participant in the 
Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search found the largest known prime number, 
which runs to 4,053,946 decimal digits ().

 A tiny skull found in 195-million-year-old Chinese sediments indicated that 
crucial features of mammalian anatomy evolved more than 45 million years 
earlier than scientists had thought (). Two new dinosaur species found in 
90-million-year-old rocks of the American Southwest were the first to fill a 
30-million-year gap in the fossil record (). Soft tissue in a 
70-million-year-old fossil hinted that some dinosaurs filtered food from water 
and mud (). The discovery of early whale fossils with certain anklebones intact 
bolstered the notion that whales are closely related to some modern hoofed 
mammals (). A new analysis of fossils and living animals suggested that most 
dinosaurs' nostrils were near the tips of their snouts (). Scientists unveiled 
an 8-ton, 12-meter-long ancient crocodile relative that munched on dinosaurs 
(). Oleanane, a chemical related to those in modern flowering plants, was found 
in fossil-bearing sediments. The discovery may help identify flowers' ancestors 
(). Excavations in Egypt unearthed bones of an 80-ton titanosaur, seemingly the 
second-most-massive dinosaur known (). Fossil charcoal suggests wildfire cycles 
as long as 360 million years ago ().

 Measurements of neutrinos from the sun strengthened a major challenge to the 
central theory of particle physics (). Accelerator experiments detected CP 
violation-a subtle difference between matter and antimatter-among subatomic 
particles known as B-mesons (; ). Light stood still for the first time in the 
laboratory when photons passing through laser-lit vapors were halted by gas 
atoms and later re-emitted (). Heavy-element researchers retracted their 1999 
claim to having created element 118, which had been the heaviest member of the 
periodic table (). X rays revealed a specific atomic arrangement in 
piezoelectric crystals that may explain their unusual degree of expansion when 
they are zapped by an electric field (). Physicists induced a weird 
correlation, called entanglement, between quantum states of trillions of 
atoms-a record number-at room temperature (). A simple, readily available 
material called magnesium diboride was found to conduct electricity without 
resistance at an unexpectedly high temperature, sparking a surge of research 
into the compound (). Astrophysicists reported that the strength of the 
electromagnetic force, supposedly a constant of nature, was once slightly 
smaller than it is today, which suggests that laws of physics vary over time 
and space (). A freak accident, which destroyed thousands of sensitive light 
detectors at the Super-Kamiokande neutrino detector near Tokyo, disrupted 
experiments there and observations of neutrinos from space (). By producing 
unprecedented numbers of atomic nuclei harboring pairs of exotic lambda 
particles, physicists verified nature's preference for combining in twos and 
threes the fundamental particles that they call quarks. The finding may lead to 
insight into stellar explosions and neutron stars (). An experiment in which an 
electron beam probed deep into protons indicated that the distribution of 
electric charge within the particles may be startlingly different from what 
scientists have thought for more than 50 years (). A close look at copper 
revealed that atoms constantly roam randomly and widely in the metal's surface 
layer rather than stay still, as scientists had previously assumed ().

 Researchers made electronic circuits from transistors as small as single 
molecules to circumvent limits on today's methods (, ; , ). Doctors tested 
high-intensity ultrasound devices for incision-free surgery with sound waves 
(). Biology and electronics drew closer as scientists devised ways to grow 
nerve and liver cells on silicon microchips (; ). In a step toward widespread 
microcircuits that are exceptionally fast and manipulate light, a new method of 
growing crystals induced high-performance semiconductors to adhere to ordinary 
silicon (). The first transatlantic surgery took place when physicians in New 
York electronically manipulated a robot in Strasbourg, France, to remove a 
woman's gall bladder (). Engineers unveiled a self-healing material containing 
microspheres that release glue when a crack develops (). A gasoline-distilling 
device for cars captured the most volatile hydrocarbons for use in cold starts 
and lowered emissions of unburned fuel ().


