Did Space Rocks Deliver Sugar?: Science News Online, Dec. 22, 2001

> Did Space Rocks Deliver Sugar?

 Ron Cowen

 How sweet it is!

 Planetary scientists have for the first time detected extraterrestrial sugar 
compounds in meteorites. The discovery bolsters the view that rocks from space 
delivered ingredients that contributed to the development of life on Earth.

 Simple sugars, sugar alcohols, and sugar acids-all of which have now been 
found in two meteorites-are key components of RNA, DNA, and cell membranes. 
They also serve as energy sources for terrestrial organisms.

 George Cooper of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif., and his 
colleagues examined the well-studied Murchison and Murray meteorites. Both fell 
to Earth within the past half-century and are known to contain organic 
compounds. To search for sugar compounds, the team used a sensitive technique 
in which vaporized samples were ionized and their chemical constituents 
separated according to mass.

 In the Dec. 20/27 Nature, Cooper and his collaborators report finding a 
variety of simple sugars, including dihydroxyacetone, and sugar alcohols such 
as glycerols. The compounds occur in trace amounts similar to the concentration 
of amino acids previously found in the two meteorites.

 Meteorites can easily become contaminated with terrestrial compounds. But two 
lines of evidence suggest that the rocks carried their sugars from space. The 
meteorites have a higher concentration of simple sugars than of the large, 
complex sugars that are abundant on Earth. Also, the ratio of carbon-13 to 
carbon-12 in the meteorites' sugar compounds matches that expected from 
extraterrestrial sources.

 Both meteorites are carbon-rich fragments of ancient asteroids and appear to 
have been chemically unaltered since the earliest days of the solar system. The 
sugar compounds in the relic rocks therefore indicate that simple sugars and 
related compounds "were present on the early Earth, and, at the least, 
available for incorporation into the first forms of life," the researchers note.

 Some of these compounds might even predate the solar system, originating in 
the interstellar cloud of gas and dust that gave birth to the sun. Last year, 
scientists reported that they had found a simple sugar in a star-forming cloud 
26,000 light-years from Earth (SN: 6/24/00, p. 405).

 It remains unclear, however, if meteorites, comets, and other leftovers from 
the formation of the solar system seeded the early Earth with substantial 
amounts of sugars or if these and other organics were made on our planet, notes 
Arthur L. Weber of the SETI Institute in Mountain View. Perhaps a combination 
of delivery from space and homegrown biosynthesis sparked terrestrial life, he 
adds.

 Jeffrey L. Bada of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, 
Calif., cautions that sugar molecules are extremely fragile. Any carried to the 
early Earth couldn't have survived the planet's harsh environment. That 
fragility has led some biologists to suggest that RNA and other nucleic acids 
with sugar backbones were not the first biological molecules to form (SN: 
6/3/00, p. 363).

 Weber says he agrees that sugars carried by meteorites wouldn't last long on 
Earth. But he adds that his experiments have convinced him that the energy 
stored and readily released by sugars can rapidly drive the synthesis of amino 
acids as well as peptides, which could have provided life's first chemical 
framework.

 The findings highlight the richness of chemistry in space and on Earth and the 
capability of both places to make molecules vital for life, Bada adds.


