Hormones: Here's the Beef: Science News Online, Jan. 5, 2002

 Hormones: Here's the Beef

 Environmental concerns reemerge over steroids given to livestock

 Janet Raloff

 Each year, U.S. farmers raise some 36 million beef cattle. Farmers fatten up 
two-thirds of these animals by using hormones.

 Many cattle are fed the same muscle-building androgens-usually testosterone 
surrogates-that some athletes consume. Other animals receive estrogens, the 
primary female sex hormones, or progestins, semiandrogenic agents that shut 
down a female's estrus cycle. Progestins fuel meat-building by freeing up 
resources that would have gone into the reproductive cycle.

 While federal law prohibits people from self-medicating with most steroids, 
administering these drugs to U.S. cattle is not only permissible but de rigueur.

 So far, almost all concern about this practice has focused on whether trace 
residues of these hormones in the meat have human-health consequences. But 
there's another way that these powerful agents can find their way into people 
and other animals. A substantial portion of the hormones literally passes 
through the cattle into their feces and ends up in the environment, where it 
can get into other food and drinking water.

 Some scientists say that it's time to better manage livestock's hormone-laced 
waste stream, which has flowed unabated in North America for decades.

 Cancer threat

 As much as anyone, John A. McLachlan knows what's been happening. He first 
became interested in livestock hormones in the early 1970s, when he learned 
that farmers were giving the synthetic hormone diethylstilbestrol (DES) to 
chickens and cattle. This synthetic estrogen chemically castrates male animals, 
enabling them to grow faster. At the time, McLachlan's own studies at the 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) used animal models 
to investigate why DES fostered the development of cancer in daughters of women 
treated to avoid miscarriages.

 While McLachlan wasn't worried about any cancer threat that DES might pose to 
animals destined for the slaughterhouse, he recalls being very concerned that 
the animals' excretions were releasing "something like 13 tons of DES a year 
into the environment." He and others began fearing that the hormones might pose 
chronic risks to wildlife and people.

 Although the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) outlawed veterinary use of DES 
by the mid-1970s, the provision of other hormones to livestock continued to 
bother McLachlan. So, he convened a 1980 symposium to explore this and related 
issues.

 For the meeting, he coauthored a paper with the late David P. Rall, then 
director of NIEHS. "We were prescient," McLachlan now says. He and Rall 
reasoned that with all the steroid hormones being prescribed not only to 
livestock but also to people-such as to women for birth control or 
postmenopausal therapy-excretions of these drugs must be substantial. The 
economic incentive for farmers to use the hormones-it can amount to a 40-fold 
return on their investment-is compelling (see "The Financial Lure of 
Hormones,"below) and will probably fuel the practice for some time.

"We said we wouldn't be surprised if significant amounts of pharmaceutical 
[including veterinary] estrogens end up in water," remembers McLachlan, now 
director of the Center for Bioenvironmental Research, which is administered 
jointly by Tulane and Xavier Universities, both in New Orleans. Recent data 
have confirmed that human hormonal drugs do taint rivers and streams-sometimes 
in amounts that adversely affect fish (SN: 6/17/00, p. 388: ).

 Soon after the 1980 meeting, interest in the environmental fate of livestock 
hormones faded as researchers got caught up in the discovery that pesticides 
and other industrial chemicals could mimic and disrupt normal hormone and 
endocrine action in people and other animals (SN: 7/3/93, p. 10).

 Indeed, although he is a biologist specializing in reproduction and 
hormonelike substances, Bernard Jegou notes that until 3 years ago, he had 
never heard people discuss excreted livestock hormones.

"Considering that the weakest of these [steroid] growth promoters is probably 
100 to 1,000 times stronger in biological activity than the most potent of the 
[industrial] endocrine disrupters gaining interest, I figured these drugs could 
pose a real environmental threat," says Jegou, who's the director of research 
at INSERM (the French Institute of Health and Medical Research) in Rennes.

 Shared concerns

 At a May 2000 meeting in Copenhagen, Jegou finally encountered other 
researchers who shared his concerns. A host of speakers at the meeting 
described steroid data that they were beginning to acquire as part of studies 
in the United States and Europe funded under a new European Union (EU) research 
program.

 Since 1988, concerns about the potential health risks of drug residues has led 
the EU to ban importation of the meat of hormone-treated animals. The United 
States and Canada, which produce such meat, have vigorously fought the ban 
through both punitive tariffs on various imports from Europe and appeals to the 
World Trade Organization. The EU has expressed hope that new research will 
provide scientific grounds to rebut these challenges to its ban.

 In one of the EU-funded studies, research teams led by Louis J. Guillette Jr. 
of the University of Florida and Ana M. Soto of Tufts University School of 
Medicine in Boston collaboratively investigated the environmental fate of 
hormones running off feedlots in Nebraska.

 Soto compared the hormonal activity of water sites downstream of feedlots with 
that of water collected upstream. In her tests, she added water samples to 
cells that react in various ways to steroids. In one assay, estrogen turns on 
cell growth; in another, androgens inhibit cell growth.

 At the Copenhagen meeting, Soto reported finding that concentrations of 
estrogenic pollutants at two of the downstream sites were sometimes almost 
double those at the upstream site. And water from all three downstream sites 
was significantly more androgenic than the samples collected upstream. One 
downstream sample exhibited nearly four times the androgenicity of the upstream 
water.

 Toxicologist L. Earl Gray Jr. with the Environmental Protection Agency in 
Research Triangle Park, N.C., has also analyzed water from those Nebraska 
sites. He uses a different assay for androgenicity, but like Soto, he finds 
evidence of masculinizing steroids.

 The steroids may not be just sitting benignly in the water. In a report that 
he has just sent to the EU, Guillette reports adverse hormonal changes in 
fathead minnows.

 Males just downstream of the feedlots "had a significantly reduced testis 
size"-which, he says, appears to explain why they also produced less 
testosterone than males upstream. He also found that the heads of these fathead 
minnows weren't all that fat-which also makes sense, he notes, since 
testosterone helps determine skull size.

 What appears to be happening, he says, is that the waterborne androgens 
provide some signal that tells the males' bodies to produce less testosterone. 
In females, the researchers observed a significant increase in the ratio of 
androgenic to estrogenic hormone concentrations in blood. The biological 
significance remains unknown.

 These observations indicate that wild fish "are being nailed by polluting 
hormones," Guillette told Science News-with males becoming somewhat feminized 
and females somewhat masculinized.

 He says that he'd wanted to compare feedlots that use hormones and those that 
don't, but he couldn't find any operations that don't take advantage of the 
drugs. Moreover, because Soto has not yet identified the particular steroids in 
down-stream waters, Guillette notes, "we can't rule out that these effects are 
due to natural androgens and estrogens in manure." Even untreated cattle, 
horses, and chickens excrete natural estrogens, testosterone, and other 
steroids (SN: 11/3/01, p. 285: Available to subscribers at ).

 However, Guillette adds, when one considers new German data on how long 
steroidal growth-promoting drugs can persist in the environment, "it's highly 
likely that what we're seeing in these wild fish is a pharmaceutical effect" 
derived from the farm use of these agents.

 Hormonal Holsteins

 Much of the German data to which Guillette refers appears in the November 2001 
Environmental Health Perspectives. It comes from EU-funded studies at the 
Technical University of Munich in Freising-Weihenstephan.

 Scientists there experimentally treated Holsteins with two growth-promoting 
steroids commonly used at U.S. feedlots. Andreas Daxenberger and his colleagues 
inserted implants of trenbolone acetate-an androgen-into the ears of 41 males 
and females and gave feed laced with melengestrol acetate, a progestin, to 
another 12 females that had never been pregnant. Then, the researchers had the 
dirty work of collecting and analyzing all of the manure that these animals 
produced-some 100 tons-over the next 2 months.

 Their trenbolone data showed that by the end of the study, 10 percent of the 
androgen had passed right through the animals into feces, Daxenberger says. The 
animals shed similar amounts of the progestin feed additive.

 The Munich scientists then looked at how well the steroids survived in manure. 
During storage of the manure, both drugs resisted bacterial breakdown, each 
showing a half-life of some 260 days. Once spread on fields, however, the 
hormones' degradation rate skyrocketed.

 For instance, once liquefied manure was applied to fields, the trenbolone 
disappeared within a little more than a week. The androgen in dried-dung 
fertilizer disappeared in about 2 months. However, Daxenberger notes, what 
share of the drugs' disappearance might be the result of runoff-versus 
microbial breakdown-remains an open question.

 Scientists at two Environmental Protection Agency laboratories have just begun 
investigating what trenbolone-laced runoff might do.

 In castrated male rats, Gray finds, trenbolone stimulates the growth of 
androgen-dependent tissues. However, he says, "it didn't behave exactly like 
testosterone," the primary natural androgen. For instance, while trenbolone 
stimulated muscle development, it had relatively little impact on prostate 
growth.

 He says the unexpected differences "mean that we can't predict exactly what 
the drug would do in [wildlife]-especially during their development." Gray 
reported his findings in November 2001 at the annual meeting in Baltimore of 
the Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry.

 At that meeting, Gerald T. Ankley of EPA's lab in Duluth, Minn., described 
preliminary data on fish exposed to trenbolone for 21 days in the lab. The most 
visible change, he noted, was the development of head bumps, known as 
tubercles, on female fathead minnows. These bumps ordinarily show up only on 
breeding males. The exposed females also produced fewer eggs than unexposed 
females do. His lab is now looking for more subtle changes.

 Even the excretion of natural steroids by livestock that are raised without 
artificial hormones can have negative impacts on aquatic animals, observes Eva 
Oberdirster of Southern Methodist University in Dallas. For example, while at 
Clemson (S.C.) University, she and her colleagues analyzed field runoff of 
estrogen-laced manure from a small herd of pregnant and lactating cows that had 
not received any hormones. Samples of the runoff boosted blood concentrations 
of the egg-yolk protein vitellogenin in female turtles at nearby ponds.

 Inducing these turtles to become "superfemales" could prove harmful, she 
worries, if they divert unhealthy amounts of energy into egg production.

 One of Oberdirster's students, Lisa K. Irwin, found that the ponds' enrichment 
with bovine estrogen also prompted juvenile sunfish to make egg-yolk 
protein-even though these males and females were all well below an age when 
even females normally do so.

 Useful studies

 With a European ban on the use of steroid drugs in livestock, why does the EU 
fund studies on environmental impacts of such use? One answer comes from data 
amassed by Rainer Stephany of the National Institute of Public Health and the 
Environment in Bilthoven, the Netherlands.

 Though Europe's beef industry maintains that no steroids are used, Stephany 
says that his lab and others have demonstrated by analyzing meat samples that 
the continent hosts an "illegal-black market-use of growth promoters."

 A "defensible overall estimate for the use of these compounds in the European 
Union, based on results from annual regulatory residue-testing programs, could 
be in the range of 5 to 15 percent" of beef cattle, he reported in the 
proceedings of the Copenhagen conference, published last summer as a special, 
571-page issue of APMIS (formerly Acta Pathologica, Microbiologica et 
Immunologica Scandinavica).

 Moreover, he notes, because all such drug treatment in Europe is illegal, 
illicit users tend to employ whatever is available and affordable. Residues of 
at least 35 such drugs have been found in meat samples. This complicates 
screening, Stephany observes, since an investigator never knows quite what to 
look for and each assay can cost as much as a cow's entire carcass is worth. 
This situation contrasts sharply with that in the United States, where drug 
residues in meat invariably consist of one or more of only six FDA-approved 
growth promoters, he says.

 Though the EU is clearly concerned about the impacts of livestock steroids, 
what about U.S. regulators? At the Copenhagen meeting, Stephen F. Sundlof, 
director of FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine in Rockville, Md., noted that 
although "it is my role to regulate these substances . . . I was only made 
aware at this workshop that we may be having some environmental issues to 
consider."

 That was nearly 2 years ago. In the interim, Soto and Guillette have briefed 
Sundlof on their studies. Sundlof has also learned of the German findings. From 
these, he now concludes that the environmental fate of livestock-steroid use 
"is something that we [at FDA] are definitely concerned about."

"My sense," he told Science News, "is that right now [FDA is] going to be 
looking into the whole issue of pharmaceuticals getting into water-and that's 
not just steroids, but it's also antibiotics and some other potent chemicals."

 If soon-to-be-published analyses of stream-sampling data by the U.S. 
Geological Survey confirm that livestock drugs are getting into the 
environment, Sundlof says, new regulations may be called for. He doesn't 
envision a phase-out of livestock steroids, but he says that farmers might be 
asked to assume greater diligence in managing the animals' wastes.

 For now, he cautions, plenty of unanswered questions remain about whether and 
how much livestock wastes contribute to pharmaceutical pollution in U.S. waters 
(SN: 4/1/00, p. 213: ).

 Indeed, notes Rigshospitalet endocrinologist Niels Skakkabak, an organizer of 
the Copenhagen meeting, when it comes to the environmental fate of livestock 
steroids, "the most frightening thing is that we still know so little."

 The Financial Lure of Hormones

 Each year, U.S. farmers send 30 million head of cattle to feedlots. This is 
where animals get beefed up on high-protein chow. To enhance the animals' 
production of muscle-that is, meat-livestock producers treat 80 percent of all 
feedlot cattle with steroid hormones.

 Some cows get steroids in their feed. Others receive one or more hormones via 
a controlled-release implant in their ears. Economically, these hormones offer 
a bonanza.

 It costs farmers about $1 to $3 per head to treat their livestock with either 
procedure, notes animal scientist Michael J. Fields of the University of 
Florida in Gainesville. Treatment increases animals' growth by 20 percent, so 
each cow in a feedlot typically gains 3 pounds per day, he says. Moreover, for 
each pound that it gains, it consumes 15 percent less feed than an untreated 
animal does.

"This feed efficiency works out to a cost savings of about $40 per head-so you 
get more protein at a cheaper cost," Fields says.

 The Center for Veterinary Medicine at the Food and Drug Administration has 
approved the use of these hormones because they tend to leave only small 
concentrations-ones believed to be harmless-in meat. However, the regulators 
haven't considered what effects the hormones might have after being excreted 
into the environment.-J.R.


