Magnetic refrigerator gets down and homey: Science News Online, Jan. 5, 2002

 Magnetic refrigerator gets down and homey

 Peter Weiss

 Household fridges and magnets have long had a surface relationship. Now, they 
may be warming up-actually, cooling off-to a more intimate involvement. 
Researchers have unveiled a new cooling system that chills by means of magnets, 
operates at room temperature, and can fit inside home appliances.

 Magnetic refrigerators and air conditioners promise to be more efficient than 
conventional ones, says Karl A. Gschneidner Jr. of the Department of Energy's 
Ames (Iowa) Laboratory. Also, magnetic appliances would circulate water or 
relatively benign antifreeze fluids instead of ozone-depleting refrigerants, he 
adds.

 Not a new technology, magnetic cooling has been used for more than 50 years by 
cryogenics specialists to chill already ultracold substances to even lower 
temperatures. A few years ago, a team led by Gschneidner and Carl B. Zimm of 
the Astronautics Technology Center in Madison, Wis., demonstrated a magnetic 
refrigeration unit that operated at room temperature (SN: 3/28/98, p. 197: ). 
However, the device required a cryogenically cooled, electrically powered 
superconducting magnet, making it impractical for homes.

 Now, the team has replaced the superconducting magnet with a custom-designed 
permanent magnet, dramatically shrinking the unit's size. The feat required 
overcoming tough engineering obstacles, such as synchronizing movements of 
heat-conducting fluids through portions of a rotating ring, Zimm says. The 
researchers announced their achievement last month.

 Like its superconducting predecessor, the new unit takes advantage of the 
so-called magnetocaloric effect. Conventional refrigerators compress a volatile 
gas and then permit it to rapidly expand, pulling heat from the surroundings. 
In contrast, the magnetic device exploits magnetically induced heating and 
cooling of a powder of the element gadolinium. The powder is stuffed in pockets 
inside the ring that carries it through the field of the permanent magnet.

 If the device does what the scientists claim, "it is a significant 
achievement," says Robert D. Shull of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in Gaithersburg, Md. However, he notes, the design's efficiency 
"ultimately will determine whether this advance will be useful or not."


