Polyhedron Man: Science News Online, Dec. 22, 2001

> Polyhedron Man

 Spreading the word about the wonders of crystal-like geometric forms

 Ivars Peterson

 A towering stack of 642 compact disks could represent an impressive music or 
software collection. The same number of CDs strung together into iridescent 
arcs can be a mathematical sculpture.

 Such a glittering assemblage, more than 6 feet in diameter, hangs in an atrium 
of the computer science building at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Titled "Rainbow Bits," the sculpture slowly rotates in response to air 
currents. Viewers experience a kaleidoscope of fleeting glints, dazzling 
colors, and shifting shadows.

 Created by George W. Hart of Northport, N.Y., the sculpture is more than an 
intriguing visual effect. Its strands of recycled CDs trace the edges of a 
novel mathematical solid-a polyhedron made up of 20 equilateral triangles and 
60 kite-shaped quadrilaterals.

 This particular solid, which Hart dubs a propellorized icosahedron, is one 
example of a newly defined class of polyhedra. "As far as I know, these forms 
have never previously been described by mathematicians," Hart says.

 Hart's Berkeley sculpture is just one of his many creations based on 
polyhedra. Hart has also collaborated with mathematicians and computer 
scientists to define and visualize a variety of new mathematical shapes.

"As a sculptor of constructive geometric forms, I try to create engaging works 
that are enriched by an underlying geometrical depth," Hart says. "I share with 
many artists the idea that a pure form is a worthy object."

 Such forms tantalize artists and scientists alike. "George Hart is a very 
special individual, a gifted mathematician, a creative artist, and an inspiring 
teacher," says Berkeley computer scientist Carlo H. Sequin. "He is among the 
very best of a rather small group of people who successfully integrate art and 
mathematics. Hart's geometrical constructions are intriguing, educational, and 
artistic at the same time."

 Passion for polyhedra

 The sculptor's passion for polyhedra was already evident by the time he had 
reached his teen years. He enjoyed making large structures, including 
mathematical solids, by painstakingly gluing together hundreds upon hundreds of 
toothpicks. Inspired by a book about mathematical models, he later took to 
constructing intricate polyhedra out of paper.

 Hart majored in mathematics, then earned graduate degrees in linguistics and 
in electrical engineering and computer science. He taught computer and 
engineering courses at Columbia University and Hofstra University in Hempstead, 
N.Y. Along the way, he wrote a textbook on multidimensional analysis, a branch 
of mathematics that relates physical measurements to one another. He also 
developed and patented methods for determining the energy consumption of 
individual appliances from measurements of total power used by a household.

 Hart is currently a visiting scholar with the computational geometry group at 
the applied mathematics and statistics department of the State University of 
New York at Stony Brook. He devotes the bulk of his time, however, to his 
varied polyhedral pursuits.

"Polyhedra have an enormous aesthetic appeal," Hart contends. Moreover, "the 
subject is fun and easy to learn on one's own," he notes.

 Since 1996, Hart has been building a remarkable Web site devoted to all things 
polyhedral (). Its enormous catalog of polyhedra now includes many solids never 
previously illustrated in any publication.

 Hart's Web pages "provide important information for my university courses on 
geometric modeling," Sequin says. Furthermore, he adds, "they provide 
inspiration for me as a part-time artist, and they provide sheer visual 
pleasure for geometrically inclined minds."

 Linking polygons

 Polyhedra are made by linking triangles, squares, hexagons, and other polygons 
to form closed, three-dimensional objects. Different rules for linking various 
polygons generate different types of polyhedra.

 The Platonic solids, known to the ancient Greeks, consist entirely of 
identical regular polygons, which are defined as having equal sides and equal 
angles. There are precisely five such objects: the tetrahedron (made up of four 
equilateral triangles), cube (six squares), octahedron (eight equilateral 
triangles), dodecahedron (12 regular pentagons), and icosahedron (20 
equilateral triangles).

 If you relax the conditions for generating the Platonic solids and specify 
that faces must be regular but not necessarily identical polygons, there are 13 
such polyhedra, known as Archimedean solids. One example is the truncated 
icosahedron, familiar as the pattern on a soccer ball, which consists of 12 
pentagons and 20 hexagons.

 Polyhedra also can be constructed from polygons that don't necessarily have 
equal sides and equal angles, and they may be indented or spiky, like 
three-dimensional stars. The great stellated dodecahedron, first described by 
17th-century mathematician Johannes Kepler, is one example of a spiky 
polyhedron. Nonindented polyhedra, such as the Platonic solids, are called 
convex.

 Hart has delved deeply into the history of the discovery and representation of 
polyhedra. During the Renaissance, he notes by way of example, Leonardo da 
Vinci invented a way to show the front and back of a polyhedron without 
confusion by depicting edges as if they were made from wooden laths and leaving 
the polyhedron's faces open.

 Inspired by Leonardo's drawings of wooden models, Hart has crafted his own 
beautiful models of these designs. He has also programmed computers that guide 
stereolithography machines to produce, layer by layer, three-dimensional 
plastic replicas of the models.

 With a vast palette of geometric solids to choose from, Hart has fashioned 
polyhedral models and sculptures from all sorts of materials and objects, 
including Plexiglas, brass, papier-mache, pipe cleaners, pencils, floppy disks, 
toothbrushes, paper clips, and plastic cutlery.

 He "brings the ideal forms of the polyhedra into the material world with wit 
and humor," says computer programmer and artist Bob Brill of Ann Arbor, Mich. 
"The austere beauty of the polyhedra is thus made accessible and familiar."

 New possibilities

 Given the lengthy history associated with polyhedra, it may seem astonishing 
that there are still mathematical discoveries to be made. Hart has proved 
particularly adept at identifying rules and variants that lead to new 
possibilities.

 For example, his discovery of propellorized polyhedra came out of a new 
notation for describing polyhedra, proposed by mathematician John H. Conway of 
Princeton University. In Conway's scheme, a capital letter specifies a "seed" 
polyhedron. For example, the Platonic solids are denoted T, C, O, D, and I. A 
lower-case letter then specifies an operation. The combination tC means 
truncate a cube; that is, cut off the corners of a cube to form a new solid 
with six octagonal and eight triangular faces. Conway's simple notation can be 
used to derive the Archimedean solids and infinitely many other symmetric 
polyhedra.

 In the course of writing a computer program to implement Conway's notation, 
Hart tried to think of a simple operator that wasn't yet included in Conway's 
list. He came up with what he called the propellor [sic] operation: Start with 
a polyhedron, then spread apart the faces and introduce quadrilaterals so that 
each face is surrounded by a ring of these forms.

"The [propellor] operation can be applied to any convex polyhedron and combined 
with other operations to produce a variety of new forms," Hart says. "These 
provide a storehouse of intriguing structures, some of which have inspired 
artworks."

 Hart based his design for "Rainbow Bits" on an icosahedron transformed via his 
propellor operator into a three-dimensional mosaic of 20 equilateral triangles 
and 60 kite-shaped quadrilaterals. The resulting sculpture required one CD at 
each vertex, five CDs along each of the longer edges, and three CDs along each 
of the shorter edges. The positions and angles of slots cut into the CDs 
determined their placement.

"For many visitors, this stunning sculpture is a main attraction of our 
building, particularly when it is hit by rays of sunlight and [sprays] intense 
colored spots over the atrium walls," Sequin says.

 Generating novel forms

 Working with Craig S. Kaplan of the University of Washington in Seattle, Hart 
has recently invented a procedure for generating many polyhedral forms, 
including new types of polyhedra. Dubbed symmetrohedra, these geometric solids 
result from the symmetric placement of regular polygons (see illustration 
below).

 The new technique generates a variety of known polyhedra, including most of 
the Archimedean solids, and infinitely many new ones. One particularly striking 
product is a polyhedron made up of 20 regular nine-sided polygons (called 
enneagons), 12 regular pentagons, and 60 isosceles triangles. "You rarely see 
enneagons in a polyhedron," Hart comments.

 In another recent effort, Hart and computer scientist Douglas Zongker of the 
University of Washington developed a novel method for constructing polyhedra by 
blending together two or more existing polyhedra.

 Hart, Zongker, and Kaplan all described their new visualization methods at a 
meeting that highlighted mathematical connections in art, music, and science, 
held last July at Southwestern College in Winfield, Kan.

 Beauty and joy

 Whether assembling an intricate polyhedral design, leading a model-building 
workshop, or describing his latest ventures, Hart brings an infectious 
enthusiasm to his task. To help spread the word about the beauty and joy of 
polyhedra, he recently coauthored a book on building models using Zome plastic 
components, produced by Zometool of Denver. Embodying mathematical ratios such 
as the golden mean, the system's balls and sticks lend themselves to polyhedron 
building. On another communications front, Hart is now writing a history of 
polyhedral geometry in art.

"The best way to learn about polyhedra is to make your own paper models," Hart 
insists. For those who prefer to skip the spilled glue, misshapen corners, 
ill-fitting edges, and hours of work, Hart's Web site provides interactive, 
three-dimensional virtual models that can be observed from different 
perspectives.

 Brill says about Hart, "His energy, his curiosity, his inventiveness appear to 
be boundless." Those qualities come in handy when exploring the infinite realm 
of polyhedra.


