Vaccine prevents urinary-tract infections: Science News Online, Jan. 5, 2002

 Vaccine prevents urinary-tract infections

 Nathan Seppa

 Infections of the urinary tract that plague many young women may someday be 
avoidable, researchers report. An experimental vaccine designed to repel 10 
common bacteria that cause these problems, also known as bladder infections, 
has cleared a key hurdle by proving safe and effective in a group of women.

 By packaging heat-inactivated versions of the 10 bacteria into a vaginal 
suppository, scientists developed a vaccine that could not only spare women 
these recurring irritations but also prevent the scarring and other damage they 
can cause to the kidneys. The bacterial roster includes six strains of 
Escherichia coli and four other species.

 First developed in an injectable form by the Swiss firm Solco, the 
experimental vaccine is now being produced as a suppository by Cincinnati-based 
Protein Express. To test its safety and potential effectiveness, immunologist 
Walter J. Hopkins and his colleagues at the University of Wisconsin^-Madison 
identified 54 women who had had at least 3 urinary-tract infections-and as many 
as 20-in the previous year.

 The researchers randomly assigned one-third of the women to receive six inert 
suppositories over 14 weeks. Another third of the group was given the same 
number of vaccine suppositories, while the remaining women received first three 
vaccine suppositories and then three placebo suppositories.

 Only 8 of the 18 women getting the full course of vaccine had any 
urinary-tract infection during the 6-month study, compared with 16 of 18 women 
in the placebo group. The women getting a partial dose fended off infections 
while they used the vaccine suppositories, but this protection faded when they 
switched to the placebos. Hopkins presented the findings in Chicago last month 
at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy.

 Because the vaccine directly contacts the lining of the vagina, the 
researchers suggest that it elicits antibodies that target mucosal tissue there 
and repel microbes. The antimicrobial response also may include other immune 
proteins and cells, Hopkins says.

 Preventing urinary-tract infections without resorting to antibiotics would 
represent "a striking advantage" for doctors and patients in fighting this 
condition, says David C. Hooper, a physician at Massachusetts General Hospital 
in Boston. Many bacteria, including those used to make this vaccine, have 
become resistant to certain antibiotics. A reliable vaccine would prevent 
bacteria from infecting a person and simultaneously help public health 
officials by limiting antibiotic use, which can lead to drug resistance, Hooper 
says.

 Hopkins and his colleagues are planning a large, multiclinic trial with 
hundreds of participants. The Food and Drug Administration typically requires 
such studies before it will approve a new drug or vaccine. Hopkins notes that 
the trial probably won't start for a year or more and will take up to 2 years 
to complete.


