Journey through the Universe: Science News Online, Dec. 22, 2001

> Journey through the Universe

 Ron Cowen

 Like many places since Sept. 11, the Smithsonian Institution's National Air 
and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., feels like a different world. Security 
guards wearing latex gloves use batons to comb through handbags, searching for 
suspicious packages or powdery substances.

 In one of the first-floor exhibition halls, it's also a different world, but 
an uplifting one. An ambitious display has replaced a long-time exhibit about 
the nature of stars.

"I was never really thrilled with it," says curator David DeVorkin. "It was OK. 
It told why we go into space, but it was outdated quickly. And it wasn't 
inspirational."

 In developing a new astronomy exhibit for the 4,600-square-foot gallery, 
DeVorkin hit upon a unifying theme: the instruments built to observe the 
cosmos. With the Smithsonian's vast collection of astronomical equipment, both 
old and new, "we can show the real thing," says DeVorkin.

"Unlike most museums that are dedicated to the process of science, we're 
interested in the products, the instruments that form the legacy of the 
discoveries," he adds.

 Although it was a theorist, Copernicus, who made the revolutionary claim in 
the early 1500s that the sun, not Earth, was at the center of the solar system, 
the idea didn't catch on for decades, notes DeVorkin. Only late in the 16th 
century, when the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe developed planet-tracking tools 
and made the critical observations, was Copernicus proved right.

"When you build new tools of perception, you discover new universes," notes 
DeVorkin. "It's always been that way, it's always going to be that way. And it 
also means that there's no definitive answers [to the nature of the universe].

"So, what I hope is that people who come through, rather than accumulating book 
knowledge by memorizing tables and facts, will get an impression of what it was 
like to observe the heavens [at a particular moment in history], what the 
problems were facing the observers, and how [they went] from asking one set of 
questions about the universe to the next."

 Here's a sampling of the exhibit, which opened in September and will remain 
permanently at the Air and Space Museum:

 Looking with the naked eye

 Before 1609, when Galileo began using a brand new invention called the 
telescope, humankind's perception of the cosmos was limited to what could be 
seen with the naked eye. It was natural to perceive Earth as the center of the 
universe, with a transparent, starry sphere rotating around it.

 The earliest astronomers used several tools to chart the position of objects 
in the sky and to predict where the sun, moon, and certain stars would move. 
With the heavens serving as both timekeeper and navigational aid, such 
knowledge was of much more than scholarly interest.

 One measuring device, the astrolabe, had two parts. Its back contained a 
moveable sighting arm and a scale for measuring altitude, while the front had a 
flattened map of the heavens that helped to calculate the future position of 
objects.

 An astrolabe featured in the exhibit dates from A.D. 1090 and has several 
interchangeable plates, each engraved with the celestial coordinates for a 
different latitude. Pointers on the top plate indicate the locations of 22 
bright stars. Like a modern star-finder chart, the top plate rotates to show 
where these stars would lie at different times of the year.

 With this device, astronomers and others could predict when the sun and 
certain bright stars would rise or set on any given day.

 As measuring devices became more and more precise, old notions about the 
universe began to crumble. For example, Brahe's measurements-even though they 
were made with the naked eye-were fine enough to reveal that comets move 
through the same region of space as the planets. That destroyed the idea that 
planets occupied a special place that no other object could penetrate.

 A telescopic view

 Soon after Brahe's death, Galileo introduced the telescope to astronomy, 
leaving behind naked-eye observations. In time, investigators built bigger and 
better telescopes. A 20-foot telescope and mirror, dating from 1783, marked the 
birth of modern cosmology, says DeVorkin. "It's the most significant single 
piece of astronomical equipment we have in here that's complete," he notes.

 Built by English astronomer William Herschel, the telescope enabled him to 
peer deeper into space than anyone had before. Using the data to develop 
theories about the size and structure of the universe, Hershel was the first 
observational cosmologist.

"At the time, people were only looking at the dynamics of the solar system, but 
Herschel had another agenda," says DeVorkin. "He wanted to know what the rest 
of the universe was like."

 Herschel's telescope consisted of a single mirror, mounted at the bottom of 
the instrument's long, wooden tube, that bounced light up to an eyepiece on the 
opposite end. He peered into the eyepiece from a platform that could be raised 
or lowered. "It almost looked like he was speaking into a trashcan," says 
DeVorkin.

 With the telescope sitting just outside his house near Windsor, Herschel would 
determine the positions of stars and call out the data to his sister Caroline, 
who sat by an open window and diligently recorded them.

 During Herschel's time, astronomers considered the Milky Way to be just a band 
of light-formed by faint stars and dust-that stretched across the sky. 
Observing as much of the heavens as he could see from England, Herschel 
produced a map of the Milky Way.

 Carefully tracking stars for months to years, he discovered double stars-two 
stars that orbit each other, locked in a gravitational embrace. The finding 
demonstrated that the pairs of stars move in accordance with Newton's law of 
gravitation, "extending [the law] farther into space than ever before," notes 
DeVorkin.

 Mysterious smudges of light, known as nebulas, held a particular fascination 
for Herschel. He wondered if they were part of the Milky Way band, perhaps 
solar systems in the making, or objects far beyond the Milky Way band. Before 
Herschel's work, only about 100 of these fuzzy patches of light were known; he 
found another 2,400. He guessed the nebulas might be clouds of material that 
would condense to form stars or were themselves clumps of stars.

 In 1833, a few years after William Herschel died, his son John took the 
telescope to South Africa. There he completed his father's work by mapping the 
distribution of stars and nebula over the Southern Hemisphere.

 But it would take several decades, and a more powerful telescope, to determine 
that the nebulas are spiral shaped, and more than a century to figure out that 
they reside far beyond the Milky Way.

 The expanding universe 

 Seated in the observing cage of the 100-inch Hooker telescope at Mount Wilson 
Observatory in Pasadena, Calif., Edwin Hubble was the first to realize just how 
expansive the universe is.

 In 1923, while observing the Andromeda nebula, he found that it contained a 
Cepheid variable, a star that regularly varies in brightness. Hubble and his 
colleagues were elated by the finding because they knew it would enable them to 
accurately measure the distance to Andromeda.

 How so? Earlier in the century, another American astronomer, Henrietta Swan 
Leavitt of the Harvard College Observatory, had shown that the brighter the 
Cepheid, the longer its period of pulsation. By measuring the duration of its 
pulse cycle, researchers could determine the star's true brightness, which is 
akin to determining the wattage of a light bulb. Comparing a Cepheid's true 
brightness with its dim brightness in the sky, they could then find how far 
away the star must lie.

 By studying the Cepheid in Andromeda, Hubble found that the nebula was so 
distant that it must lie outside our Milky Way. That suggested that Andromeda, 
as well as other spiral nebula, were themselves galaxies. The Milky Way is not 
alone, he realized, but one of countless galaxies in a cosmos far vaster than 
most astronomers had ever imagined.

 As a cosmic yardstick for measuring the distances to galaxies, Cepheids have 
proven invaluable. Launched in 1989, the Hubble Space Telescope, which was 
named in honor of Edwin Hubble, has detected Cepheids farther away than ever 
before and has provided better estimates of galaxy distances and the age of the 
universe.

 In 1929, Hubble made a second revolutionary finding, this time with the help 
of the relatively new science of spectroscopy. Just as motion changes the pitch 
of a sound wave, it can change the length of a light wave. Light emitted by an 
object moving away from Earth appears to have its wavelengths stretched, or 
lengthened, as indicated by its spectrum. The faster the object moves the 
greater the shift.

 By examining the shifts in spectra from a great many galaxies, Hubble 
discovered that galaxies were fleeing from each other, with the farthest ones 
receding the most rapidly. Now known as Hubble's law, this finding provided the 
first observational evidence that the universe isn't static, but instead 
expands over time.

 Pigeons and the Big Bang

 In the late 1940s, the Russian emigre George Gamow and two younger physicists 
developed a theory about the origin of the chemical elements and how the 
universe began. Gamow and his colleagues, Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman, 
calculated that there should be some latent heat left over from the explosive 
event, now known as the Big Bang, that sparked the expanding universe and 
forged several of the lightest elements.

 The team predicted that a sensitive enough telescope should be able to detect 
that relic heat, which the researchers calculated to have a temperature of 
about 5 kelvins.

 Gamow adopted the word ylem (pronounced eye-lem), an ancient word meaning 
primordial substance, for the stuff from which the universe was made. Known for 
his sense of humor, Gamow slapped a new label on a bottle of Cointreau liqueur, 
rechristening it ylem.

 By the 1960s, most researchers had forgotten about Gamow's prediction that a 
tiny amount of heat left over from the Big Bang should still be aglow in the 
universe today. But Robert Dicke of Princeton University and his colleagues 
arrived at a similar conclusion and in the early 1960s began searching for the 
background glow using a radio-wave detector mounted on the roof of a Princeton 
building.

 At about the same time, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson of Bell Laboratories in 
Holmdel, N.J., were cataloguing all known sources of radio emissions from space 
in an effort to improve satellite communications. They soon encountered a 
puzzle, however. Some radio static persisted no matter where in the sky they 
pointed their radio antenna, which was shaped like a large horn. Pigeons had 
taken to roosting in the antenna, and Penzias and Wilson thought that heat from 
the bird droppings might be the source of the static. Trapping the pigeons 
didn't solve the problem, however.

 Ultimately, the researchers were forced to conclude that a faint microwave 
hiss bathed the entire sky. By accident, Penzias and Wilson had discovered the 
cosmic microwave background-the Big Bang's latent heat. The energy of the 
radiation is equivalent to that emitted by a material at about 3 kelvins.

"Boys, we've been scooped!" said Dicke when he heard the news.

 For their landmark finding, Penzias and Wilson won a Nobel Prize in Physics. 
The discovery, which helped to confirm the Big Bang model, spurred a new era in 
which astronomers have probed the microwave sky in finer and finer detail in 
their effort to understand the origin of the universe.

 The digital era

 The proliferation of tools for observing the heavens has itself reached 
astronomical proportions. Various telescopes, spectrometers, particle 
detectors, and other gadgetry-some earthbound and some on spacecraft-can 
measure virtually any wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation and most of 
the other physical or chemical phenomena the cosmos can muster. 
Computer-controlled telescopes automatically record terabytes of data from the 
sky.

 Some of the newest instruments are revealing a cosmic puzzle that astronomers 
are still trying to comprehend: Not only is the universe expanding, as Hubble 
showed in the 1920s, but it's doing so at an ever-faster rate. As Smithsonian 
curator DeVorkin likes to remind visitors, every instrument enlarges our view 
of the universe.


