Biological Dark Matter: Science News Online, Jan. 12, 2002

 Biological Dark Matter

 Newfound RNA suggests a hidden complexity inside cells

 John Travis

 It started with worms that just would not grow up. In the early 1990s, Victor 
Ambros and his colleagues were conducting a gene hunt. In particular, they were 
searching for the gene that was mutated in a perplexing strain of 
Caenorhabditis elegans, the small nematode whose development many biologists 
study.

 This genetic change Ambros hunted had apparently disrupted the worms' 
developmental timing.

 In normal strains, worms pass through four larval stages as they mature into 
fertile adults. But members of the mutant strain get stuck at the first stage. 
They would molt, but instead of moving on to the second larval stage, they 
simply repeated the first stage. The larvae kept growing larger but never 
became full-fledged adults.

 Ambros' team painstakingly homed in on the gene responsible by adding pieces 
of DNA from normal C. elegans back into the mutant worms. If a DNA sequence 
restored full development, it presumably harbored a working copy of the gene 
that's defective in the mutants, reasoned the investigators. In 1993 at 
Dartmouth Medical School in Hanover, N.H., the hard work of Ambros and his 
colleagues paid off with the elusive gene's discovery.

 It was a "heroic detective story," says Sean Eddy of the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute at Washington University in St. Louis.

 The story had a surprise ending, too. Unlike most genes, the one identified by 
Ambros' group doesn't encode a protein. It spawns a small molecule of RNA-a 
chemical relative of DNA-that somehow turns off other genes that play a role in 
worm development.

 This odd finding stood alone until a few years ago, when a team led by Gary 
Ruvkun of the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston found a gene that 
controls C. elegans' transition from the fourth larval stage to adulthood. This 
gene also creates RNA that regulates the expression of worm genes.

 Although Ambros hadn't found genes in other organisms similar to the one he'd 
identified in C. elegans, Ruvkun and his colleagues discovered that many 
animals have versions of this second RNA-encoding worm gene. His team found 
such genes in flies, mollusks, fish, and even people. The researchers 
speculated that the RNA produced by the gene is a universal regulator of animal 
development, perhaps an important controller of a caterpillar's metamorphosis 
into a butterfly and a tadpole's into a frog.

 Inspired by such research, biologists have now begun to systematically look 
for so-called RNA genes." DNA whose final product is RNA instead of protein. 
Several groups, including one led by Eddy, recently surveyed the DNA of the 
bacterium Escherichia coli and uncovered dozens of such genes. Just a few 
months ago, Ambros' team and two other research groups reported that worms, 
flies, and people contain dozens of previously undetected genes that spawn RNA 
instead of protein.

 These investigators argue that the many intensive searches for protein-coding 
genes have ignored or missed genes for small, stable RNA molecules that have 
cellular functions. The RNA genes found so far are "just the tip of a huge 
iceberg," says Ruvkun.

 The biologist goes as far as to compare the RNA-gene findings to a humbling 
discovery on a much larger scale. Astronomers studying the effects of gravity 
on galaxies found to their astonishment that the universe contains large 
quantities of so-called dark matter, mass that still eludes observation. In the 
Oct. 26, 2001 Science, Ruvkun speculates that "the number of genes in the tiny 
RNA world may turn out to be very large, numbering in the hundreds or even 
thousands in each genome. Tiny RNA genes may be the biological equivalent of 
dark matter-all around us but almost escaping detection."

 RNA genes have already attracted commercial interest: A biotech firm is 
testing whether some of the newfound bacterial RNAs play a role during 
infection and might therefore be targets for new antibiotics. If that's not 
provocative enough, some scientists suggest that RNA regulation of gene 
activity and other cellular processes could explain the diversity and 
complexity of plants and animals as compared with bacteria.

 In the shadow

 RNA has long stood in the shadow of DNA. Both chemicals consist of molecules 
called nucleotides. In DNA, two strands of nucleotides pair up to form the 
double-helix structure discovered by biologists James Watson and Francis Crick. 
In contrast, RNA usually consists of a single strand of nucleotides, although 
that strand can sometimes fold back on itself and create double-stranded 
regions.

 The "central dogma of genetics," a phrase coined by Crick, argues that 
information in a cell flows from DNA to RNA to protein. A cell reads the 
information encoded in a gene's DNA and makes a strand of RNA. This messenger 
RNA, or mRNA, travels through a cell to sites of protein synthesis called 
ribosomes. These microscopic factories then read the mRNA to determine what 
amino acids to string together into a protein.

 Yet biologists have long known that RNA does more in a cell than convey 
protein recipes. For example, RNA strands are important parts of those 
protein-making ribosomes (SN: 8/12/00, p. 100: ). In fact, some researchers 
speculate that life began solely with RNA molecules, an idea known as the 
RNA-world theory (SN: 4/7/01, p. 212: ).

 Unlike the RNA genes recently identified by Amros and his colleagues, the 
genes for the RNA in ribosomes were discovered several decades ago. After all, 
a cell produces 10 millions copies of every ribosomal RNA. Moreover, each of 
these strands is at least 13,000 nucleotides long-large enough for relatively 
straightforward detection in the laboratory.

 To unearth much smaller RNAs, such as the 22-nucleotide C. elegans strand that 
Ambros initially identified, biologists have had to develop new search methods. 
To pick out traditional genes, scientists had developed computer programs that 
scan DNA sequences for distinctive protein-coding sequences. Those programs, 
however, are ineffective at finding genes for RNAs.

"Everything is biased towards proteins," says Stephen R. Holbrook of Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory in California.

 He and his colleagues are trying to fix that. They recently tested a computer 
program that they call RNAGENiE on the genome of E. coli. Armed with knowledge 
about most of the bacterium's known RNA genes and rules regarding RNA 
structure, the program spotted other previously recognized RNA genes, 
Holbrook's team reports in the Oct. 1, 2001 Nucleic Acids Research. RNAGENiE 
also identified several hundred potential RNA genes that researchers knew 
nothing about.

 These genes "are an undiscovered kingdom that's slowly revealing itself," says 
Holbrook. His team plans to further refine RNAGENiE so that it can inspect the 
more complex genomes of yeast, plants, and animals.

 What's important

 Several research groups have scanned the E. coli genome using other methods. 
One of the most powerful is known as comparative genomics. Its success rests on 
the idea that evolution preserves what's important. In other words, if two or 
more species share an identical stretch of DNA, it probably does something 
important. Otherwise, over time, mutations would scramble the sequences in each 
species.

 Biologists have used this principle to identify possible protein-coding genes, 
but it also works for RNA genes. A team headed by Gisela Storz and Susan 
Gottesman of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., recently 
demonstrated that approach in E. coli. By comparing several of the bacterium's 
intergenic regions-parts of the genome empty of protein-coding genes-with those 
of some closely related bacteria, the researchers identified 59 potential RNA 
genes. They then verified that 17 of the genes in the bacteria produce RNA 
strands ranging in length from 45 to 320 nucleotides.

 Like several of E. coli's known RNAs that regulate gene activity, many of the 
new RNAs bind to a protein called Hfq, the researchers reported in the July 1, 
2001, Genes and Development. To Gottesman, that's evidence that the newfound 
RNAs also influence gene activity in the bacterium.

"There's a level of RNA regulation that we didn't realize was there," she says. 
"It was just invisible."

 In the Sept. 4, 2001 Current Biology, Eddy and his colleagues described a 
similar comparative-genome scan. Matching E. coli's DNA against that of four 
other bacteria, the researchers identified 275 potential RNA genes. To test the 
predictions, the biologists followed up on 49 of the candidate genes and 
determined that at least 11 of them produced RNAs of unknown function.

 From the overlap seen in these and various other groups' results, Eddy 
estimates that E. coli has 50 to 200 RNA genes. Its protein-coding genes number 
about 4,000, he notes.

 If biologists are going to exploit the newfound RNAs as targets for novel 
antibiotics, they need to figure out the function of each one. That assignment 
interests Ibis Therapeutics of Carlsbad, Calif. Funded in part by the 
Department of Defense, which is looking for new ways to combat biological 
warfare, this biotech firm develops small molecules that can dock inside RNA 
molecules and interfere with their function.

 The newly discovered bacterial RNAs represent potential targets for Ibis' 
drugs, says David Ecker, the company's president. Ibis has begun to create 
bacteria with mutations in their RNA genes and examine whether the mutant 
microbes infect mice as effectively as the unaltered germs. If a gene mutation 
reduces a bacterium's capability to produce illness, the gene's RNA product 
could provide a good target for a drug, explains Ecker.

 New RNA genes

 The hunt for new RNA genes also goes on beyond the world of microbes. 
According to a preliminary analysis by Eddy's team, biologists should soon be 
able to expose most human RNA genes by comparing the human genome to the mouse 
genome.

 Several research groups have already turned up one new family of RNA genes in 
flies, worms, and people. In the Oct. 26, 2001 Science, three teams describe 
dozens of RNA genes similar to the two initially identified in C. elegans. 
Researchers have dubbed the RNAs produced by these genes as microRNAs.

 Thomas Tuschl of the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in 
Gottingen, Germany, and his colleagues unearthed new genes by sifting through 
all the RNA produced in fruit fly cells and human-cancer cells. They developed 
techniques to pick out RNAs about 24 nucleotides long, ones that normally would 
get discarded in experiments because of their small size. Tuschl's team 
identified 16 novel microRNAs in fruit fly embryos and 21 in human cancer cells.

 Working with C. elegans, David P. Bartel of the Whitehead Institute for 
Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., and his colleagues followed a similar 
strategy. They sorted through the worm's RNA for molecules 21 to 25 nucleotides 
in size and identified 55 microRNA genes. Many of these, the researchers found, 
vary in activity during the worm's development.

 Ambros and his Dartmouth colleague Rosalind C. Lee also found microRNA genes 
by examining novel small RNAs made by C. elegans. Moreover, they compared the 
worm's genome to that of a closely related nematode. All told, the two 
researchers discovered 15 new genes encoding microRNAs. At least 10 of those 
vary in abundance during larval development, suggesting that they too may 
regulate the timing of development.

 All three groups discovered that mammals, insects, and worms share some of the 
same RNA genes. One intriguing gene is active in human-heart tissue and in the 
developing mouse embryo.

 Bartel suspects that there may be as many as 200 microRNA genes in C. elegans, 
which would represent about 1 percent of its genes. He also points out that 
there may be many other classes of RNA genes that investigators have yet to 
uncover.

 Overlooked culprit

 How important are all these newfound RNAs and their genes to human development 
and health? That won't be clear until scientists reveal the functions of the 
RNA. Eddy speculates that scientists may have searched in vain for genes 
causing some diseases because they considered only protein-coding genes when an 
overlooked small RNA gene is the culprit.

 RNA genes may be even more important than Eddy suggests, according to John 
Mattick of the University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia. In a radical 
theory developed with University of Queensland physicist Michael J. Gagen, the 
geneticist proposes that small RNAs account for the diversity and complexity of 
eukaryotes-the animals, plants, and other organisms whose cells keep their DNA 
in a pouch known as the nucleus.

 Mattick notes that biologists have been surprised to find that the number of 
protein-coding genes in an organism doesn't seem to reflect its complexity. 
Worms and flies, for example, have roughly the same number of such genes, which 
is only about twice the number counted in yeast and some bacteria. Moreover, 
people may have only twice as many protein-coding genes as flies and insects do 
and the same number that some fish have.

 Perhaps the complexity of higher organisms lies in RNAs, not proteins, Mattick 
and Gagen speculate. They note that in a traditional gene, not all the DNA 
encodes the protein. When a cell reads a gene's DNA sequence to create 
messenger RNA, it initially creates a longer-than-needed strand of RNA. To then 
finalize the mature messenger RNA, enzymes cut out segments.

 Mattick contends that these excised pieces of RNA, as well as the other RNAs 
formed by the genes turning up in current studies, form a vast molecular 
network that regulates a cell's overall activity. According to his 
calculations, about 98 percent of the RNA produced in a eukaryotic cell don't 
encode a protein.

"This will be the big story in genomics over the next few years," Mattick 
predicts. "You would have to be blind not to see that noncoding RNAs are a 
vastly unexplored world."


