Nicotine metabolism shows ethnic bias: Science News Online, Jan. 19, 2002

 Nicotine metabolism shows ethnic bias

 Nathan Seppa

 A comparison of Latino, white, and Chinese-American smokers suggests that 
people of East Asian descent are apt to clear nicotine from their blood more 
gradually than the other smokers do, thereby staving off a craving for the next 
cigarette.

 Researchers recruited 131 smokers-37 Chinese-Americans, 40 Latinos, and 54 
whites-for the analysis. Each volunteer gave a blood sample before receiving an 
intravenous infusion of nicotine. The substance was labeled with deuterium 
atoms, a heavy form of hydrogen, to make it detectable in the blood. After the 
injection, the participants provided 10 blood samples at specific intervals 
over the next 8 hours, then one per day for 4 days.

 Nicotine is cleared from the blood by liver enzymes that convert it to its 
metabolite cotinine. Blood analysis showed that it took an average of 152 
minutes for half the injected nicotine to degrade in the blood of the 
Chinese-Americans in this study. Nicotine's half-life in whites and Latinos was 
134 and 122 minutes, respectively. Slow metabolism of nicotine draws out its 
effects, says Neal L. Benowitz, a clinical pharmacologist at the University of 
California, San Francisco. He and his colleagues report their work in the Jan. 
16 Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

 In a second test, the researchers measured the smokers' blood concentrations 
of cotinine. Knowing how fast each volunteer converted nicotine to cotinine, 
the team could estimate how much nicotine had been inhaled in a given period 
and then divide that figure by how many cigarettes each person had smoked in 
that time-arriving at an amount of nicotine absorbed per cigarette. The 
calculations showed that Chinese-Americans took in less nicotine from each 
cigarette than whites or Latinos. This indicates the Chinese-Americans smoke 
less intensely, Benowitz says.

"The technique the researchers use for looking at [nicotine] metabolism is 
superb," says Rachel F. Tyndale, a pharmacogeneticist at the University of 
Toronto. The work is the first to show explicitly that people of Asian descent 
dispose of nicotine more slowly than others do and therefore need to smoke less 
to avoid withdrawal symptoms, she says.

 The biological basis for the differences in nicotine metabolism could include 
variations in a gene that encodes an enzyme called CYP2A6, which converts 
nicotine into cotinine, Benowitz says. CYP2A6 is also one of the enzymes that 
activate cancer-causing agents called nitrosamines that are found in tobacco 
smoke.

 Smokers who have two fully functional copies of the CYP2A6 gene smoke 7 to 10 
more cigarettes per day than smokers who have only one, Tyndale and her 
colleagues previously reported. Other research indicates that some Asians 
harbor more enzyme-slowing variations in the CYP2A6 gene than whites do, which 
could be part of the reason that Asians smoke less and get less lung cancer, 
Benowitz suggests. But he expects that variations in CYP2A6 will ultimately 
explain only a portion of smoking behavior.

 Psychologist Ovide F. Pomerleau of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor 
agrees. What lies ahead, he says, "is genetic archaeology," as scientists dig 
for other influential genes.


