Exploring the Red Planet: Science News Online, Jan. 19, 2002

 Exploring the Red Planet

 Mars Odyssey set to begin its mission

 Ron Cowen

 Last week, flight controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, 
Calif., breathed a collective sigh of relief. Although in 1999 they had lost 
the last two spacecraft that journeyed to Mars, their current mission to the 
Red Planet had completed a risky maneuver, using the friction of the Martian 
atmosphere to begin settling into its designated orbit 400 kilometers above the 
surface. Early next month, if all continues according to plan, the Mars Odyssey 
craft will begin a 2-year exploration of the composition of the Martian 
surface, hunt for near-surface deposits of water, and examine the planet's 
radiation background.

 Odyssey embarks on its mission at a time when questions about past and present 
conditions on the planet, including its water content and ability to harbor 
life, seem more puzzling than ever. "We're in state of maximal confusion," says 
planetary geologist David A. Paige of the University of California, Los Angeles.

 Channels or canals?

 People have associated Mars with water ever since Italian astronomer Giovanni 
Schiaperelli peered through a telescope in 1887 and saw a pattern of linear 
markings on the Martian surface. He called them canali, the Italian word for 
channels, but the word was mistakenly translated into English as canals.

 The features Schiaperelli saw turned out to be artifacts of his telescope. But 
beginning in the 1970s, Mariner 9 and several later NASA missions returned 
images that revived watery notions about the Red Planet. Some pictures show 
sinuous networks of valleys that resemble dry riverbeds. Other images reveal 
features that seem to have been carved into the Martian landscape by a 
catastrophic outpouring of water. Those data convinced most planetary 
scientists that Mars was once wetter and therefore warmer than it is now. Many 
suspect that oceans flooded some regions and that rivers coursed through 
others. All of which supports the notion that life may once have flourished on 
the Red Planet.

 If there were oceans in the distant past, the water somehow has disappeared 
from view. Perhaps it went underground or evaporated into space. For decades, 
spacecraft data had indicated that present-day Mars, with an average surface 
temperature of ^-60@C and a surface pressure less than one-hundredth that of 
Earth, has been essentially inactive for billions of years.

 Newer images and other observations made by the Mars Global Surveyor 
spacecraft, however, have revealed that Mars isn't just a frozen desert. 
Rather, the planet is undergoing dramatic changes on both local and global 
scales.

 Close-up images taken by Surveyor, which has orbited Mars since 1997, hint 
that in some of the planet's coldest regions, water has recently rushed to the 
surface (SN: 7/1/00, p. 5: ). Newer measurements, reported last December, 
suggest the planet may be undergoing a climate change that could warm it 
significantly.

 Scientists are hoping that Mars Odyssey-along with a fleet of other orbiting 
craft and rovers to be launched over the next 5 years-will begin to answer some 
of the riddles about the Red Planet. Odyssey was originally designed to have 
its own lander and rover, but NASA decided to scuttle that plan after the 
back-to-back losses of the Mars Climate Orbiter and the Mars Polar Lander in 
1999.

"The primary theme is, Where is the water today and where has it been in the 
past?" says Jonathan I. Lunine of the University of Arizona in Tucson. "Was the 
water so abundant that it has been able to alter the chemistry of minerals on 
the surface?"

 The Odyssey spacecraft comes equipped with several devices that will explore 
the Red Planet in new ways. A gamma-ray spectrometer will record the abundance 
of chemical elements in the surface, providing a global map of the composition 
of the Martian crust. The spectrometer also features two neutron detectors that 
will search for hydrogen-a proxy for water-down to a depth of 1 meter.

 Another instrument, the thermal emission imaging system (THEMIS), is a 
combination camera and thermal infrared spectrometer. Using infrared detectors, 
it will identify the mineral content of surface rock at spatial scales 
one-fiftieth as fine as any previously attempted. Minerals chemically altered 
by the flow of water should be easily detected this way. The instrument will 
also make daily temperature maps of the Martian surface, providing information 
on the exchange of water and carbon dioxide between the planet's atmosphere and 
its polar caps. The maps may spot signs of active hydrothermal systems such as 
heat emerging from erupting volcanoes.

 A third device, the Mars Radiation Experiment (MARIE), is designed to measure 
radiation near the planet's surface and begin to assess how human explorers 
could operate safely in the Martian environment. However, a computer glitch 
caused MARIE to stop transmitting data during the journey to Mars, and NASA 
won't attempt to reactivate the sensor until Odyssey begins its mapping mission 
next month.

 Surprises and paradoxes

 Instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor have revealed a host of surprises-and 
paradoxes-about the planet. A laser altimeter, which stopped working last 
August, had measured the height of mountains to an accuracy of centimeters. 
Bouncing a laser beam off the Martian landscape, the altimeter found evidence 
of valleys carved by water and huge basins that may once have held more than 
seven times the water in the Mediterranean Sea (SN: 12/9/00, p. 372).

 On the other hand, Surveyor's thermal emission spectrometer has found no 
evidence of water-altered minerals on the Martian surface. According to 
geologists, receding oceans on Mars would most likely have left behind an 
abundance of such minerals. Yet other experts believe that shifting veneers of 
dust would have covered such deposits over millions of years, making them 
difficult to identify from orbit without an extremely high-resolution camera, 
notes James B. Garvin, the lead scientist for Mars exploration at NASA 
headquarters in Washington, D.C.

 Surveyor's magnetometer has revealed a magnetic field pattern that some 
scientists interpret as evidence that the Red Planet has undergone tectonic 
activity: Chunks of the planet's crust may have slid underneath each other, the 
same global process that formed Earth's continents.

 The spacecraft's high-resolution camera, which has taken more than 100,000 
snapshots of Mars, has yielded its own surprises. The camera has provided 
close-ups of about 1 percent of the planet, revealing details as small as 1.5 
meters across. While analyzing several of these images, researchers identified 
hundreds of newly formed gullies, a finding that suggests that water gushed to 
the surface relatively recently. Curiously, the gullies reside on the sides of 
steep cliffs in some of Mars' coldest places, where water should be ice, not 
liquid.

 Although water reaching the Martian surface wouldn't remain liquid for long, 
heat from the planet's interior could melt a reservoir of ice a few hundred 
meters below the surface, notes geologist Michael C. Malin, who built the 
Surveyor camera. He and Kenneth C. Edgett, both of Malin Space Science Systems 
in San Diego, suggest that when the water reaches the chilly surface, it 
freezes and forms an ice dam that blocks liquid water still percolating beneath 
it. According to their model, the pressure from the liquid eventually becomes 
so great that it breaks through the dam and gushes onto the surface with enough 
force and volume to create gullies before freezing and evaporating.

 Other scientists contend that water, which may be scarce in both the 
atmosphere and on the surface, didn't sculpt the gullies. Instead, they argue 
that carbon dioxide, the most abundant constituent of the atmosphere, did the 
job.

 Lunine, his Arizona colleague Timothy D. Swindle, and Donald S. Musselwhite of 
NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, contend that carbon dioxide gas from 
the Martian atmosphere seeps into the pores of rocks on the steep-sided cliffs 
and condenses there into ice during winter. In their view, additional frozen 
carbon dioxide also forms on the exposed surface of the rocks, covering them 
like a lid.

 In the spring, the carbon dioxide within the rocks warms and expands, turning 
to liquid as pressure builds under the lid. At the same time, the lid begins to 
evaporate and the underlying liquid bursts through.

 But it isn't the carbon dioxide liquid that forms the gullies, according to 
the model described by Lunine and his colleagues in the July 2001 Geophysical 
Research Letters. They argue that the carbon dioxide liquid that bursts through 
quickly vaporizes and cools, producing a snow suspended in a plume of carbon 
dioxide gas that hasn't yet cooled enough to condense. The suspended material 
joins rock debris to form a slurry that flows like a liquid and carves the 
gullies.

 Because the carbon dioxide must liquefy and burst rapidly through the lid, the 
model requires that the gullies occur on cliff faces that are subject to a 
dramatic temperature swing between winter and spring. If Surveyor or Odyssey 
find evidence of gullies in flatter terrain that aren't prone to such swings, 
the model could be in trouble.

 Although Odyssey doesn't have the resolution to detect near-surface water 
under an individual gully, its broad view might still shed light on the origin 
of the gullies. If, for example, the data from the craft reveal that that 
gullies tend to lie in areas with large underground water deposits, Malin's and 
Edgett's water-based theory would gain support.

 Odyssey's search for water is indirect. Its neutron spectrometers can identify 
places on Mars where neutrons scattered off the surface have, on average, a 
lower energy than in other areas. Because collisions with hydrogen, the 
lightest element, most efficiently sap energy from neutrons, the energy deficit 
indicates the presence of hydrogen. Most hydrogen is tied up in water.

"My prediction is that we'll see hydrogen concentrations at all kinds of scales 
on Mars, and we'll all be scratching our beards trying to figure out what they 
mean," says Garvin. "In some cases, it will indicate buried ground ice; in 
other cases, intriguing reservoirs of water-bearing or hydrogen-bearing 
minerals."

 Higher resolution

 THEMIS may also play a role in determining the origin of the gullies. The 
system, which has much higher resolution than a similar instrument on Surveyor, 
can zoom in on individual gullies and examine the minerals in surface rock. If 
a recent flow of water formed the gullies, it would have left behind 
water-borne deposits of minerals that could display a unique infrared signature.

 Even if the gullies were carved by water, these features may indicate but a 
tiny amount of the present-day water supply on the Red Planet, cautions Garvin 
of NASA headquarters. Surveyor may have spied the gullies first simply because 
these features are more exposed than other water-carved landforms or because 
the craft has yet to examine most of the planet in the same fine detail, he 
suggests.

 Alternatively, he notes, the gullies could indicate the last places on Mars to 
still have reservoirs of liquid water. At other sites, the water may have 
disappeared long ago.

 Several Mars investigators have suggested that a vast area in the northern 
plains of Mars could be the sediment of what once was a large body of standing 
water. Two years ago, researchers reported that Surveyor's laser altimeter 
showed the region to be unusually flat. James Head of Brown University in 
Providence, R.I., and his colleagues say that the flatness strongly suggests an 
ocean or lake resided there hundreds of millions of years ago. Yet Surveyor's 
camera found no evidence of a shoreline at the edge of the region. Garvin notes 
that on Earth, standing bodies of water that have evaporated leave behind a 
telltale "bathtub ring," a boundary between the place where the water once was 
and adjacent landforms that hadn't been underwater.

 By mapping the elements and minerals in the Martian crust, Odyssey could help 
sort out the seemingly contradictory information from Surveyor. "Mars Odyssey 
is a crucial next step in understanding the history of Martian water and in 
locating potential sites where water has been recently," says Lunine.

 Ultimately, the search for water may require radar detectors that will fly 
aboard two Mars-bound craft-an Italian mission set for launch in 2003 and a 
NASA mission scheduled to take off in 2005. NASA has also begun developing 
rovers capable of climbing the steep cliffs where the gullies reside. These 
all-terrain robots, considerably larger and more mobile than the wagon-size 
rover carried by Mars Pathfinder in 1997, could look for direct evidence of 
recent water-related activity.

 Evaporating ice caps

 Observations by Odyssey and Surveyor may also illuminate a startling set of 
findings about the present Martian climate reported in the Dec. 7, 2001 
Science. Using Surveyor's camera, Malin and his colleagues found that during a 
full Martian year-about 2 Earth years-the walls of pits in the south polar ice 
cap receded by 1 to 3 m. The cap is mostly frozen carbon dioxide, and the 
dramatic shrinkage suggests that large amounts of the material have evaporated 
into the Martian atmosphere.

 If that trend continues, the weight of the Martian atmosphere could increase 
by about 1 percent per decade, Malin's team estimates. With a greater 
atmospheric pressure, water is more likely to remain a liquid on the surface. 
More to the point, in time the planet could become significantly warmer and 
wetter, perhaps returning to conditions that prevailed much earlier in the 
planet's history.

 Indeed, theorists have calculated that over hundreds of thousands of years, 
Mars' axis of rotation can tilt by as much as 50 degrees. If so, very different 
climate conditions could have permitted a substantial amount of liquid water on 
the planet's surface some time in the distant past.

 The new findings also suggest that the carbon cycle might have been as active 
in the recent past as it has been during the past Martian year. If the activity 
caused an increase in the planet's atmospheric pressure, it would make it "more 
likely that water was present as a liquid near the surface" in recent times, 
says Malin. The gullies could be visible signposts of such an occurrence, he 
and his colleagues note.

 If the environment on Mars has changed as much and as quickly as the Surveyor 
images suggest, then several spacecraft and landers set to explore the Red 
Planet over the next few years should also be able to detect signs of the rapid 
changes.

 Relying on Odyssey as their water scout, two spacecraft will carry the 
ultimate in high-tech dowsing rods. Both the Italian space agency's Mars 
Express mission and NASA's Mars Reconnaissance mission will employ radar that 
can hunt for water buried as deep as a kilometer beneath the surface.

 The possibility of such reservoirs opens up the most tantalizing issue of all. 
If Mars periodically goes through freeze-and-thaw cycles, buried ice deposits 
"could conceivably be places that are refuges for life," says Lunine.

"We don't know whether that's the case or not now, but I'm now optimistic we'll 
have some answers within the next decade."


