New structure reveals catalysts' details: Science News Online, Jan. 12, 2002

 New structure reveals catalysts' details

 Jessica Gorman

 Two centuries after Englishman William Hyde Wollaston first isolated the 
element palladium, researchers have now uncovered fundamental new information 
about the material.

 Palladium-a soft, gray-white metal that resembles platinum-is a component in 
dental alloys, jewelry, and electrical contacts. It also serves as an important 
catalyst in countless chemical reactions, including those that occur in 
automobiles' catalytic converters. Fundamental reactions widely used to produce 
pharmaceuticals, such as reactions that add hydrogen atoms to molecules, also 
rely on palladium catalysts.

 With the help of a newly synthesized palladium compound, a team of Japanese 
researchers has uncovered chemical information that they say is important to 
understanding and designing such catalysts. The finding is reported in the Jan. 
11 Science by Shigeru Shimada and his colleagues at the National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology in Tsukuba, Japan.

 The new compound contains a palladium atom bonded to surrounding atoms in a 
way that scientists hadn't observed previously. This novel arrangement seems to 
change the palladium atom's so-called oxidation state, or oxidation number. An 
atom's oxidation state defines its capacity to donate, accept, or share 
electrons when it bonds to other atoms. It's a concept familiar to generations 
of chemistry students and fundamental to scientists' understanding of how 
chemical reactions work.

"Half the reactions in nature deal with oxidation state," says chemist Robert 
H. Crabtree of Yale University.

 A particular element can have different oxidation states. The new structure's 
arrangement suggests that its palladium atoms are in the highest oxidation 
state ever observed for the element, says Shimada.

 The researchers created their compound by heating molecules containing carbon, 
hydrogen, silicon, phosphorus, and palladium for 2 days in the solvent toluene. 
Three of these molecules, each containing a palladium atom with the oxidation 
number 2, combine to form the product, says Shimada. The resulting red, 
crystalline compound has a central palladium atom bonded to six silicon atoms, 
giving it an apparent oxidation number of 6, the researchers report. They base 
their conclusion on X-ray analysis, nuclear magnetic spectroscopy, and infrared 
spectroscopy.

 There is another interpretation of the data, Shimada and his colleagues 
acknowledge. Some silicon atoms in the structure are close enough together that 
there could be some partial bonding between them. Shimada notes that this 
interpretation would yield an unremarkable oxidation number of 2 for the new 
compound. His team plans to do calculations to attempt to settle the issue.

 Regardless of whether the oxidation state turns out to be 2 or 6, Crabtree 
says, the new compound has a unique structure and gives interesting information 
about the nature of palladium bonding.

 Shimada expects the results to deepen chemists' understanding of catalytic 
processes in general and also lead to new palladium-containing catalysts.


