Ancient Gene Takes Grooming in Hand: Science News Online, Jan. 12, 2002

 Ancient Gene Takes Grooming in Hand

 Bruce Bower

 All sorts of animals groom themselves regularly, which keeps them clean and 
healthy. However, mice with an alteration in one of the genes that orchestrate 
body development lose their grip on grooming, a new study finds.

 These mice bite and lick themselves so hard and so often that they end up with 
bald patches and open sores, according to Joy M. Greer and Mario R. Capecchi, 
both geneticists at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. Moreover, the 
same genetically altered rodents groom cage mates just as aggressively.

 The mice have a mutated version of one of the homeobox, or Hox, genes, which 
scientists have implicated in embryo development. The new finding offers a 
potential avenue for exploring the biological roots of trichotillomania, a rare 
condition in which people tear out their hair, as well as some of the 
repetitive cleaning behaviors classed as obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 
the researchers conclude in the Jan. 3 Neuron.

"This particular Hox gene may regulate the amount of grooming performed by an 
animal," Capecchi says. "So far, we see no other unusual behaviors in mice with 
this mutation."

 The study adds to emerging evidence that Hox genes, which are largely the same 
in all vertebrate species, influence biology and behavior in a surprisingly 
wide variety of ways, he adds. It makes sense, in his view, that at least one 
of these evolutionarily ancient genes influences the comparably ancient 
grooming practices of vertebrates.

 Greer and Capecchi altered one of the two copies of the Hoxb8 gene in 
individual mice from an inbred line. This enabled the scientists to compare 
these animals with others in the line, which shared the same set of genes 
except for the critical Hoxb8 mutation.

 As adults, genetically modified mice displayed bald patches and skin lesions 
on their bodies. The researchers found large amounts of hair in the rodents' 
mouths and stomachs.

 Videotaping for 24 hours showed that mice with Hoxb8 mutations spent twice as 
much time grooming themselves as the other mice did. Hoxb8 mice also doggedly 
groomed their cage mates.

 Further evidence of a Hoxb8 influence on excessive grooming came when Greer 
and Capecchi found that mutant mice didn't have any other condition that might 
cause such behavior. For instance, the animals were as sensitive to pain as 
other mice were and had no irritating skin conditions.

 Laboratory analyses of the brains of the mutant mice then revealed molecular 
footprints of Hoxb8 activity in areas that had already been implicated in 
control of animal grooming and generation of human OCD symptoms, such as 
compulsive hand washing.

 Psychiatrist James F. Leckman of Yale University School of Medicine calls the 
new finding about the Hoxb8 gene "very exciting." Leckman's group is currently 
investigating possible effects of other Hox genes on OCD.

 The Hoxb8 mutation described by the Utah scientists may also shed light on 
body dysmorphic disorder, Leckman holds. In this OCD-related condition, people 
experience debilitating preoccupations with imagined physical defects.

 Still, the Hoxb8-mutated mice behaved much as people with trichotillomania do, 
comments psychiatrist Lewis R. Baxter of the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham. Researchers need to explore whether prescription drugs that ease 
trichotillomania and OCD trim back grooming in Hoxb8 mice, Baxter says. These 
medications boost the activity of serotonin, a chemical messenger in the brain.

 Greer and Capecchi are already examining whether the mutation that they 
identified in mice appears in people diagnosed with trichotillomania.


