Biology of rank: Social status sets up monkeys' cocaine use: Science News 
Online, Jan. 26, 2002

 Biology of rank: Social status sets up monkeys' cocaine use

 Bruce Bower

 Power has its perks, even for laboratory-housed monkeys. When moved from 
individual to group cages, socially dominant male monkeys exhibit a 
brain-chemistry change that fosters resistance to using drugs such as cocaine, 
a new study finds.

 This alteration increases the amount of so-called dopamine D2 receptors, a 
molecular gateway on brain cells controlled by the chemical messenger dopamine. 
Earlier studies implicated these receptors in pleasurable responses to drugs 
and other stimuli.

 In contrast, male monkeys at the bottom of the social pecking order display no 
boost in the D2 receptors when housed with other monkeys, say neuroscientist 
Michael A. Nader of Wake Forest University School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, 
N.C., and his colleagues. Unlike their more dominant cage mates, the 
low-ranking monkeys readily self-administer large amounts of cocaine.

 These findings raise the possibility that a person's vulnerability to drug 
abuse can be influenced by brain-altering environmental factors, Nader's group 
concludes in an upcoming Nature Neuroscience.

"This is the first demonstration in primates that a social stressor, such as a 
dominance hierarchy, can regulate levels of dopamine D2 receptors," remarks 
psychiatrist Nora D. Volkow of Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, N.Y. 
"It provides a potential biological mechanism to explain why people in lower 
social classes are generally at higher risk for drug abuse."

 Nader and his coworkers used a scanning technique called positron emission 
tomography (PET) to study D2 receptors in the brains of 20 male macaque monkeys 
that had been housed in individual cages for 1½ years. PET scans were repeated 
after the monkeys were moved into larger cages, grouping four animals per cage, 
and given time to establish social hierarchies.

 The scans revealed comparably low numbers of dopamine D2 receptors in all 
individually housed monkeys and in low-ranking monkeys in the groups. In 
dominant monkeys, D2-receptor numbers increased sharply. These animals also 
displayed relatively low concentrations of dopamine in the junctions, or 
synapses, between brain cells.

 Excess synaptic dopamine leads to an oversensitivity of the brain's reward 
pathway and creates a susceptibility to drug abuse, the researchers theorize. 
Loss of control over environmental factors may have triggered such a dopamine 
pattern in low-ranking monkeys, they hold. When the scientists implanted 
intravenous lines, subordinate animals quickly learned to press a lever to 
receive infusions of cocaine in increasing doses and largely ignored a lever 
controlling delivery of saline solution.

 In dominant monkeys, the surge in dopamine D2 receptors indicates they use 
dopamine efficiently for cell-to-cell communication, Nader's group contends. 
These monkeys showed no preference for receiving intravenous cocaine over a 
saline solution.

 Whether these findings have correlates among people remains an open question, 
the researchers note. In line with the new study, earlier PET data indicated 
that people with low dopamine D2-receptor numbers report more pleasurable 
responses to stimulant drugs than those with high D2 numbers do. "We're going 
to have to start paying much closer attention to the social rank of individuals 
in studies of the biology of drug abuse," Volkow says.


