Supernova dealt deaths on Earth? Stellar blasts may have killed ancient marine 
life: Science News Online, Feb. 2, 2002

 Supernova dealt deaths on Earth? Stellar blasts may have killed ancient marine 
life

 Ron Cowen

 A group of young, hot stars in and near the constellation Scorpius shine 
brightly, making a memorable sight in the southern night sky. But if Narciso 
Benitez of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and his colleagues are 
correct, this collection of stars could have a lot to answer for. One of its 
members may have exploded in the solar system's neighborhood 2 million years 
ago, causing the widespread destruction of a variety of marine species here on 
Earth.

 About 35 of the thousands of stars in this group, known as the 
Scorpius-Centaurus (Sco-Cen) OB association, weigh several times as much as the 
sun. These heavyweights-the group's brightest stars-tend to end their 
relatively brief lives with a powerful bang called a supernova. Other 
astronomers have determined that previous supernovas within the Sco-Cen 
association carved out the Local Bubble, a low-density cavity of interstellar 
gas that extends about 150 light-years around the sun (SN: 4/20/96, p. 248).

 The Sco-Cen stars now lie some 450 light-years from Earth, too far away for a 
supernova explosion to harm our solar system. But by using data from the 
Hipparcos satellite to measure the current positions and velocities of stars in 
the association, Benitez' team traced the stars' paths back in time. The 
researchers found that the Sco-Cen members were quite a bit closer a few 
million years ago. Some could have passed within 130 light-years of Earth.

 That's near enough that if one of the stars went supernova, cosmic rays from 
the explosion would have destroyed much of Earth's ozone layer. Then, the sun's 
harmful ultraviolet radiation would have penetrated the atmosphere and could 
have led to the destruction of plankton, mollusks, and other marine life at the 
so-called Pliocene-Pleistocene boundary 2 million years ago, the team suggests.

 Benitez and his colleagues Jesus Maiz-Apellaniz of the Space Telescope Science 
Institute in Baltimore and biologist Matilde Canelles of Silver Spring, Md., 
describe their analysis in an upcoming Physical Review Letters.

 Two key pieces of evidence support their proposal, the researchers note. A 
study by Maiz-Apellaniz indicates that the Sco-Cen association has had 20 
supernova explosions over the past 11 million years. Further, an analysis of 
deep-ocean crusts by other teams shows an excess of iron-60 in samples that 
date roughly from the time of the Pliocene-Pleistocene extinction. Iron-60, an 
isotope produced by supernovas, could have become incorporated into ocean 
sediment if dust from a stellar explosion bombarded Earth.

 The extinction at the Pliocene-Pleistocene boundary is considered a modest 
one. Several researchers over the past 25 years have proposed that nearby 
supernova explosions could have caused one or more of the most massive 
extinctions, such as the dinosaur die-off. However, the new analysis shows that 
unless a supernova came within a few light-years of Earth, its radiation 
wouldn't be intense enough to cause such an extinction.

 Geologist Luann Becker of the University of California, Santa Barbara concurs 
with Benitez' team that a supernova is indeed a plausible but unproven 
candidate for the marine extinction. She notes that supernova dust isn't the 
only type of iron-rich space debris to pelt Earth. Analyzing more samples of 
ocean sediment to pinpoint the amount and timing of the iron-60 excess could 
provide a more rigorous test of the supernova model, Becker adds.


