Circuitry in a nanowire: Novel growth method may transform chips: Science News 
Online, Feb. 9, 2002

 Circuitry in a nanowire: Novel growth method may transform chips

 Peter Weiss

 In a feat of nanometer-scale engineering, researchers have produced 
semiconductor filaments that are as thin as viruses but contain working 
electronic and optical devices. Alternating bands of different semiconductor 
materials in the superthin wires serve as the electron and photon manipulators. 
Someday, such striped strands may form the basis of a new type of circuitry 
that is far tinier, faster, and more energy efficient than conventional chips 
will ever be, the scientists say.

 Last year, a Harvard University team led by Charles M. Lieber demonstrated 
nanowire-based electronic devices and rudimentary logic circuits, but those 
were composed of wires of uniform composition (SN: 11/10/01, p. 294: Available 
to subscribers at ). By crossing different nanowires over one another, the 
researchers made them behave as transistors and diodes.

 Now, Lieber's group and two other teams-one led by Peidong Yang at the 
University of California, Berkeley and the other led by Lars Samuelson of Lund 
University in Sweden-have unveiled striped nanowires resembling submicroscopic 
barber poles. Each stripe has a different composition, and thereby different 
electronic properties.

 Electrical measurements by the Harvard and Lund groups show that the junction 
of just two adjacent stripes within one wire can be a diode that guides 
electrons. In the Feb. 7 Nature, Lieber and his colleagues also report making 
within a single wire a type of diode that emits light. What's more, the Harvard 
investigators constructed a prototype, one-wire "nano^-bar code" that 
fluoresces under green light in alternating dark and bright stripes. It's 
possible, they claim, to make stacks of multiple colors that would be leaner 
than any microscopic bar code rods created so far (SN: 10/6/01, p. 212: 
Available to subscribers at ). Such nano^-bar codes might label and track 
individual proteins and other biomolecules.

 The Berkeley and Lund groups each report their striped-nanowire work in the 
February Nano Letters. The Lund team presents further details of their approach 
in the Feb. 11 Applied Physics Letters.

 All three groups use similar, high-temperature methods to create their striped 
nanowires. They start with a wafer of silicon, or another substrate, sprinkled 
with nanometer-scale blobs of gold. In a furnace, a vapor of a semiconductor 
material, such as indium phosphide, settles on and dissolves into the molten 
blobs. When the dissolved material reaches a sufficient concentration, it 
crystallizes and the blob exudes a shaft of semiconductor about the same 
diameter as the blob. As the shaft lengthens, the researchers change vapors, 
thereby producing successive stripes of different materials.

"This is an important milestone in a very fast-moving field," comments Thomas 
E. Mallouk of Pennsylvania State University in State College.

 Samuelson notes that the three teams have partially retraced steps taken a 
decade ago by Japanese researchers who demonstrated diode function in nanowires 
with one band each of two different semiconductors.

 A major impetus for making nanowires is the expectation that miniaturization 
of conventional microcircuits, which has continued unabated for 30 years, will 
soon bottom out. As the dimensions of conventional transistors and other 
devices shrink to only a few tens of nanometers, the laws of quantum mechanics 
and other effects will prevent those devices from working properly, many 
scientists predict.

 Small-scale devices based on nanowires or their rival circuit-building 
components called carbon nanotubes (SN: 5/26/01, p. 335: Available to 
subscribers at ) are among many technologies being developed as possible 
successors to today's circuitry (SN: 11/25/00, p. 350: ). However, now that 
nanowires can be grown with stripes of different semiconducting materials, the 
wires may pull ahead of tubes in that race, Lieber notes.

 There are differences among the nanowires coming out of the Harvard, Berkeley, 
and Lund laboratories. The Harvard and Berkeley wires grow 100 times faster 
than those made by the Lund group, Samuelson notes. The slow growth of the Lund 
wires enables the Swedish researchers to orchestrate transitions between 
different semiconductor materials within just a few atomic layers, he claims. 
Such sharp boundaries make for superior electronic and optical properties in 
the resulting devices, says Samuelson.

 Lieber contends that many electronic devices don't require such crisp 
boundaries. Yang says that the slow growth rate could make the Lund process 
impractical.

 Despite such disputes, one advantage of all striped nanowires is that 
different semiconductors can be neighbors even when their crystal structures 
don't match very well. Because the width of the wire can vary, the 
semiconductor stripes have room to accommodate each other. Such adjustments are 
not possible in conventional chips. This advantage could make it possible to 
build nanowires with novel combinations of materials and, therefore, build 
novel devices.

 The advent of striped nanowires should also open up new options for tiny 
circuits beyond the crossing of wires, says Harvard's Mark S. Gudiksen. For 
instance, if segments of a single wire can be interconnected, a striped 
nanowire could serve as a compact, elongated circuit. Alternatively, suggests 
Samuelson, forests of striped nanowires might share space with conventional 
semiconductor technology within hybrid chips.


