Anatomy of a Lightning Ball: Science News Online, Feb. 9, 2002

 Anatomy of a Lightning Ball

 An aerial wonder, pondered for ages, no longer seems so ghostly

 Peter Weiss

. Not many people get to see ball lightning, but those who do never forget it. 
Imagine a glowing orb suddenly materializing in front of you, possibly sizzling 
or exuding a bluish mist and an acrid smell. The globe may be larger than a 
beach ball and dart through the air, perhaps hovering occasionally as if 
considering its next move. The ball may also roll or bounce along the ground, 
climb utility poles, and skitter along power lines. As it travels, the fiery 
sphere may destroy electrical equipment, ignite fires, and even singe animals 
or people.

 After only 10 seconds or so, the apparition typically vanishes abruptly. Some 
balls flick out in silence, like a lamp turning off. Others burst with sharp 
bangs and fiery streamers.

 Despite half-a-millennium's worth of anecdotal reports and two centuries of 
scientific investigations, no one yet can say for sure just what ball lightning 
is. Lately, however, a small group of researchers has developed theories and 
reported experimental results that appear to explain some features of ball 
lightning that previous models couldn't account for.

 Most eyewitness reports point to ordinary lightning as the trigger, but other 
electric discharges have also been implicated. What happens next depends on the 
theorist.

 These researchers agree that an aerosol, a suspension of fine particles in 
air, is present in the balls. The particles react chemically and interact 
electromagnetically. Some of the theorists, however, picture a radiant network 
of filaments-a "fluff ball of fire," as one scientist described it. Another 
contends that the aerosol is an acid mist and that it encloses a gaseous, hot 
core of reactive chemicals. In all the models, the aerosol's action is critical 
in explaining the litany of often astonishing eyewitness accounts.

 Alternative to plasmas

 Documented sightings of ball lightning date back to the Middle Ages. A Russian 
databank includes about 10,000 reports from the past several decades. In recent 
years, as science failed to decipher the phenomenon, pseudoscientific 
explanations have abounded. Those include matter-antimatter annihilations, 
clumps of the exotic dark matter of the universe, and spontaneous bursts of 
nuclear fusion.

 Ball lightning has "a big kook following and a scientific following because 
it's one of the great unexplained mysteries," says Martin A. Uman of the 
University of Florida in Gainesville, who has studied lightning for some 30 
years.

 Of the many scientific theories of ball lightning, most depict the phenomenon 
as some kind of plasma, or hot gas of electrons and positively charged atomic 
or molecular ions. That's a reasonable expectation since ball lightning 
generally has been reported to occur along with thunderstorms whose ordinary 
lightning bolts ionize the air, creating columns of plasma along their paths.

 Nonetheless, pure-plasma models for ball lightning are plagued by 
difficulties. "None of them works," scowls Graham K. Hubler, a physicist and 
materials scientist at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in Washington, D.C. 
He saw ball lightning 42 years ago as a 16-year-old, and he has never forgotten 
the experience. "You're just so startled you can't move," he recalls of the 
moment a whitish-yellow ball about the size of a tennis ball suddenly appeared 
in front of him one night in a park in upstate New York.

 One major challenge to the plasma explanation for ball lightning is that 
plasma always expands unless great pains are taken to confine it. Fusion 
researchers "build enormous [reactors called] tokamaks to do that sort of 
thing-to contain a plasma for a second" within a magnetic field for nuclear 
fusion experiments, Hubler notes (SN: 3/18/00, p. 191).

"Hot plasma in air has two tendencies-to disappear and to go up," says physical 
chemist David J. Turner of Condensation Physics in Huntingtown, Md., a retired 
electric utility researcher who became interested in ball lightning while 
studying the behavior of ions in steam. The oppositely charged particles that 
make up the plasma tend to rapidly recombine, quickly annihilating it. 
Moreover, the buoyancy of hot plasma in air, which would make a ball rise, 
doesn't jibe with ball lightning's hovering, rolling, and flying horizontally, 
Turner adds.

 He suggests that one way out of the conundrum is to add features of an aerosol 
to a plasma theory of ball lightning. An aerosol's additional material can form 
a structure, host long-lasting chemical reactions, store electric charges, and 
otherwise account for observed ball-lightning properties, Turner and others 
argue.

 Says Turner, "I don't think you can explain all the properties [of ball 
lightning] without accepting that it's an aerosol-related phenomenon."

 Dirty secret

 The notion that aerosols may be a part of ball lightning goes back to at least 
the 1970s, but it's currently winning unprecedented attention.

 Some of the theories don't include a plasma after the original lightning 
strike. Two years ago, chemical engineers proposed a specific and plausible 
mechanism by which a lightning strike on soil could produce an aerosol type of 
ball lightning. John Abrahamson of the University of Canterbury in 
Christchurch, New Zealand, and James Dinniss, who's now at the household 
chemicals firm Lever Rexona in Petone, New Zealand, described their hypothesis 
in Nature and reported on experiments that seemed to support it.

 Hubler said in a commentary accompanying the report, that the model is the 
first that "can explain most aspects of ball lightning."

 Besides giving a boost to aerosol interpretations of ball lightning, the 
findings prompted people around the world-many of them scientists or 
engineers-to contact Abrahamson with previously undocumented eyewitness 
accounts of the phenomenon. The findings also sparked further research, as well 
as new collaborations among the handful of aerosol ball^-lightning 
investigators.

 A variety of articles on ball lightning, including descriptions of the current 
aerosol theories and a collection of the new eyewitness reports, appears in the 
January Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London A. Abrahamson, 
who was guest editor of the one-theme issue, says it "probably doubles the 
number of [published] observations . . . by scientifically trained people."

"You could say that Abrahamson and [his] theory have revived interest in ball 
lightning in general," says Uman. The model invented by Abrahamson, a 
specialist in reducing the dust content of factory air, and Dinniss, his former 
student, has been dubbed by Hubler as the fluff-ball model. They revisited an 
old hypothesis that ball lightning might contain a fine network of metal 
particles. They built upon that idea by formulating a specific sequence of 
chemical reactions that could be triggered by a lightning strike on soil and 
generate such networks.

 Specifically, they proposed that when a lightning bolt vaporizes silicon 
dioxide-a common mineral in soil-reactions with carbon compounds transforms it 
into nanometer-scale pure-silicon droplets. Such reactions also underlie the 
smelting of many rocky ores into metal.

 Once formed, the silicon particles would react with oxygen and become coated 
with an insulating skin. In the highly charged atmosphere of an electrical 
storm, the oxide-coated nanoparticles would then pick up polarized electrical 
charges and form loose-knit networks of filaments-the "fluff balls" of Hubler's 
commentary.

 By calculating the heat and light that those wispy, charge-laden balls would 
generate, the team determined that a plausible ball roughly the size of a 
basketball would last 3 to 30 seconds and glow like a 100-watt bulb-conditions 
often reported by those who have observed ball lightning. Without a protective 
layer, oxidation of bare metal nanoparticles would be expected to proceed more 
quickly and at higher temperatures than observations of typical ball lightning 
have described. That oxide layer ought to keep fresh oxygen from diffusing too 
quickly to the underlying silicon. That slows the reactions and reduces the 
energy output.

 Uman says the theory is promising, but he suspects that it has gaps. He and 
fellow lightning researchers have been within 100 meters of ground strikes 
hundreds of times, he notes. They should have seen ball lightning at least a 
few times if the New Zealanders' theory is correct, Uman argues. What's more, 
both he and Hubler say, the New Zealand team's model for how the charged 
filaments assemble into ball-shaped structures is less than compelling.

 Abrahamson counters that additional support for the model has recently come 
from other fields, particularly from microgravity experiments on granular 
materials. In fact, in the May Journal of Electrostatics, he and geologist John 
Marshall of the SETI Institute in Mountain View, Calif., will present a novel 
explanation-with supporting experimental evidence-of how electrical forces can 
build filament networks.

 Different strokes

 Six years before Abrahamson and Dinniss published their model, Vladimir L. 
Bychkov of the Russian Academy of Sciences' Institute for High Temperatures in 
Moscow proposed that ball lightning consists of a loose, porous aggregate of 
particles. In his theory, the heat and light come mainly from electric effects, 
not oxidation.

 Bychkov presents the latest version of his theory alongside an updated version 
of the New Zealand model in the Transactions issue on ball lightning. In 
Bychkov's theory, lightning can transform many organic materials in the 
environment-not just metal residues from the soil-into airborne polymer 
threads. Once that happens, he surmises, the threads could tangle up into a 
spongy ball. As long as the materials in the tangles are electrical insulators, 
or dielectrics, such a ball can hold electric charges in place and permit huge 
buildups of energy on the ball's surface, Bychkov argues. The energy is stored 
in well-separated patches-a mosaic-of positive charges and negative charges, he 
says.

 Once a ball forms, it could yield heat and light when high voltages begin 
breaking down gases near the surface. That process could create the orange or 
blue coronas that some observers have witnessed. The enormous charge buildup 
also could intermittently force electric currents through some of the threads 
in the ball itself, making them glow like light-bulb filaments.

 Turner's theory, also updated in Transactions, holds that ball lightning 
contains a hot plasma as its main energy source and that the sphere maintains 
its shape without any network of interconnected filaments. Instead, 
electrically charged ions from the plasma drift outward and cool, collecting 
water molecules along the way. This hydration of the ions transforms them into 
acidic moisture droplets-aerosol particles. Ultimately an electrically charged 
shell of those droplets encloses the plasma, all the while absorbing ions from 
it and causing the internal pressure of the plasma within the shell to fall. 
The resulting inward pressure from the air maintains the ball's shape.

 Both Bychkov and Turner claim that their theories can account for the small 
but significant number of reports of so-called high-energy ball lightning. In 
those reports, the fiery orbs land in liquids and boil them away or sear 
through glass, metal, trees, or even people.

 As first proposed 2 years ago, the New Zealand team's model could not 
accommodate the higher-energy balls. But now, Abrahamson argues that his model 
can explain high-energy balls under certain unusual conditions, such as when 
there's a lightning strike or a powerful electric discharge on a fuse box or 
other closely confined metal object. The resultant balls would be richer in 
metal fuel than those produced by a strike on soil and therefore would burn 
hotter.

 Abrahamson notes a precedent for this. U.S. military scientists have devised 
as potential missile decoys for warplanes balls of aerogel (SN: 12/14/96, p. 
383) -an extremely porous and lightweight substance-whose surfaces inside and 
out are coated with a thin film of iron. Normally packed in inert gas, the 
balls spontaneously oxidize when they hit the air, emitting missile-fooling 
infrared radiation. NRL's Celia I. Merzbacher, one of the inventors of the 
balls, describes them in the Transactions issue. (For related video clips, see )

 Seeing is believing

"If we want to understand ball lightning, we need to be able to make and 
control it in the laboratory," says Turner in his Transactions report.

"This is the acid test of any theory," Abrahamson agrees.

 As a starting point for tests of aerosol theories, scientists note that 
lightning strikes have long been known to create glassy walled, hollow tubes 
just under the ground's surface. The tubes, known as fulgurites (SN: 3/20/93, 
p. 184), form where lightning discharges melt and vaporize soil along their 
paths. For at least 30 years, researchers have suspected that materials from 
such cavities might play a role in ball lightning.

 In Soviet experiments reported in 1977, laboratory researchers used up to 
12,000 volts to vaporize the inner walls of tubes of ice or plastic that served 
as models of fulgurites. Once enough pressure built up in the tube to rupture a 
thin plastic diaphragm, brilliant balls up to 400 mm in diameter came flying 
out. Although they were in the size range of natural ball lightning, the 
specimens were much too bright and lasted only a few milliseconds, the 
scientists reported.

 Subsequent experiments by Bychkov and his colleagues also have produced fiery 
balls. For example, electric discharges vaporized material from the walls of 
wax or plastic tubes. When that plasma hit a metal, tiny balls glowing yellow 
or yellowish-red appeared, but none of them lasted longer than a fraction of a 
second.

 Instead of plastic and other surrogates for soil, Abrahamson and Dinniss 
tested their hypothesis with actual dirt. They packed it onto shallow, 
electrically conductive platters and zapped it with up to 20,000 volts. As they 
had predicted, chains of nanometer-scale particles formed. To find them, the 
scientists pumped the air above the soil beds through filters just as the 
electrical discharge took place. Using an electron microscope, the researchers 
detected thread-like chains caught in the filters.

 In more-recent experiments described in the Transactions issue, Abrahamson and 
his colleagues carried out discharges on deeper, narrower soil beds. The beds 
were insulated on top so that a fulgurite-like cavity could form when the soil 
vaporized. Although none of 24 tests produced luminous balls, two of the 
discharges generated short-lived, donut-shape puffs of material, like glowing 
smoke rings. Those shining loops may be precursors to ball lightning formation, 
Abrahamson conjectures.

 Neither he nor Turner has had the privilege of seeing ball lightning. "I do 
badly want to see it," Turner confesses.

 Adds Abrahamson, "I won't be satisfied until we've got all the conditions 
right to achieve a [soccer-ball]-sized ball lightning in the lab." With luck, 
they or some other fortunate scientist may soon transform ball lightning from a 
rare apparition into an everyday acquaintance.


