Germs That Do a Body Good: Science News Online, Feb. 2, 2002

 Germs That Do a Body Good

 Bacteria might someday keep the doctor away

 Ben Harder

 After several straight months of persistent diarrhea, a New York woman was 
exhausted, uncomfortable, and frustrated. She also was out thousands of dollars 
that she'd spent on drugs and hospital bills. The problem had begun while she 
was being treated with intravenous antibiotics for an infection that caused 
inflammation in her colon. In healthy people, pathogens like the Clostridium 
difficile bacteria responsible for the woman's diarrhea are held in check by 
harmless intestinal microorganisms, poetically referred to as flora. By killing 
off these benign bugs, antibiotics often upset the balance of the gut ecosystem 
and leave it open to novel invaders or nasty, normally latent microbes.

 Dorothy Ogden (not her real name) learned the hard way that 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea can persist in some people long after they've 
beaten their original infection and stopped taking antibiotics. No treatment 
for the diarrhea gave Ogden more than temporary respite, she says, until she 
agreed to undergo an unorthodox procedure at Montefiore Medical Center in New 
York.

 Lawrence J. Brandt, a gastroenterologist at Montefiore, reseeded Ogden's colon 
with some of her husband's fecal matter-replete with a normal array of thriving 
microorganisms. By replacing the flora that Ogden had lost to antibiotics, 
Brandt revived the natural microbial competition.

 Using good bacteria to obstruct bad ones-a strategy known as bacterial 
interference-is one application of so-called probiotics, a field with growing 
medical promise. The name suggests a twist on antibiotics, which kill 
disease-causing microbes. Some probiotic bacteria do their work by competing 
for resources and space with pathogens inside the body and, in effect, elbowing 
the bad bugs out of the way.

 Others secrete byproducts that are toxic to a disease-causing microbe but 
harmless to people, trigger the host's immune system to gird itself for battle 
against hostile bacteria, promote other responses in the host that stymie 
pathogens, or use several mechanisms at once, says Gregor Reid, a 
microbiologist at the University of Western Ontario in London, Ontario.

 Many folks, however, find the idea of receiving bacterial transfusions to 
prevent or treat illness rather hard to take, especially when it requires a 
distasteful treatment. "A lot of people don't like this procedure and won't do 
it," Ogden, now 72, recalls Brandt telling her before he described the fecal 
colonoscopy that he was recommending. Brandt mixed samples of the husband's 
stool in saline solution and deposited globules of it every 10 centimeters 
along her colon. The application extended from Ogden's anus to her cecum, about 
150 centimeters away, which is as far into the intestinal tract as a 
colonoscope can reach.

 The infusion seemed to restore the proper bacterial balance, and Ogden's 
symptoms disappeared immediately, Brandt reported in November 2000. It was the 
first time that Brandt-or anyone, as far as he knows-had attempted the 
procedure, although simpler fecal enemas had worked in several dozen earlier 
cases.

 Edible germs

 Although Ogden's therapy was novel, the use of probiotics isn't altogether 
new. Folk remedies since the beginning of recorded history have ascribed 
antidiarrheal effects to dairy foods, such as cheeses and yogurt. It turns out 
that their active component is live bacteria.

 While gaps remain in understanding the mechanisms by which probiotics work, 
scientists have made great strides in the past 20 years in determining how 
natural bacteria can be added to foods to serve as protective agents. The most 
notable was the isolation from the intestine of a healthy person in 1983 of a 
strain of Lactobacillus rhamnosus dubbed lactobacillus GG, says Sherwood L. 
Gorbach of Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston. When that particular 
bacterium establishes itself in the human gut, it reduces the incidence and 
severity of intestinal infections.

 Lactobacillus GG belongs to the group that includes the microbes that turn 
milk into cheeses and yogurts. Other lactobacilli live naturally within the 
human body-for example, in the gut and the vagina.

 Because some lactobacilli occur naturally in dairy products, scientists have 
used those foods as the main vehicle for introducing probiotics into the human 
body. To inhibit intestinal infections in consumers, producers, especially in 
Europe, have fortified some commercial yogurts with live cultures of bacteria 
after pasteurization.

 According to Gorbach, research has so far proved the benefits of probiotics in 
food for at least two health problems. In the first case, probiotics to prevent 
or ease antibiotic-associated diarrhea, at least in cases that are less 
intractable than Ogden's. In the second, introduced bacteria combat acute 
diarrhea and intestinal inflammation by countering rotaviruses that typically 
affect children.

 More than a gut feeling 

 While research has focused primarily on probiotics' effects on digestive tract 
health, some scientists recognize potential applications to the vagina, the 
respiratory tract, and other parts of the body where bacterial ecosystems also 
exist. This research is promising, if preliminary.

 For example, studies by Sharon L. Hillier of Magee-Women's Hospital in 
Pittsburgh suggest that probiotics can help combat an infection called 
bacterial vaginosis, which is caused by anaerobic microbes that trigger a shift 
in vaginal flora. This infection affects about 1 in 10 U.S. women of 
reproductive age and sometimes causes itching, excessive vaginal discharge, and 
a fishy odor. It's been linked to elevated risk of HIV infection (SN: 9/5/98, 
p. 158: ) and complications with pregnancy.

 Hillier developed a suppository that consists of a gel capsule that melts upon 
insertion into the vagina, dispersing a payload of probiotic lactobacilli that 
researchers isolated from the vaginas of healthy women. In an initial trial, 
the capsules proved effective at restoring depleted vaginal populations of 
lactobacilli. Hillier is currently overseeing a study of about 400 women that 
examines whether these vaginal suppositories will alleviate bacterial vaginosis.

 Hillier draws a distinction between two types of probiotics. Some, including 
most bacteria being administered in food, interfere with pathogens but don't 
remain permanently in the body. Others rely on bacteria that are naturally 
present in the body, such as those in the vaginal suppositories and those that 
Brandt introduced into Ogden's colon.

 Hillier says that replacing natural bacteria makes sense in parts of the body 
at constant risk of pathogenic invasion. For example, because beneficial flora 
in the reproductive tract play a role in resistance to disease, helping women 
reestablish lost populations of microbes would be a simple strategy for 
improving reproductive health.

 Therapy that replaces depleted bacteria may also fight respiratory tract 
infections. Swedish researchers reported in the Jan. 27, 2001 British Medical 
Journal that they used a probiotic to reduce the recurrence of otitis media, an 
infection of the middle ear, among children prone to the ailment. Parents 
repeatedly sprayed a solution laced with alpha-streptococcus bacteria in the 
children's noses. Part of the normal flora of tubes that connect the upper 
nasal passage to the middle ear, alpha-streptococci kept the pathogens that 
cause otitis media from spreading up the nose and into the ear (SN: 2/3/01, p. 
68: Available to subscribers at ).

 Preemptive strike 

 Beyond using probiotics to replenish missing bacteria, clinicians are working 
to prevent pathogenic invasions of normally bacteria-free tissues that are, for 
one reason or another, at risk of infection. The strategy in these cases is to 
install harmless bacteria at the site before nasty ones invade.

 Reid has experimented with using probiotic lactobacilli to prevent 
Staphylococcus aureus from colonizing animals' wound sites, where it can cause 
life-threatening infections. He and his colleagues at the University of Western 
Ontario simulated a surgical operation by implanting small pieces of silicone 
beneath the skin of laboratory rats. They simultaneously added S. aureus to the 
wounds.

 Five of nine animals receiving just the implant developed S. aureus infections 
within 3 days. However, all nine rats that received large doses of one live 
Lactobacillus fermentum strain at the wound site during surgery remained free 
of the pathogen. In other tests, rats receiving lower doses showed 
progressively less protection, the researchers report in an upcoming issue of 
the Journal of Infectious Diseases.

 Rolien H. Free of the University Hospital of Groningen in the Netherlands and 
her colleagues have used probiotics to guard prosthetic voice boxes-though only 
in beakers in the lab-from the films of dangerous bacteria and yeasts that tend 
to form on them. These silicone rubber devices enable people to speak after 
their cancerous larynx has been removed. An estimated 10,000 are in use in the 
Netherlands alone.

 In a study in the October 2001 Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 
Free's team reported that a probiotic strain of streptococci reduced bacterial 
growth on one prosthesis model by 53 percent and yeast growth by 33 percent. A 
second probiotic strain cut bacteria on another model by 19 percent and yeasts 
by 45 percent. Other tests suggest that the probiotics may be even more 
effective if drunk in a bacteria-rich saline solution rather than in dairy 
products.

 Another target for probiotic therapy is the bladder. Richard Hull of Baylor 
College of Medicine in Houston began a decade ago to use probiotics to prevent 
recurrent bladder infections. Unlike the gut or vagina, a healthy bladder 
doesn't contain microorganisms, which makes introducing bacteria to the organ a 
counterintuitive idea that's unpopular with some clinicians.

 However, "the bladder is not sterile in our patient group," says Hull, who 
treats people with spinal-cord injuries that render them unable to urinate 
without a catheter. The catheter tube makes occasional infections almost 
inevitable, he says.

 To protect a patient against such infections, Hull sends a small amount of 
solution containing an apparently harmless strain of Escherichia coli through 
the catheter and into the bladder. This inoculation won't fight an infection 
already in progress, but it does make it more difficult for new harmful 
bacteria to take hold, he says.

 In the September 2001 Urology, Hull and his colleagues reported the results of 
a pilot trial in which they introduced probiotic E. coli into the bladders of 
44 catheter-using patients with spinal injuries. In 30 of these patients, the 
E. coli inhabited the bladder for an average of more than a year. During that 
time, only two urinary tract infections occurred in the group. Before receiving 
the treatment, each of the 30 patients had experienced an average of nearly two 
infections per year. In the other 14 patients, the infused E. coli failed to 
colonize the bladder but caused no illness.

 Only two Houston medical centers currently administer this unusual treatment. 
Hull intends to conduct a multicenter scientific trial if several health 
centers agree to test the procedure.

 What's next? 

 Although a staunch advocate of food-based probiotics, Gorbach is wary of 
promoting other applications for bacteria because he says the safety and 
efficacy evidence is scanty. He is particularly concerned about the risks of 
therapies, such as Hull's, that introduce bacteria to normally sterile parts of 
the body. "I don't want to be a party to promoting putting [probiotics just] 
anywhere," says Gorbach.

 Hull acknowledges that "a lot of the research in probiotics isn't very good 
science." There are often only anecdotal success stories and small-scale 
studies that have yet to be replicated. That's precisely why research on many 
possible uses for probiotics should forge ahead, he says.

 Even ingestible probiotics, which offer relatively well-established benefits, 
face obstacles that limit the full exploitation of the therapeutic strategy. 
Part food, part drug, and part dietary supplement, probiotics fall in a 
regulatory gray area, says Gorbach. In the United States, food manufacturers 
can advertise that products contain live cultures, but packaging can't display 
health claims regarding specific ailments.

 Reid says that this is appropriate in some cases because the strains that 
products contain aren't necessarily identical to those that research has shown 
to have healthful effects, making it uncertain whether the bacteria on 
supermarket shelves actually work as probiotics. On the other hand, he says, 
"it's a shame that strains that have been shown to have specific health 
benefits can't make [those] claims."

 Despite regulatory uncertainties, research forges ahead. When a candidate for 
a probiotic isn't naturally available, progress may require engineering one, 
suggests Jeffrey D. Hillman of the University of Florida College of Dentistry 
in Gainesville. Streptococcus mutans, a bacterium that is commonly responsible 
for tooth decay, metabolizes lactic acid from sugars in food residues on the 
surface of teeth. That acid eats away at the minerals that make up the tooth, 
creating cavities. Hillman modified a strain of S. mutans so that it could no 
longer produce the offending acid.

 He chose to work with a particularly aggressive strain that can often replace 
other bacteria already living on the teeth. Hillman figured that the engineered 
strain might take over the habitat that acid-producing strains normally 
dominate. In experiments with lab rats, the strategy worked, Hillman reported 
in an August supplement to Operative Dentistry.

 Hillman hasn't tried the engineered probiotic in people, but he suggests that 
someday dentists will squirt solutions of the altered bacteria onto the teeth 
of children during a regular cleaning. "In theory, a single application of our 
[modified] strain could give lifelong protection against tooth decay," he says.

 That's a tall promise from the relatively immature field of probiotics. In the 
meantime, the approach faces a variety of obstacles, including a federal 
regulatory system that's never handled bacteria as therapeutics and prospective 
patients who balk at having living organisms put into their bodies. But with 
sufficient scientific research, probiotics might one day provide wholesome 
antidotes to a host of infections.


