Dose of caution: New antipsychotic meds produce muted benefits: Science News 
Online, Feb. 9, 2002

 Dose of caution: New antipsychotic meds produce muted benefits

 Bruce Bower

 The past decade has witnessed a wave of new medications to treat 
schizophrenia, a debilitating mental disorder that afflicts 1 in 100 people. 
Armed with results from their own studies, various pharmaceutical companies 
tout the new drugs, the so-called atypical antipsychotics, as superior to 
traditional antipsychotic drugs in the battle against schizophrenia.

 However, it may be time to lower expectations for atypical antipsychotics. A 
new investigation, funded largely by the federal government, finds that 
treatment with any of three of these medications diminishes chronic 
schizophrenia symptoms only slightly more than a traditional antipsychotic drug 
does.

"Atypical antipsychotics work better than standard medications, but their 
advantage is relatively modest, at least for chronic schizophrenia," says study 
coauthor Jeffrey A. Lieberman, a psychiatrist at the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill. Although atypical antipsychotics often induce a weight 
gain of 5 to 12 pounds, Lieberman adds, they're much less likely than 
traditional antipsychotics to cause severe movement disorders.

 The new investigation, led by psychiatrist Jan Volavka of the Nathan S. Kline 
Institute for Psychiatric Research in Orangeburg, N.Y., sharpens an ongoing 
debate among physicians about whether to prescribe atypical antipsychotics as a 
primary schizophrenia treatment. These drugs cost at least 10 times as much as 
traditional antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol.

 Volavka and his coworkers describe their findings in the February American 
Journal of Psychiatry.

 The scientists recruited 157 patients, most around age 40, from state 
psychiatric hospitals in North Carolina and New York. Participants had suffered 
from schizophrenia for up to several decades and had previously taken only 
traditional antipsychotics, which had not yielded any improvement. Over a 
14-week trial, patients were randomly assigned to receive one of three atypical 
antipsychotics-clozapine, olanzapine, or risperidone-or haloperidol.

 The three atypical drugs, but not haloperidol, yielded "statistically 
significant but clinically modest" improvements in schizophrenia symptoms, the 
researchers say. These symptoms included delusions, hallucinations, apathy, and 
a lack of verbal and emotional expression. Clozapine and olanzapine worked 
slightly better than risperidone did.

 The new study was funded mainly by the National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH) in Bethesda, Md., with about 18 percent of the project's cost assumed by 
olanzapine's manufacturer. Previous trials subsidized by pharmaceutical firms 
have focused on the particular atypical antipsychotic drug made by the funder.

 The modest treatment advantage reported by Volavka's group for atypical 
antipsychotics "clearly underscores the need for identification of more 
effective [antipsychotic] treatments," remarks psychiatrist David A. Lewis of 
the University of Pittsburgh in an editorial published with the new study.

 Researchers need trials longer than the new study to clarify the relative 
merits of different atypical antipsychotic drugs, especially as frontline 
treatments for schizophrenia, holds psychiatrist John M. Kane of Hillside 
Hospital in Glen Oaks, N.Y.

 Such a project is now under way. Researchers in 38 states, led by Lieberman, 
plan to study 1,600 people with schizophrenia treated for up to 1 year with one 
of five atypical antipsychotics or a traditional medication. Participants in 
this NIMH-funded study will also receive standard forms of supportive 
psychotherapy and education (SN: 4/28/01, p. 268: ).


