Beam Team: Unusual laser emits a band of light: Science News Online, Feb. 23, 
2002

 Beam Team: Unusual laser emits a band of light

 Peter Weiss

 Typically, lasers emit light of one pure color, or wavelength. A new little 
laser breaks that mold by generating a beam containing all the wavelengths in a 
swath of the electromagnetic spectrum.

 This new broadband laser operates in the infrared spectrum, which is invisible 
to the human eye. The multiwavelength emission makes the laser more suitable 
for many applications than conventional single-wavelength lasers are, its 
inventors say. These uses include monitoring air pollution and observing 
ultrafast reactions in combustion and other chemical processes.

 It's "a breakthrough and a milestone in laser development," comments Erich 
Gornik of the Vienna University of Technology in Austria.

 An ordinary laser emits only a single color because it's built with a 
light-emitting substance that naturally generates one wavelength of light when 
energized. To create a laser that would emit a broad band of wavelengths, 
Claire Gmachl, Federico Capasso, and their colleagues at Bell Labs' Lucent 
Technologies in Murray Hill, N.J., deposited on a microchip alternating layers 
of two semiconductors in a configuration known as a quantum cascade.

 Like earlier quantum-cascade lasers, the new broadband laser contains hundreds 
of exquisitely thin semiconductor layers, each one affecting the energies of 
electrons passing through it, Gmachl says.

 In any quantum-cascade laser, a high voltage coerces an electric current to 
penetrate layer after layer in the stack. The tight physical confinement of 
many of those stacked layers makes them act as so-called quantum wells, in 
which electrons can only have certain amounts of energy, Gmachl explains. Those 
specific energy levels are determined by the laws of quantum mechanics.

 The stack emits a laser beam because many electrons forced into those wells by 
the high voltage carry more energy than the wells can accept. Those electrons 
shed their excess energy, sometimes as heat but often as photons. At each end 
of the stack, partially reflective crystal surfaces cause many of those photons 
to bounce back and forth. The rebounding photons boost the odds that other 
electrons in the quantum wells also will convert their energy into photons 
rather than heat, Gmachl notes. A fast buildup of light intensity permits 
enough photons to streak beyond the end mirrors to form a beam.

 In earlier generations of quantum-cascade lasers, all the quantum wells had 
the same thickness. In the new version, however, the researchers varied the 
quantum wells' thickness from a few atomic layers to a few dozen, causing each 
well to emit light of a different wavelength. Also, each well emits small 
amounts of light with wavelengths slightly longer and shorter than its dominant 
one. The result: a beam of high intensity at every wavelength from 6 to 8 
micrometers, in the so-called midinfrared range.

 The Lucent researchers made the new laser, which is 2 millimeters long and 
less than one-tenth the thickness of a human hair, by stacking quantum wells. 
Each well is based on a layer of indium gallium arsenide sandwiched between 
layers of aluminum indium arsenide. The team describes its invention in the 
Feb. 21 Nature.

 By using the same design principle with other materials, the scientists expect 
to make broadband lasers that work in portions of the electromagnetic spectrum 
other than the midinfrared. One such device, already in the works, would 
operate at the shorter infrared wavelengths now widely used for optical-fiber 
telecommunications, Gmachl says. In principle, the same technique might someday 
lead to a white-light device for room lighting, computer displays, or video 
projection, she notes.

 Previous attempts to generate broadband laser light have employed exotic 
crystals or extreme operating conditions. In contrast, the Lucent laser works 
at room temperature.

"This is really the first time that you've had a laser with such a broad 
spectrum," comments Jerry R. Meyer of the Naval Research Laboratory in 
Washington, D.C. "It's a spectacular demonstration of something new."


