No Olympian: Analysis hints T. rex ran slowly, if at all: Science News Online, 
March 2, 2002 

 No Olympian: Analysis hints T. rex ran slowly, if at all

 Sid Perkins

 Tyrannosaurus rex, a bipedal meat eater considered by many to be the most 
fearsome dinosaur of its day, may not have been the swift 
Jeep-chaser portrayed in Jurassic Park. Scientists figure that for a 
6,000-kilogram adult T. rex to dash along in high gear, as much as 86 
percent of its body mass would need to be leg muscles-an unlikely pair of 
drumsticks, indeed.

 The leg muscles of a running, bipedal animal typically must support at least 
2.5 times the animal's body weight at the highest-stress point 
of its stride, says John R. Hutchinson, an evolutionary biologist now at 
Stanford University. That applies across the range of modern animals 
from chickens to ostriches to people. Using that rule, Hutchinson and Mariano 
Garcia, a mechanical engineer now at Borg-Warner Automotive in 
Ithaca, N.Y., performed an engineering analysis of the forces that would be 
imposed on a T. rex's lower leg bones and joints during fast 
running.

 Fossil footprints recently discovered in England suggest that cousins of T. 
rex could run at speeds of 29 kilometers per hour (SN: 2/23/02, 
p. 125: Available to subscribers at .). Some paleontologists have estimated 
that the much larger T. rex could move at speeds up to 20 meters 
per second, or about 72 km/hr. Hutchison and Garcia found that to sprint at 
that speed, the creature would have needed muscles in each leg 
equal to an improbable 43 percent of its entire body weight. The scientists, 
formerly at the University of California, Berkeley, report their 
results in the Feb. 28 Nature.

 Simple laws of biophysics dictate that big animals need proportionately larger 
leg muscles to run than small animals need, says Hutchinson. 
The maximum force that a muscle produces when it contracts is related to its 
cross-sectional area, a two-dimensional parameter. However, the 
animal's weight relates to its volume, a three-dimensional quantity. So, as an 
animal's size goes up, the amount of muscle needed to support 
sprinting generally outpaces muscle performance.

 Although the researchers' analysis technique is simple, it provides results 
that qualitatively agree with the traits of living animals. An 
alligator would need rear leg muscles adding up to just over 15 percent of its 
body weight to run bipedally, but it actually has only half 
that much. And alligators don't run on their rear legs, Hutchinson notes. Also, 
the analysis estimates that a quick-running chicken needs leg 
muscles that add up to at least 9 percent of its body mass; they actually have 
almost twice that much.

 Even if T. rex didn't have the stuff of an Olympic sprinter, it still had what 
it took to satisfy its carnivorous obsessions, says Andrew A. 
Biewener, a paleontologist at Harvard University. A long-striding T. rex could 
have walked briskly at 20 km/hr. "An animal that size moving at 
that pace still would have been impressive," Biewener adds.

 Furthermore, Hutchinson notes, T. rex probably preyed upon other large 
dinosaurs burdened with the same problem. With their immense bulk, 
they couldn't run fast, either.

 Says Thomas R. Holtz Jr., a paleontologist at the University of Maryland in 
College Park, "A T. rex didn't have to be in a full run to outrun 
its prey."



