Better Stainless: Analysis could bring pits out of the steel: Science News 
Online, Feb. 16, 2002

 Better Stainless: Analysis could bring pits out of the steel

 Sid Perkins

 Stainless steel, true to its name, resists rust. Cheaper grades of the 
material, however, are susceptible to pit corrosion, in which small spots on 
the metal's surface erode at accelerated rates. In certain environments, pit 
corrosion can pierce several millimeters of stainless steel in just a few weeks.

 A study by British researchers, reported in the Feb. 14 Nature, offers hints 
about how metallurgists could conquer this pox on steel and produce materials 
that are longer lasting and easier to clean than current low-grade stainless 
steel is.

 Most stainless steel is an alloy of iron, chromium, and nickel. When less than 
13 percent of the atoms in the steel is chromium, the material corrodes as 
readily as regular iron, says Mary P. Ryan of Imperial College of Science, 
Technology and Medicine in London.

 Researchers have long known that pit corrosion occurs around small 
impurities-called inclusions-that contain manganese sulfide, says Ryan. 
Scientists once thought the inclusions at the surface dissolve into liquids and 
produce corrosive chemicals that eat away the surrounding metal. But that 
didn't make sense, Ryan notes, because manganese sulfide is a very stable 
molecule.

 So she and her colleagues blasted specimens of a high-chromium stainless steel 
with a high-energy ion beam and then chemically analyzed the resulting vapor. 
The researchers found that the inclusions themselves were chromium-rich, but 
the zones surrounding them contained as little as 10 percent chromium.

 The disparity in chromium concentrations develops during the material's 
cooling process, says Ryan. Sulfide-rich inclusions remain molten slightly 
longer than the rest of the steel and attract chromium atoms from adjacent 
zones.

 Metallurgy is often an exercise in compromise. When stainless steel doesn't 
have any sulfide inclusions, pitting doesn't occur. However, some sulfide 
content makes the material easier to machine into useful objects. Therefore, 
Ryan says, the key to developing pit-resistant stainless steels is to correct 
the dearth of chromium atoms around inclusions, not to reduce manganese sulfide 
content.

 One solution might be to speed up the material's cooling process, which would 
allow less time for chromium atoms to migrate into the inclusions. Another 
answer might be to add a processing step that redistributes chromium into the 
zones where it's low. Both methods would be cheaper than adding expensive 
metals, such as molybdenum or titanium, as makers of the highest-grade 
stainless steels now do.

 There's a gigantic market for less expensive corrosion-resistant steel, says 
Roger C. Newman, a materials scientist at the University of Manchester in 
England. Possible customers include industries that use stainless pipes and 
vats in making products such as food, deodorants, and shampoos.

 Newman estimates that a new inexpensive stainless steel could result in a 10 
percent reduction of the initial costs of such vats and pipes and an overall 
savings of 30 to 40 percent over the life of a manufacturing system that 
includes such equipment.


