Channel Surfing: Science News Online, March 9, 2002

 Channel Surfing

 Atomic-resolution snapshots illuminate cellular pores that control ion flow

 John Travis

 Sarah Hughes unexpectedly skates to a gold medal in Salt Lake City at the 
Winter Olympics. Barry Bonds whips a baseball bat around to smack yet another 
home run. At the age of 22, Garry Kasparov defeats Anatoly Karpov to become the 
youngest world chess champion ever. Physicist Stephen Hawking teases out the 
mysteries of a black hole. Those are celebrations of human physical and mental 
capabilities.

 A man writhing in an epileptic fit isn't. Nor is a child with cystic fibrosis 
struggling to draw air into clogged lungs, or a promising young basketball 
player who dies suddenly of heart failure.

 Microscopic cellular pores called ion channels unite the starkly different 
images above. These protein-based molecular gatekeepers govern the cellular 
influx and outflow of ions, such as calcium and chloride. Literally every 
single thought or action involves these channels. After all, among their duties 
is regulation of the electrical excitability that nerve cells use to 
communicate and that muscles exploit to contract.

"There's no question that nature uses ion channels to accomplish many things in 
the cell. They're obviously very important for life and health," says Roderick 
MacKinnon, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) investigator at Rockefeller 
University in New York.

 When an ion channel malfunctions, the outcome can be devastating. Epilepsy can 
result from defects in channels for calcium, while cystic fibrosis stems from 
mutations in a channel for chloride ions (SN: 1/26/02, p. 59: Available to 
subscribers at .). Problems with potassium channels have been known to cause 
arrhythmic beating even in an athlete's well-conditioned heart.

 Those are just some of the reasons why scientists want to better understand 
how ion channels work. Moreover, many drugs, including ones for epilepsy, heart 
conditions, and migraines, work by altering the function of such pores. 
Uncovering their molecular structures should help researchers design new agents 
that work by binding to the channels.

 Yet until recently, scientists were hamstrung in their efforts to depict 
channels' structures. In 1998, however, MacKinnon and his colleagues used X 
rays to construct atomic-resolution images of a potassium channel. The detail 
was unprecedented. These snapshots provided immediate insight into questions 
such as how the channel can shuttle up to 100 million potassium ions across a 
cell membrane in a single second while keeping out similarly charged sodium 
ions, whose smaller size would seem to make passage even easier.

 The revelation of the long-awaited potassium channel's structure drew strong 
praise. "A dream come true for biophysicists," said Clay Armstrong of the 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia in a commentary 
accompanying the 1998 report.

 MacKinnon and other researchers have continued to delve into the structure and 
function of the potassium channel. And earlier this year, MacKinnon's team 
published the first atomic-scale structures of a chloride channel. As with the 
earlier work on the potassium channel, the new images have helped explain how 
the complicated chloride channel operates.

"The drug companies are just drooling at these structures," notes Stephen 
Cannon of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

 Powerful crystals 

 Discovered in the 1950s, ion channels have been the topic of thousands of 
studies. In one common research strategy, investigators mutate a channel's gene 
to exchange or eliminate a single amino acid in the protein. If this changes 
the function of the channel, researchers have a new clue to its structure. This 
technique might reveal, for example, that the amino acid glutamate in one 
specific location of the channel protein serves as part of the gateway for ions.

 Such studies have provided some insight into how channels work, but they 
haven't delivered the clarity that comes from, say, a picture of a channel's 
three-dimensional shape. It's akin to the differences between inferring a large 
object's shape through touch versus seeing it all at once with your eyes.

 For years, however, many researchers didn't think that direct images of ion 
channels were possible. To get atomic-resolution images of a protein, 
scientists generally turn to X-ray crystallography. They first need to coerce 
many billions of the protein molecules to crystallize, and then they shine 
X-rays on the resulting crystal. From the way the X-rays bounce off the 
protein, the investigators can painstakingly deduce the location of each atom 
and ultimately reconstruct the protein's shape.

 That's the ideal, anyway. The practice isn't easy when it comes to ion 
channels because they snake in and out of a cell's membrane, making them 
difficult to isolate. Investigators must first use a detergent to extract the 
channels from cell membranes. But the detergent itself sticks to the protein 
and impedes its forming a well-ordered crystal.

 Another major challenge is to obtain enough copies of an ion channel protein 
to produce a crystal. Individual cells have relatively few ion channels of any 
particular type. That's why MacKinnon and other scientists usually resort to 
studying the ion channels of bacteria. These structures closely resemble ion 
channels in more complex creatures, and it's easy to culture the microbes in 
large batches.

 In 1998, using this approach, MacKinnon and his colleagues produced the first 
detailed structure of an ion channel-a potassium channel called KcsA from the 
bacterium Streptomyces lividans. In animals, potassium channels govern nerve 
cell signaling, beating of the heart, and release of insulin.

 Scientists have known for years that potassium channels are composed of four 
identical protein subunits that form a complex. The crystallography-derived 
images of KcsA confirmed that and showed that the channel is an inverted teepee 
with the four subunits providing the supporting poles.

 The pictures also immediately cleared up some mysteries surrounding potassium 
channels, such as how the channels distinguish so well between potassium and 
sodium ions. A potassium channel lets in just one sodium ion for every 1,000 or 
so potassium ions, although each sodium ion has the same electrical charge as a 
potassium ion and are only slightly smaller.

 It turns out that the wide exterior opening of a KcsA channel contains what 
scientists call a selectivity filter. Potassium ions, stripped of the water 
molecules that normally surround them when dissolved in body fluids, just fit 
inside this oxygen-lined tunnel structure. The filter's oxygen atoms 
essentially take the place of the water molecules.

"The potassium channel is organized to be a mimic of water," says MacKinnon. 
"The design is very simple and very beautiful."

 Sodium ions are too small for a potassium channel's oxygen lining to 
effectively take the place of the ion's shell of water. As a result, the sodium 
ions generally remain outside the channel.

 The images of the KcsA channel "explained beautifully why sodium can't go 
through the channel," says Bruce Bean of Harvard Medical School in Boston.

 The new structural data also offered details on how the channel speeds 
potassium ions into the cell. Various stretches of amino acids within the 
channel coil up into helical structures whose distributed electrical charges 
draw positively charged ions from the opening of the channel toward the inside 
of the cell. There's also a minuscule water-filled cavity within the pore that 
the potassium ions enter after flowing through the selectivity filter. 
Reacquiring a shell of water there may help an ion complete its passage through 
a cell's oily membrane into the watery interior, suggest researchers.

 Since its 1998 publication, MacKinnon's team has teased more and more 
information from their crystallography-derived images. In the June 7, 2001 
Nature, for example, the investigators described a portion of the channel 
protein that can plug up its pore very quickly and shut off the flow of ions. 
The time it takes for such a channel to reopen-on the order of a 
millisecond-explains in part why nerve cells need tiny breaks when they fire 
off electrical signals, notes MacKinnon.

 In the Nov. 1, 2001 Nature, the researchers presented the highest-resolution 
images yet of the bacterial potassium channel. Among other things, the pictures 
reveal that as many as four potassium ions at a time can flow through the pore 
across the cell membrane.

 Negative thoughts 

 Before folding into their three-dimensional shapes, proteins start off as 
linear strings of amino acids. Because of similarities in the amino acid 
sequences of the proteins that comprise channels for positively charged ions, 
scientists suspect that sodium and calcium channels will prove to have the same 
basic structure as the KcsA channel.

 Until a few months ago, it was less clear how the channels that conduct 
negative ions into and out of cells do their job. In the Jan. 17 Nature, 
MacKinnon's team hits pay dirt again, this time presenting the structures of 
bacterial chloride channels.

 Before this work, scientists weren't even sure which parts of a 
chloride-channel protein assembled into the pore structures. With pictures of 
these channels in hand, it's now understandable why investigators struggled so 
much. The chloride channel is "such a complex structure, one in which the pore 
involves many segments of the channel," explains David Clapham, an HHMI 
investigator at Children's Hospital in Boston.

 The new work resolves a lingering controversy over whether the channels harbor 
one pore or two, one in each subunit. MacKinnon's pictures show "unequivocally" 
that a chloride channel has two pores, says Cannon.

 The chloride-channel structure is markedly different from that of the KcsA 
channel. Instead of inverted teepees, the chloride channels resemble 
hourglasses. Ions flow into a large opening that narrows considerably at the 
middle of the channel before expanding again.

 In some ways, however, the chloride and potassium channels are similar. Both 
channels contain helical structures that have a distributed electrical charge. 
In contrast to the helices in KcsA channels, however, those in the chloride 
channels are oriented so that the positively charged faces of the helices point 
inward. This helps draw the negatively charged chloride ions into the channel 
and through to the cell's interior. "It's the same thing [as in KcsA channels] 
but in reverse," says MacKinnon.

 Head to toe 

 Determining how channels selectively permit certain ions to enter a cell is 
just one of two crucial issues concerning the pores. The other centers on how 
channels open and close like a valve, a process called gating. Some channels 
open when they receive a chemical or environmental signal, such as the recently 
discovered calcium channel that responds to cold temperatures (SN: 2/16/02, p. 
101: Available to subscribers at .). Other channels open in response to changes 
in the voltage differential across the surrounding cell membrane. Because they 
can open and close so quickly, these so-called voltage-gated ion channels are 
well-suited for their roles in nerve conduction

 Revealing the mechanisms behind voltage gating is, in the words of Cannon, 
"the next Holy Grail" in the ion-channel field.

 Neither MacKinnon nor anyone else has yet produced atomic-resolution pictures 
of a voltage-gated ion channel. One difficulty has been the inability to find a 
suitable channel for crystallization. It appears that Clapham's team may have 
taken a major step in that quest, however.

 The researchers recently discovered a novel voltage-gated calcium channel in 
the tails of mammalian sperm (SN: 10/13/01, p. 228: ). They then looked at 
various databases of genetic sequences in search of similar channels in other 
species. They found a promising candidate in a bacterium called Bacillus 
halodurans, which lives in high-salt environments. However, the microbial 
channel conducts sodium, not calcium.

"People had predicted this channel would be a calcium channel . . . so it was a 
big surprise that it turned out to be a very fast-activating sodium channel," 
says Clapham.

 There was something even more surprising. No one had previously reported 
voltage-gated ion channels in a microbe. Jellyfish were the simplest creatures 
known to possess such channels. It was generally thought that microbes, which 
lack muscles and nervous systems, don't need the high-speed reactions that 
voltage-gated ion channels permit.

"This changes the whole evolutionary picture of [ion] channels," says Clapham. 
"It means that bacteria, the most primitive life forms, have what was thought 
to be a very specialized channel."

 Beyond raising questions about the origins of various ion channels, the 
protein identified by Clapham's group may also finally allow researchers to 
obtain an atomic-scale portrait of a voltage-gated channel. Clapham and several 
other teams are now racing to grow B. halodurans and obtain enough of its 
channel proteins for crystallization.

"This [sodium channel] is going to be the tool that cracks the mystery of 
voltage sensing," predicts Cannon.

 If that turns out to be true, scientists will have answered the most 
fundamental questions about ion channels. While he's optimistic that the 
currently known structures of ion channels, as well as ones that will be 
uncovered in the coming years, will ultimately lead to novel drugs, MacKinnon 
admits that he's motivated more by the thrill of understanding these remarkable 
proteins.

"I just wonder how nature does things," he says. "How did nature make an 
electrical signal go from my brain to my toes so fast? The more you learn about 
what the ion channels have to do to make that signal, the more incredible it 
seems."


