The Hunger Hormone?: Science News Online, Feb. 16, 2002

 The Hunger Hormone?

 An appetite stimulant produced by the stomach may lead to treatments for 
obesity and wasting syndromes

 John Travis

 Perhaps you skipped breakfast this morning. It's nearly noon and your stomach 
is starting to rumble. Or maybe you're working late and developing a headache 
because you haven't had dinner yet. In both of these cases, your body is 
sending a clear signal: Give me food, right now. Figure out how that signaling 
works and the world will beat a pathway to your door. Controlling weight, after 
all, is important for cosmetic and medical reasons, and it's already a 
multibillion-dollar business.

"We all know that around mealtime, one tends to get hungry. It's a very 
powerful sensation. All of us have had it. Yet the nature of that powerful 
stimulus is quite vague," notes David E. Cummings of the University of 
Washington in Seattle. "There's no clear consensus on why we get hungry at 
mealtimes."

 Over the years, scientists have proposed many hunger signals. Some researchers 
argued that the contracting stomach provides the trigger. One investigator went 
so far as to swallow a balloon and inflate it. This dulled his appetite all 
right, but other researchers countered that people who had had their stomachs 
surgically removed still became hungry.

 Biologists have also debated whether a dip in the blood's sugar concentration 
initiates desire for a meal. "It's a hypothesis that has not gained universal 
acceptance," Cummings says.

 Now, a new candidate for a hunger signal has emerged.

 Two years ago, scientists found that when they gave a hormone called ghrelin 
to rodents, it stimulated feeding. Last year, Cummings' team showed that the 
concentration of ghrelin in a person's blood rises significantly before meals 
and plummets afterwards. And in one of the latest studies, investigators 
observed that people receiving premeal infusions of the hormone increased their 
food intake by an average of 30 percent.

 Although scientists only identified ghrelin in 1999, more than 100 papers on 
the substance have already been published. The reasons for the interest are 
obvious. If ghrelin is a safe appetite stimulant, the hormone could lead to 
treatments for wasting syndromes stemming from AIDS, cancer, heart disease, and 
a variety of other causes. And perhaps of greater interest to the overall U.S. 
population, in which obesity has become epidemic, ghrelin could become the 
basis for treatments that suppress appetite and provide a novel way to 
encourage weight loss.

"With every passing paper-and there are many per month now-the concept that 
ghrelin is a physiologically important regulator of appetite and body weight 
seems to be growing more strong," says Cummings. "In the realm of body-weight 
regulation, this is one of the major stories."

 Stomach pump

 Ghrelin's discovery came about through reverse pharmacology: Synthetic drugs 
revealed a natural substance produced by the body.

 Beginning in the late 1970s, researchers began creating ingestible drugs that 
stimulate the release of growth hormone, a substance known to be critical for 
development, tissue repair, muscle growth, bone strength, and much more. 
Although growth hormone may be most vital during fetal development and 
childhood, it has been touted as a potential antiaging agent (SN: 5/11/96, p. 
301).

 While investigating some of these synthetic drugs that stimulate the release 
of growth hormone, researchers discovered that several don't work through the 
brain's well-known triggering agent, which is called growth hormone releasing 
hormone. Instead, scientists learned that the drugs act upon a previously 
unrecognized cell-surface protein, or receptor, in the brain's pituitary and 
hypothalamus.

 Biologists hypothesized that the body has a second signal, recognized by the 
newfound receptor, that regulates growth hormone secretion. In 1999, a research 
group headed by Kenji Kangawa of the National Cardiovascular Center Research 
Institute in Osaka, Japan, finally identified this natural signal, a peptide 
consisting of 28 amino acids. As expected, when injected into rodents, it 
stimulates growth hormone secretion.

 The researchers dubbed the new molecule ghrelin. The name uses the root 
"ghre," which means growth in Hindi and related languages. The name's initial 
letters also reference ghrelin's role as a growth hormone releasing factor.

 Ghrelin's discovery offered a major surprise. Although its receptors are in 
the brain, its primary site of production turned out to be the stomach. This 
suggested that the stomach pumps ghrelin into the bloodstream and the hormone 
then travels to the pituitary where it spurs the release of growth hormone. 
Indeed, Kangawa and his colleagues found significant amounts of ghrelin in the 
blood of healthy people. And in 2000, Ezio Ghigo of the University of Turin in 
Italy and his colleagues reported that injecting people with ghrelin led to a 
significant, prolonged increase in growth hormone concentrations in their blood.

 Anyone hungry?

 Ghrelin, however, has quickly outgrown its role as a simple regulator of 
growth hormone secretion. Less than a year after its discovery was announced, 
scientists from Lilly Research Laboratories in Indianapolis, reported that 
injecting rodents with ghrelin prompted the animals to gain weight, most of it 
as fat tissue.

 The hormone stimulated extra food intake by the animals and also shifted their 
metabolism so that they burned less fat. The investigators saw similar effects 
in a strain of mice unable to make growth hormone, indicating that ghrelin's 
influence on weight is independent of its stimulation of growth hormone release.

 Several research groups quickly confirmed the Lilly findings in rodents and 
began to investigate ghrelin's role in people. Over the years, many of the 
people taking drugs that are now known to activate ghrelin's brain receptors 
reported hunger as a side effect. And in the initial studies of ghrelin 
injections into people, which were designed solely to confirm that it triggers 
growth hormone secretion, about 80 percent of the participants complained of 
intense hunger.

 In the August 2001 Diabetes, Cummings' group offered further evidence that 
ghrelin may initiate desire for food. "We reasoned that if ghrelin is a 
precipitant of mealtime hunger, it should rise before every meal, and as soon 
as you begin to eat, it should fall back down again," says Cummings

 To test that conjecture, the researchers regularly measured ghrelin in the 
blood of 10 healthy people over a 24-hour period. As predicted, ghrelin's 
concentration rose, on average by 78 percent, before each meal and fell 
dramatically after the meal.

 The most powerful evidence yet that ghrelin regulates human hunger comes from 
Stephen Bloom of Hammersmith Hospital in London and his colleagues. For one 
day, beginning in the morning, they continuously infused nine healthy 
volunteers with saline solutions either with or without ghrelin. The volunteers 
ate a fixed amount for breakfast 2 hours after they began their infusion and, 2 
hours later, had lunch at an open buffet. Each person underwent the regimen 
twice, receiving ghrelin one time and not the other.

 Neither the researchers nor the volunteers knew whether ghrelin had been 
infused until after the experiment.

 Ghrelin "certainly made the human volunteers voraciously hungry," says Bloom. 
Compared with their eating when they received only saline, people infused with 
ghrelin ate 30 percent more, the team reports in the December 2001 Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism.

 Cummings notes, "If one Ritz cracker a day [in extra calories] would cause you 
to gain a pound a year, imagine what a 30 percent increase in food intake would 
do."

 Ghrelin is the first natural bloodborne molecule known to stimulate human 
appetite, concludes Bloom. Other peptides that increase appetite are made in 
the brain and only work if injected directly into appropriate brain regions, he 
explains.

 Starvation signal

 To their surprise, researchers have found that people suffering from wasting 
illnesses actually make more ghrelin than normal, not less. In fact, the 
highest blood concentrations of ghrelin ever recorded are in people suffering 
anorexia nervosa, a psychological condition in which people can literally 
starve themselves to death. Their bodies are apparently yelling at them to eat, 
but they're not listening.

 Cummings and his colleagues have also found that ghrelin concentrations in the 
blood follow a daily cycle, reaching high concentrations during the night. Yet 
hunger doesn't prevent most people from sleeping. Cummings suspects that other 
biological signals change the threshold at which ghrelin triggers hunger 
throughout the day and night.

 Last April, investigators reported in Diabetes the first results on ghrelin 
concentrations in the blood of obese people. The team had hypothesized that 
obese people overproduce ghrelin. On average, however, obese people have less 
ghrelin in their blood than thinner people do, the study concluded.

 These results indicate that ghrelin itself isn't the cause of most obesity. In 
fact, the body may naturally try to combat obesity by reducing its hunger 
stimulus, notes study coauthor Eric Ravussin of the Pennington Biomedical 
Research Center in Baton Rouge, La. An alternative explanation for obesity is 
that overweight people are extremely sensitive to ghrelin-for example, they may 
have more receptors for the hormone-so they don't need as much of the hormone 
to stimulate hunger.

 If labeling ghrelin as the hunger hormone is an oversimplification, how many 
functions does the hormone have? In just 2 years, scientists have shown that 
ghrelin influences blood pressure, sugar concentrations in blood, insulin 
metabolism, cardiac efficiency, and many other aspects of physiology. The 
hormone may act as a general starvation signal, preparing the body to deal with 
a scarcity of food, says Ghigo. To better understand ghrelin's myriad powers, 
investigators are now rushing to create mice unable to make the hormone.

 Cautionary tale

 From a medical standpoint, the most pressing question about ghrelin is whether 
interfering with the hormone's function will promote weight loss. Although most 
obese people already have lower-than-normal blood concentrations of ghrelin, 
reducing ghrelin concentration further won't necessarily be ineffective, 
stresses Cummings.

 There are at least three ways to inhibit ghrelin's stimulation of appetite. 
One would be to suppress the stomach's production of ghrelin. A second strategy 
would identify so-called ghrelin antagonists, drugs that block the hormone's 
actions by binding to its receptor. While pharmaceutical companies are 
reportedly racing to develop such antagonists, it's not usually easy to make 
drugs that can reach the brain from the bloodstream.

 A third tactic could center on a unique aspect of ghrelin's biology. For the 
hormone to work as an appetite stimulant, it must first attach to a small fatty 
acid molecule. Biologists are now searching for the enzyme that joins ghrelin 
to the fatty acid. Inhibiting the enzyme's function would, in theory, leave any 
ghrelin made by the stomach unable to affect appetite, notes Cummings.

 The most immediate medical payoff of ghrelin's discovery may be for people 
suffering cachexia, a dangerous wasting induced by the loss of appetite 
stemming from surgery, AIDS, cancer, and other conditions. Noritoshi Nagaya of 
Japan's National Cardiovascular Center says that he and his colleagues already 
plan to test ghrelin's ability to stimulate appetite in patients with cachexia 
as a result of heart disease. This weight loss and weakening is a major 
contributor to the mortality of such patients, the investigator notes.

 Some researchers warn against overenthusiasm about ghrelin's prospects. Mark 
Friedman of Tulane University of Louisiana in New Orleans, who contends that 
signals from the liver regulate food intake, points to the story of leptin as a 
cautionary tale. Quickly dubbed the obesity hormone by the media and some 
scientists after its discovery, leptin is secreted by fat cells and appears to 
tell the brain whether the body has enough energy stored as fat (SN: 7/29/95, 
p. 68).

 Excited by this discovery, some researchers speculated that extra leptin could 
trick the body into thinking that it didn't need to eat much. A biotech company 
even paid $25 million for the patent rights to leptin. It's turned out, 
however, that obese people make abnormally high amounts of the hormone and that 
providing them with more leptin doesn't instigate significant weight loss.

 Efforts to develop ghrelin into a blockbuster drug for weight management could 
suffer the same fate. But even if it doesn't lead to best-selling drugs, its 
recent arrival on the scientific scene has whetted researchers' appetites to 
learn more.


