Chill Out: Mild hypothermia aids heart attack recovery: Science News Online, 
Feb. 23, 2002

 Chill Out: Mild hypothermia aids heart attack recovery

 Nathan Seppa

 It sounds cold, but icing down patients who have just had a heart stoppage may 
boost their survival chances and prevent brain damage in those who do pull 
through, two new studies show.

 A heart attack, near-drowning, or other misfortune that leaves a person 
pulseless for even a few minutes can damage the brain because halted blood flow 
starves brain tissues of needed oxygen. Ironically, cardiac resuscitation and 
the abrupt restoration of blood flow often cause a second round of damage to 
the brain.

 Experiments in animals during the past 2 decades showed that cooling the body 
after a shutdown of the heart prevented much of this secondary damage. Lowering 
body temperature, thereby cooling the blood, slows processes in the brain that 
ignite harmful biochemical chain reactions.

 Cooling was tried as a heart attack treatment in the 1950s. After mixed 
results, doctors shelved the concept. In fact, warming patients during some 
surgeries has proven beneficial (SN: 4/12/97, p. 220: ). However, cooling has 
been used for years with good results on another set of patients-those who have 
had blood flow to the brain stopped intentionally during heart surgery.

 To assess whether this so-called mild hypothermia could help resuscitated 
heart attack patients, researchers in Europe randomly assigned about half of 
273 such patients to receive cooling after their initial collapse. All the 
people had been pulseless for at least several minutes before being revived, 
says Mattias Fischer, an anesthesiologist at Bonn University in Germany. He and 
his colleagues kept the cooled patients at 33@C (91.4@F) for 24 hours.

 Six months after their heart attack, 41 percent of the patients receiving the 
mild hypothermia treatment had died, compared with 55 percent of those kept at 
normal body temperature, the researchers report in the Feb. 21 New England 
Journal of Medicine ( NEJM). Of the cooled patients, 55 percent were well 
enough to live independently and work at least part-time, but only 39 percent 
those patients who had not been cooled were living on their own and holding a 
job. The average age in both groups was 59.

 In another study reported in the same issue of NEJM, researchers working in 
and around Melbourne, Australia, instructed emergency teams to apply ice packs 
to comatose heart attack patients who had been resuscitated-but only on 
odd-numbered days. These patients were then kept between 32@C and 34@C for 12 
hours. Patients shiver as their body temperature drops but stop when they reach 
this range, says study coauthor Stephen A. Bernard, an intensive-care physician 
at the Dandenong Hospital in Dandenong, Australia. On even-numbered days, 
comatose heart attack patients were kept warm.

 The researchers found that 21 of 43 cooled patients (49 percent) were 
ultimately discharged to their homes or a rehabilitation center, compared with 
only 9 of 34 patients (26 percent) kept warm.

 People who are comatose after being revived following a heart attack face grim 
odds. Three-fourths or more die from the heart attack, Bernard says. Dandenong 
Hospital and other facilities in the Melbourne area have begun cooling all 
revived, comatose heart attack patients in the ambulance, he says.

 Protective effects of hypothermia have also been indicated by case studies of 
people who have fallen through ice, experienced a heart stoppage, and been 
revived-a situation with built-in cooling. However, such severe hypothermia can 
render a person vulnerable to infections and other problems.

 On the other hand, mild cooling "is without side effects, safe, and 
inexpensive," says Peter J. Safar, an anesthesiologist at the University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center. "Mild hypothermia for cardiac arrest should be part 
of [physicians'] guidelines," he says.

 The secondary damage to the brain caused by the restoration of blood flow 
appears linked to a chain reaction that releases glutamate from nerve cells in 
the brain. Too much glutamate, an amino acid, overexcites and kills these 
cells. Keeping the blood cool curbs glutamate release, Safar says.

 Other research suggests that mild hypothermia also limits the number of 
heart-muscle cells that die after a heart attack, possibly offering an 
additional benefit, says Robert A. Kloner, a cardiologist at Good Samaritan 
Hospital in Los Angeles.


