Stem Cell Success: Mice fuel debate on embryo cloning: Science News Online, 
March 16, 2002

 Stem Cell Success: Mice fuel debate on embryo cloning

 John Travis

 A handful of mutant mice have fired up the debate over the cloning of human 
embryos to produce cells for medical use. After genetically engineering cells 
that had been generated by cloning mouse embryos, investigators have partially 
repaired the defective immune system of these animals.

 The two new studies, which will appear in an upcoming Cell, represent the 
first evidence that the strategy dubbed therapeutic cloning could someday 
provide sick people with genetically matched cells, tissues, or organs, say the 
researchers. "We felt we needed to put some evidence on the table that this 
could indeed work," says William M. Rideout III of the Whitehead Institute of 
Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., a coauthor of one study.

 Yet a rival researcher openly challenges the significance of the experiments. 
"This does not address the issue of whether therapeutic cloning will work or 
not," argues Robert Lanza of Advanced Cell Technologies in Worcester, Mass. His 
company recently claimed to have cloned human embryos as a first step toward 
therapeutic cloning (SN: 12/1/01, p. 341: ).

 A more favorable assessment of the mouse work comes from Irving Weissman of 
Stanford University, who recently chaired a national advisory panel that called 
for continued work on therapeutic cloning but a ban on cloning intended to 
create babies (SN: 1/26/02, p. 52: Available to subscribers at .). Noting that 
the mouse experiments offer the first evidence in a scientific journal that 
cloned stem cells can be therapeutic, he says the reports "should completely 
change the tenor of the debate."

 The debate to which Weissman refers concerns the bill introduced by Sen. Sam 
Brownback (R-Kan.) and Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) that would ban the cloning of 
human embryos to produce either a baby or tissues for transplantation. Since 
the House of Representatives has passed a similar bill, and President Bush 
supports the legislation, approval of the Brownback-Landrieu bill would 
effectively outlaw human therapeutic cloning.

 Some scientists argue that such research will simply continue in countries 
with less restrictive policies. In fact, the Wall Street Journal recently 
reported that investigators in China have cloned human embryos to derive stem 
cells.

 Therapeutic cloning, in theory, offers patients lab-grown replacement cells 
that won't be rejected by their immune system. For example, a woman with 
diabetes might receive insulin-secreting islet cells cloned from her own body 
and therefore genetically identical to the rest of her cells. Such transplants 
could preclude the need for immune-suppressing drugs.

 The Whitehead Institute researchers tested therapeutic cloning on mice that 
have a gene mutation leaving them unable to make immune cells known as T and B 
cells. A small number of people have similar conditions, which leave them 
vulnerable to infections. In the cloning step of the experiment, the scientists 
clipped cells from the tail of one mouse and implanted its DNA into another 
mouse's eggs, which they had stripped of DNA. They then stimulated the eggs 
into dividing to the embryonic stage from which they could extract so-called 
stem cells, which can develop into any tissue.

 The scientists then repaired the original mouse's genetic defect in the stem 
cells and allowed the cells to mature until the team could isolate ones with 
blood-forming properties similar to bone marrow of adults. "What we were 
looking to achieve [in the mice] was the equivalent of a bone marrow transplant 
without any of the rejection problems," says Rideout.

 Next, the researchers added to the stem cells a gene called HoxB4. Experiments 
conducted by a Whitehead Institute team led by George Daley had shown that the 
activity of this gene helps such cells survive after being transplanted.

 Finally, the investigators transferred the cells into mice with the same 
immune defect that the original mice had. The animals are all from the same 
inbred line, so their genes are virtually identical. The expectation was that 
the transplanted cells would produce normal blood cells, including the missing 
T and B cells. The plan did not work at first. "Even though the cells were 
genetically identical [to the recipients'], they were being rejected," says 
Daley.

 He, Rideout, and their colleagues ultimately concluded that the cells before 
transplantation hadn't matured enough to sport the proper identifying proteins, 
so some immune cells of the host mice attacked the transplanted cells as 
foreign. By performing the same experiments in mice in which those patrolling 
immune cells were absent or suppressed, the investigators finally were able to 
get the transplanted cells to take hold and produce new T and B cells.

 The researchers estimate that they restored only about 5 percent of a mouse's 
normal T and B cell function. "It does not rise to the level of a cure," says 
Daley. "That's for the future."

"As in most areas of biology, the first results, although definitive, are not 
as robust as one would take to the clinic," agrees Weissman.

 Lanza takes a harsher view. Since the mice used are inbred, and, in his 
opinion, don't have a particularly sophisticated immune system to begin with, 
he argues that the experiments didn't actually test whether therapeutic cloning 
creates tissue that avoids rejection. "The real challenge is to get things to 
work in large animals with sophisticated immune systems similar to a human's," 
he says.

 Several newspapers have reported that Advanced Cell Technologies has used 
therapeutic cloning to derive bovine stem cells and create kidneys that it has 
transplanted into adult cows. Lanza confirmed those reports but declined to 
offer any further details, noting that the company planned to publish its 
results soon.


