Heads Up: Problem solving pushed bright primates toward bigger brains: Science 
News Online, March 16, 2002

 Heads Up: Problem solving pushed bright primates toward bigger brains

 Bruce Bower

 Progressively larger brains evolved in primates of all stripes, not just 
humans. We can thank a common capacity for solving a broad range of problems, 
from coordinating social alliances to inventing tools, according to a new study.

 This conclusion challenges a popular theory that big, smart brains arose 
primarily because they afforded advantages when it came to negotiating complex 
social situations during human evolution.

"The ability to learn from others, invent new behaviors, and use tools may have 
[also] played pivotal roles in primate-brain evolution," say Simon M. Reader of 
McGill University in Montreal and Kevin N. Laland of the University of 
Cambridge in England. In an upcoming report in the Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, the two zoologists chronicle links between an array of 
intelligent behaviors and enhanced brain size in primates.

 Reader and Laland examined approximately 1,000 scientific studies of behavior 
in 116 of the world's 203 known primate species. They identified 553 instances 
of animals discovering new solutions to survival-related problems, 445 
observations of individuals learning skills and acquiring information from 
others, and 607 episodes of tool use.

 The researchers then consulted previously obtained data on brain size relative 
to body size in different primates. In particular, they focused on the volume 
of the structures that make up what scientists call the executive brain, a 
frontal region thought to be crucial for complex thinking.

 Species that have the proportionately largest executive brains are the ones 
that most often innovate, learn from others, and use tools, Reader and Laland 
contend. These three facets of intelligence vary together as primate brains 
enlarge, they say. There's no evidence in any species of an evolutionary 
trade-off between these traits, such as an increase in innovation accompanying 
a decline in social learning.

 A related report by neuroscientist Barbara L. Finlay of Cornell University and 
her colleagues concluded that different brain regions in mammals enlarged all 
together during mammalian evolution, not in piecemeal fashion related to 
specific functions. Whole-brain evolution was driven by changes in the timing 
of early brain development in individuals, says Finlay. In all species, 
late-generated structures-including the executive brain-have grown the largest, 
Finlay's team asserted in the April 2001 Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

 Reader and Laland provide "important new evidence" that wide-ranging thinking 
skills shared by many primate species encouraged the evolution of large brains, 
comment psychologist Robert M. Seyfarth and biologist Dorothy L. Cheney, both 
of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, in a comment published with 
the new report.

 They suggest that intellectual accomplishments unique to people, such as 
language use, may have played a smaller role in the evolution of our sizable 
brains than has often been thought.


