Unified Erectus: Fossil suggests single human ancestor: Science News Online, 
March 23, 2002 

 Unified Erectus: Fossil suggests single human ancestor

 John Pickrell

 A newly found, million-year-old African skull is fueling an ongoing debate 
over whether Homo erectus was a single wide-ranging species or 
several localized ones. The skull appears similar to those found in Asia, 
suggesting that the populations were in fact one species.

 Fossils of H. erectus were discovered in Java in the 1800s. For many years, 
this species was recognized as the sole link between humans' 
earliest direct ancestor, Homo habilis, and modern Homo sapiens. H. erectus 
emerged 1.8 million years ago and may have survived to times as 
recent as 50,000 years ago.

 Beginning in the 1980s, with the advent of new methods of analysis, some 
anthropologists have argued for splitting up H. erectus (SN: 
6/20/92, p. 408). Proponents of this argument hold that European and African 
specimens formerly considered H. erectus belong to another 
species that they call Homo ergaster. They say that H. ergaster evolved into 
modern man but the Asia-bound H. erectus came up against an 
evolutionary dead end.

 Arguments have raged, with some scientists proposing that observed differences 
between specimens are due to evolution in a single species 
over time-most African fossils are older than Asian ones-rather than the 
presence of two distinct species.

 The newfound specimen is younger than most African fossils assigned to H. 
ergaster and contemporary with some Asian H. erectus specimens, 
with which it shares striking similarities.

 This is the first time that it's been possible to compare Asian and African 
fossils from the same period, says W. Henry Gilbert of the 
University of California, Berkeley, who discovered the fossil. The find may 
vindicate researchers who argued against dividing the species, he 
says.

 The skull-which is missing the lower face, jaw, and teeth-comes from a 
fossil-rich region 140 miles northeast of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
Scratch marks suggest that the individual may have been killed by a lion or 
hyena that ate the lower face and gnawed the skull in an attempt 
to extract the brain, says study coauthor Tim White, also of UC-Berkeley. 
Researchers spent 2 years cleaning the partially crushed skull.

 With the new specimen in hand, White and his coworkers compared 14 groups of 
H. erectus and H. ergaster skulls from Asia, Africa, and 
Georgia, formerly in the Soviet Union. The researchers found a considerable 
overlap in shape between specimens from Asia and the other 
geographic regions, they report in the March 21 Nature. Features such as a 
short bulging forehead in the new fossil are similar to those in 
Asian H. erectus, says White.

 Though most anthropologists are excited with the find, some disagree with the 
authors' conclusions. "The researchers should be congratulated 
on finding such a fantastic specimen," says Bernard Wood of George Washington 
University in Washington, D.C. However, they can't rule out that 
the new specimen is H. ergaster, he adds.

"I don't think this will conclude the debate," says Chris Stringer of the 
Natural History Museum in London. He points out that scientists who 
support dividing the species based many conclusions on dental features of H. 
erectus. These can't be compared with the new fossil because it's 
missing its teeth.

 Others feel the fossil provides unequivocal evidence of a single species. 
"This slams the door shut [on the debate]," says C. Owen Lovejoy of 
Kent (Ohio) State University. "Now, all these specimens can be confidently 
restored to their original designation as H. erectus."

"This find should put the issue to rest," agrees Milford Wolpoff of the 
University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. However, he adds, "no discovery 
ever seems to put things to rest in a field as contentious as paleontology."



