Star in a Jar? Hints of nuclear fusion found—maybe: Science News Online, March 
9, 2002

 Star in a Jar? Hints of nuclear fusion found-maybe

 Peter Weiss

 A group of scientists claims to have found evidence of nuclear fusion in a 
vase-size flask of liquid. The researchers say they created tiny bubbles that 
seemed to have collapsed with enough violence to force atomic nuclei to fuse.

 Skepticism about the results outweighs confidence in them. Still, if the 
observations reported in the March 8 Science by Rusi P. Taleyarkhan of Oak 
Ridge (Tenn.) National Laboratory and his colleagues are confirmed, scientists 
will have a new way to study fusion reactions. A far more speculative and 
exciting possibility is that the tabletop experiments might lead to the 
long-sought goal of harnessing fusion for generating power.

"That's the ultimate goal-if it's possible to scale to that level," Taleyarkhan 
says.

 The basis of the new energy source would be so-called sonoluminescence-a 
phenomenon in which bubbles of vapor in a liquid bombarded by sound waves 
rapidly implode, generating heat spikes and flashes of light in the bubbles 
(SN: 10/6/01, p. 213: ). Taleyarkhan and several of his Oak Ridge colleagues 
collaborated on the research with scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute in Troy, N.Y., and the Russian Academy of Sciences in Ufa.

 Even if the experiments did yield fusion reactions, practical technology based 
on the phenomenon would be a long way off. However, many scientists have 
already pronounced the new findings dead wrong.

"They just don't have the evidence," says William C. Moss of Lawrence Livermore 
(Calif.) National Laboratory, one of several sonoluminescence specialists who 
have theorized that fusion in collapsing bubbles is feasible.

 Other critics say that the most damning indictment of the new work is an 
unpublished follow-up experiment by a pair of nuclear physicists, also of the 
Oak Ridge lab.

 Several detractors have compared the new Science report to the infamous "cold 
fusion" announcement made in 1989 (SN: 4/1/89, p. 196). Two electrochemists 
claimed then to have sparked fusion at room temperature by passing electric 
current through a bath of water in which ordinary hydrogen is replaced by 
deuterium, a heavier isotope. However, neither the original pair nor anyone 
else could reproduce those findings, which have since largely been discredited 
as a case study of mistaken science (SN: 6/22/91, p. 392).

 On the other hand, scientists have produced tabletop fusion, for instance by 
zapping small clusters of atoms with high-powered lasers (SN: 3/27/99, p. 196: 
).

 In the new work, Taleyarkhan and his collaborators used bursts of neutrons to 
fabricate clouds of short-lived, but extraordinarily large, sonoluminescence 
bubbles in acetone, the solvent in many nail-polish removers. In some tests, 
the researchers filled the flask with ordinary acetone, whose molecules each 
contain six hydrogen atoms. In other tests, they used deuterated acetone, in 
which deuterium atoms replace the hydrogen ones.

 Under extreme pressure and at temperatures of millions of degrees, such as at 
the center of the sun, deuterium atoms fuse in a reaction whose products 
include tritium-hydrogen's radioactive heavy isotope-and neutrons. However, 
sonoluminescence flashes typically occur at temperatures of thousands of 
degrees, not millions. "Such high temperatures are unlikely to occur" in the 
bubbles of the Oak Ridge setup, notes Lawrence A. Crum of the University of 
Washington in Seattle.

 Using detectors, the Oak Ridge research team looked for surges of neutron 
emissions that correlated with the light flashes of collapsing bubbles. The 
researchers report that flasks containing deuterated acetone show significant 
excess of such events compared with background levels, but flasks of ordinary 
acetone didn't. Moreover, the team observed a buildup of tritium only in the 
deuterated acetone.

 In the current setup, creating sonoluminescence takes far more energy than the 
bubble collapse gives off, even if fusion is taking place, Taleyarkhan says. 
However, he adds, mathematical models of the process suggest that much greater 
energy production may be possible. Of more immediate concern to him and his 
colleagues is the task of convincing other scientists that their evidence of 
fusion is sound.

 Bristling at comparisons to the cold-fusion drama, the Oak Ridge researchers 
say that their findings withstood extensive peer review before being published. 
The cold-fusion claim in 1989 was announced to reporters before being submitted 
for publication.

 The new signs of fusion in bubbles were so extraordinary that Lee L. 
Reidinger, the Oak Ridge lab's deputy director for science and technology, 
commissioned two of the lab's nuclear physicists, Dan Shapira and Michael J. 
Saltmarsh, to monitor the sonoluminescence setup using different detectors.

 In a five-page internal document, Shapira and Saltmarsh report finding no 
correlation between neutrons with the energy expected from deuterium-deuterium 
fusion and light flashes from collapsing bubbles.

 In response to that report, Taleyarkhan and his colleagues produced a 14-page 
rebuttal, in which they claim that their would-be spoilers made mistakes. When 
those errors are corrected, Taleyarkhan says, the Shapira-Saltmarsh findings 
actually agree with the original results.

 Not so fast, Saltmarsh counters. "We stand by our data," he says.


