Are They Really Extinct?: Science News Online, March 16, 2002

 Are They Really Extinct?

 Searches for plants and animals so rare that they may not be there at all

 Susan Milius

 After 22 years, is it time to give up looking? Are searchers deluding 
themselves when they refuse to say that long-sought species have gone extinct? 
Such questions come to mind when talking to botanist Larry Morse of 
NatureServe, a biodiversity conservation group in Arlington, Va. Every summer 
since 1980, he's looked for a little tidal-flat plant called Micranthemum 
micranthemoides. The plant is currently too rare to qualify for the U.S. 
endangered species list; Morse can't demonstrate that even a single M. 
micranthemoides remains on the planet. Legally, and logically, something has to 
exist to be endangered.

 The last record of the plant dates from Sept. 13, 1941. That day, Harvard 
botanist Merritt Lyndon Fernald collected the plant's low-growing, round-leaved 
tufts in two places along the edge of the Chickahominy River in Virginia. What 
happened to the species after that, nobody knows.

 Morse has carefully searched the places recorded on Fernald's samples as well 
as all 10 sites mentioned on labels of the other known specimens. He's also 
visited more than a hundred additional sites with similar soil and tides 
throughout the species' mid-Atlantic range. In 22 years, he's turned up not a 
single M. micranthemoides.

 So, is it time to declare an end to the quest? "Oh no," he says. "There's 
still plenty of habitat to look at."

 Morse's search isn't rousing the public enthusiasm kicked up by the 
January-February 2002 efforts to find another possibly extinct species, the 
ivory-billed woodpecker (SN: 3/2/02, p. 141: Available to subscribers at .). 
Once the largest woodpecker in the United States and second largest in North 
America, the bird stretched some 20 inches from its brilliant red crest to the 
base of its dark tail. An international team sighted no ivory-billed 
woodpeckers during a month of combing woodlands in southeastern Louisiana as 
reporters chronicled developments for CNN, the Wall Street Journal, USA Today, 
and other news outlets not known for bird reports.

 Most zoological and botanical search efforts don't make headlines when they 
come up empty-handed. Some conservation groups have guidelines for when to 
declare a hunt over and an organism gone. Yet when it comes to hope, searchers 
for species presumed extinct still make their own rules.

 The e-word

 To explain the passion behind some of these last-ditch searches, Nigel Collar 
turns to the cautionary tale of the Cebu flowerpecker in the Philippines. An 
ornithologist in Tring, England, at the Natural History Museum's bird division, 
Collar edited a series of books on threatened birds and knows plenty of 
extinction horror stories.

 The little flowerpecker lived in forests on the island of Cebu, but as land 
clearing accelerated in the past century, biologists began to fret over the 
bird's fate. In 1959, a Philippine biologist reported that the island had no 
more forests and presumably no more flowerpeckers. The case became a textbook 
example of how destroying habitat can wipe out an animal. "Everybody just gave 
it up," says Collar.

 In 1992, however, a birdwatcher visiting the island spotted Cebu flowerpeckers 
in a leftover scrap of forest. Surveys have now turned up a few birds that have 
survived in improbably small woodlands, but the species' future looks far from 
promising.

 Collar charges that the premature declaration of extinction wasted 33 years 
that conservationists could have dedicated to preserving the birds. Even in 
1959, conditions were far more favorable to flowerpecker survival than they are 
today. "The patch of forest was much bigger," Collar says.

 Improbable as the 1992 discovery was, now and then other seemingly extinct 
species return from oblivion. For example, in the mid-1980s, a western 
naturalist touring a bird market in Thailand saw a captive Gurney's pitta. This 
species, known only from Myanmar and Thailand, has black plumage marked with 
brilliant yellow and blue. "A pitta is a staggeringly beautiful animal," says 
Collar.

 Ornithologists had searched lowland forests for it during the two previous 
decades but failed to find it. The discovery of the market bird eventually led 
scientists to a hilly woodland fragment with a few dozen of the birds. Their 
future looks precarious, but today the species certainly isn't extinct.

 Estimating the chances of such rediscoveries is tricky, according to Craig 
Hilton-Taylor, who compiles the Red List of imperiled species for the 
IUCN-World Conservation Union based in Gland, Switzerland. The 2000 edition of 
the list ranked 766 plants and animal species as having gone completely extinct 
during the past 500 years and 50 having become extinct just in the wild. Since 
that publication, Hilton-Taylor says, rediscoveries have justified 
reclassifying two of the extinct species: a plant that's a close relative of 
the national flower of Mauritius and the Bavarian pine vole.

 The vole was unusual even for a rediscovery, says Hilton-Taylor. So many 
people, including biologists, crowd into Europe that its flora and fauna hold 
fewer surprises than do those of wilder regions of the world. Biologists had 
found the vole only at one site and had given up hope for the species after a 
hospital complex obliterated that German habitat. Yet, last year, a Bavarian 
pine vole turned up in a trap in Austria.

 In the United States, NatureServe-and before it, the Nature Conservancy-has 
reclassified one or two species a year from lost to living, says Morse.

 Are species being written off too soon? According to IUCN policy, a species is 
declared extinct "when there is no reasonable doubt that the last individual 
has died." IUCN directs Red List assessors to consider the quirks of the 
organism. Have surveys covered the appropriate times of day or year? Have they 
lasted long enough, considering the individuals' life spans? The list's 
commentary cautions that accumulating evidence of extinction "could take a very 
long time" in some cases. The IUCN gives as an example an orchid that blooms, 
briefly, only after wildfires that strike about every 25 years.

 Back from oblivion

 Finding those last few survivors often takes a new point of view and 
old-fashioned luck. Pamela Rasmussen of Michigan State University in East 
Lansing discovered a missing owl in India after realizing that earlier 
searchers had combed the wrong habitat. Analysis from the FBI helped, too.

 When Rasmussen began writing a field guide to birds of the Indian 
subcontinent, she noticed that several species had not been reported in 
decades. One such bird, called the forest owlet, purportedly occupied a broad 
swath of populated, accessible central India. "It's not where you expect a 
mystery bird to be," she says.

 Descriptions of the bird came only from the seven existing stuffed specimens, 
the most recent of which had been supposedly collected by Col. Richard 
Meinertzhagen in 1914. At the Natural History Museum's bird division in Tring, 
England, Rasmussen was plowing through the registry of specimens from another 
collector, James Davidson, when she noticed a listing for a forest owlet that 
hadn't been among the set of specimens she'd studied. She knew that a modern 
ornithologist had reported that Meinertzhagen had pilfered other collectors' 
specimens. Could he have stolen the owlet and presented it as his own-with an 
altered location description?

 The British museum permitted an expert preparator at the Smithsonian 
Institution in Washington, D.C., to examine the so-called Meinertzhagen owlet 
specimen. A good look at the bird's wing revealed bits of old, stained cotton 
stuffing. The only collector of that period who tucked cotton into bird wings 
was Davidson. An FBI fiber expert confirmed that the remnants match cotton in 
Davidson's known birds.

 Using the location for the last sighting of the bird according to Davidson's 
records instead of Meinertzhagen's, Rasmussen narrowed the bird's confirmed 
range to two areas. She also developed a new list of ways to identify the bird 
in the field.

 A Smithsonian colleague gave Rasmussen odds of one in a thousand for finding 
the species during a short trip to India. In 1997, though, she and two other 
birders gave it a try. At the second site they checked-at 8:30 a.m. on their 
first day there-one of Rasmussen's fellow searchers spied a forest owlet 
sitting on a branch near a dirt road. The team videotaped the accommodating 
bird through a bird-watching scope.

 Location, location, location

 Habitat analysis like Rasmussen's underlies many of the rediscovery successes. 
However, herpetologist Gordon Rodda wasn't analyzing habitats when he first met 
Guam's slender-toed geckos.

 The name comes from the gecko's unique toes, which have no pads. Other Guam 
geckos have pads that help them race up slippery wet leaves, but the 
slender-toed ones stick to rocks and other rough, easy-to-grip surfaces. These 
animals have no males, and the females lay eggs that develop without 
fertilization.

 Slender-toed geckos remain on a few Pacific islands, but the population on 
Guam had gone missing after World War II. Or so Rodda thought. In 1996, he was 
trapping species in an undersurveyed area-near a former storage area for 
nuclear weapons-and caught a slender-toed gecko. Another showed up under an old 
mattress that had been tossed into the shrubbery on a different part of the 
island, and Rodda eventually found enough animals to piece together their 
distribution. They had survived mostly on parts of the island that had been 
settled by an alien invader, the brown tree snake.

 Rodda, now at the U.S. Geological Survey in Fort Collins, Colo., offers an 
explanation for this peculiar pattern. He suggests that the snake, generally a 
regrettable addition to Guam's wildlife, helps the geckos by keeping in check 
another invader, a big musk shrew that eats ground-dwelling creatures. The 
other islands that still have slender-toed geckos have escaped this shrew's 
invasion, so far.

 Rethinking a habitat also led to the rediscovery of the Yadkin River goldenrod 
in North Carolina. The plant takes its common name from the only river, in 
central North Carolina, where botanists have found it. Scientifically described 
in 1896, the goldenrod "fell out of people's consciousness," says botanist Alan 
Weakley, now of North Carolina's NatureServe office in Durham. The few people, 
including Weakley, who did think about the goldenrod assumed that two dams 
built on the river had covered the plant's habitat with deep water.

 Weakley was tramping around the region surveying plants along the Yadkin in 
the fall of 1994, when he noticed a peculiarity on the aerial photos he 
carried. They showed what looked like a quarter-mile stretch of original 
riverbank still intact between the two dams. Weakley drove over to see if some 
goldenrods had indeed escaped flooding. "I thought there was a pretty good 
chance, but then I thought it couldn't be this easy," he says.

 It was. A road took him to within 100 yards of the riverbank, and he climbed 
down to find hundreds of the bright yellow flowers leaning over the water. 
Weakley ended up sharing the honors of rediscovery with local plant sleuth 
Steve Leonard, who independently visited the same spot 3 days later.

 Wildlife Conservation Society biologist Peter Zahler of Pelham, Mass., didn't 
have such an easy trip to potential habitat for woolly flying squirrels. In the 
early 1990s, Zahler studied records of the animal in Pakistan. With a 
2-foot-long body and a tail the same length, the heavily furred squirrel had 
been ranked as the world's longest. Yet the last record of the squirrel came 
from 1924, when a British colonel photographed one being led around on a rope.

 Few western biologists had recently visited the highly mountainous Diamer 
region, and travel books warn of murderous local feuds in the isolated valleys. 
Nonetheless, Zahler began working his way through the valleys-at his own 
expense-in 1992. He set live-capture traps and, through his interpreter, 
politely quizzed locals about the squirrel. They told him plenty of legends but 
assured him the animal was extinct.

 Yet the area's abundance of caves and other potential hiding places for large 
squirrels impressed Zahler. "There could be a squirrel party on a ledge 20 feet 
above my head, and I'd never know," he says. He convinced the World Wildlife 
Fund of Pakistan to contribute funds for a second trip 2 years later.

 Again, he traveled in the valleys, set traps, and talked to people about the 
squirrel. He continued to hear tall tales, such as of squirrels that used to 
milk cows at night. One guffawing policemen made Zahler's girlfriend leave the 
room and then confided that aged, rocklike squirrel droppings have aphrodisiac 
powers.

 Two men who later dropped by Zahler's camp asked if he'd pay for a living 
squirrel. He said, "Sure," but didn't expect any deal. They surprised him by 
returning in a couple of hours with a live woolly flying squirrel in a bag. He 
learned that they were aphrodisiac dealers who collected the droppings from 
caves. By finding more of these entrepreneurs, he's now located evidence of the 
squirrels throughout the Diamer region.

 Even with the best habitat analysis in the world, an extinct-species 
rediscoverer still needs luck. Larry Morse hasn't had much in the Micranthemum 
department, but he has had other bright moments. One of his searches revealed a 
low-growing, mat-forming plant on the Chickahominy River's tidal flats. It 
wasn't Micranthemum, but it was another lost species, a small mudflat creeper 
called Bacopa stragula.

 No one had reported seeing it for years, but it wasn't truly extinct, Morse 
found. Someone just needed to look in the right place.


