Brave New Drug: Compound stops cowpox and smallpox viruses: Science News 
Online, March 23, 2002

 Brave New Drug: Compound stops cowpox and smallpox viruses

 Nathan Seppa

 By cloaking an antiviral drug in a fat molecule, scientists have developed a 
new compound that people might someday swallow to ward off smallpox.

 A vaccine against smallpox exists, but governments' supplies have dwindled 
since the disease was declared eradicated in 1980. Smallpox virus is preserved 
in laboratories in the United States and Russia, however, and some smallpox 
stocks may have fallen into terrorist hands when the Soviet Union fell.

 In response to smallpox's potential as a bioterror threat, the U.S. government 
in the 1990s started sponsoring research into drugs that inhibit poxviruses. 
The star candidate so far has been cidofovir, which kills the smallpox virus in 
test tube studies. Cidofovir, however, has two major drawbacks. The drug, 
marketed as Vistide for cytomegalovirus eye infections, must be injected 
intravenously. Also, the large doses required to get cidofovir into cells can 
damage the kidneys, says Karl Y. Hostetler, an endocrinologist at the Veterans 
Affairs San Diego Healthcare System and the University of California, San Diego 
in La Jolla.

 To create an oral version of cidofovir that's less toxic, Hostetler and his 
colleagues packaged each molecule in a partially degraded, digestible fat 
molecule. The new compound, called hexadecyloxypropyl-cidofovir (HDP-CDV), is 
absorbed intact through the membranes of mammalian cells-including those 
infected with a poxvirus-the researchers reported this week in Prague, Czech 
Republic, at the 15th International Conference on Antiviral Research. Inside 
the cells, enzymes strip away HDP-CDV's fatty portion, then its cidofovir binds 
to poxvirus and prevents it from replicating, Hostetler says. HDP-CDV is more 
than 100 times as effective against poxviruses as cidofovir is.

 Further tests on mice receiving HDP-CDV orally once or twice a day over 5 days 
show that the animals fended off cowpox, a close relative of smallpox, reports 
John W. Huggins, a virologist at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of 
Infectious Diseases in Fort Detrick, Md.

 Cowpox and smallpox spread by direct contact or via an infected host's saliva 
droplets that are inhaled by others. The cowpox and smallpox viruses cause skin 
lesions and life-threatening damage in the digestive tract and lungs. Huggins' 
team exposed several groups of mice to an aerosol of cowpox virus and 
simultaneously gave some the HDP-CDV treatment or cidofovir. Others were 
untreated.

 Samples of lung tissue from the untreated mice contained heavy viral loads, 
whereas tissue from mice given HDP-CDV had nearly undetectable cowpox virus. 
Mice getting cidofovir had significantly more viruses in their lungs than the 
HDP-CDV mice did.

 The researchers plan next to test HDP-CDV in monkeys infected with monkeypox, 
which resembles smallpox, Huggins says.

"I don't want to be overly optimistic," Hostetler says, "but it's intriguing 
that after thousands of years of death from smallpox, there is something that . 
. . might treat the disease."

 Huggins says that a treatment is needed to protect people against a possible 
smallpox-virus release. Not enough vaccine has been stockpiled to inoculate 
everyone, and any person who is pregnant, has cancer, or has a weakened immune 
system shouldn't get the vaccine.

"This [study] is very promising but very preliminary," says Catherine Laughlin, 
a virologist at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in 
Bethesda, Md. "Since cidofovir has two serious drawbacks, we would really 
prefer to have a better drug."

 In addition to HDP-CDV, as many as 27 other drugs show promise against 
poxviruses in early lab tests, says virologist Earl R. Kern of the University 
of Alabama^-Birmingham School of Medicine.

 Based on lab tests, Kern says, cidofovir and HDP-CDV may also prove useful 
against chickenpox, herpes, and infectious mononucleosis.


