Genetic Culprit: Mutation increases risk for uterine fibroids: Science News 
Online, March 9, 2002

 Genetic Culprit: Mutation increases risk for uterine fibroids

 Nathan Seppa

 Analysis of DNA from families whose women have been beset by uterine growths 
reveals a mutation that can predispose women to these so-called fibroids.

 Uterine fibroids are common, benign tumors that can cause pain, pelvic 
pressure, infertility, and long, heavy periods in women of childbearing age. 
Their cause has been unknown. Medication that slows estrogen production can 
ease symptoms but doesn't cure the problem. Many women with severe symptoms 
undergo hysterectomies-removal of the uterus-making fibroids the most common 
reason for this surgery in the United States.

 Using blood samples from families with a history of fibroids, researchers in 
Finland tracked genetic aberrations in some women to a region of DNA on 
chromosome 1. Meanwhile, researchers studying DNA from a separate set of 
families in Britain were also homing in on this chromosomal area. The teams 
pooled their efforts and report in an upcoming issue of Nature Genetics the 
discovery of mutations of the gene that encodes an enzyme called fumarate 
hydratase. Previous research had shown that this enzyme normally enables a cell 
to derive energy by metabolizing sugar.

 If both parents pass on a mutated copy of the fumarate hydratase gene, the 
results are disastrous. The infant usually dies within months.

 However, when only one of the parents provides a mutated copy, the child 
generally shows no abnormalities. If the other gene copy later becomes mutated 
in some cells, however, they can stop producing fumarate hydratase, says study 
coauthor Ian P.M. Tomlinson, a geneticist at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund 
in London. In the skin of both men and women, this loss can cause painful 
lumps, whereas in the uterus it can cause fibroids. Indeed, the researchers 
measured unusually low activity of fumarate hydratase in the fibroids in women 
with the mutated gene.

 The conclusion that the mutation predisposes a woman to fibroid formation "is 
very plausible," says Barbara J. Davis, a pathologist at the National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) in Research Triangle Park, N.C. The 
metabolic disruption could steer a cell onto an aberrant growth path. However, 
many factors probably influence fibroid growth, she says. Uterine muscle cells, 
unlike other muscle cells, might be particularly vulnerable to growth 
abnormalities. In premenopausal women, the uterus is regulated in part by 
estrogen, a hormone broadly associated with cell growth, she says.

 Uterine fibroids are common, says Donna Day Baird, an epidemiologist at NIEHS. 
In one study, she and her colleagues found that by age 50, more than 80 percent 
of black women and roughly 70 percent of white women developed uterine fibroids 
detectable by ultrasound.

 The link between the fumarate hydratase gene mutation and uterine fibroids is 
clear but probably explains only a minority of cases, says study coauthor Lauri 
A. Aaltonen of the University of Helsinki.

 Still, discovery of the mutations could help identify women at risk of 
fibroids, Tomlinson says, and might provide insight into how fibroids 
grow-information that scientists might use to block that growth.


