Wild Chimps Rocked On: Apes left unique record of stone tools: Science News 
Online, March 30, 2002

 Wild Chimps Rocked On: Apes left unique record of stone tools

 Bruce Bower

 Archaeologists, by definition, uncover the remnants of past human activity. 
With the first excavation of chimpanzee stone tools at an African site, 
however, the scope of their work has entered virgin terrain.

 Chimps transported suitable pieces of stone to the undated site and used them 
to crack open nuts placed on thick tree roots, according to Julio Mercader of 
George Washington University in Washington, D.C.

"At least some wild chimpanzees have produced stone [artifacts] and left behind 
an archaeological record of their nut-cracking behavior," says Mercader, who 
directed the excavation. He described the recent discoveries at the annual 
meeting of the Paleoanthropology Society, held last week in Denver.

 Researchers previously had reported that chimps living in western Africa's Tai 
forest avidly stockpile stones at places with broad tree roots or stumps that 
serve as anvils for cracking nuts. This activity may represent a learned 
behavior peculiar to the local animals, since chimps living in other parts of 
Africa don't use stone implements (SN: 6/19/99, p. 388).

 Mercader and his coworkers excavated a Tai forest site called Panda 100. Trees 
bearing so-called Panda nuts grew in this region until 1996, when they died 
out. The chimp artifacts haven't been dated yet.

 The researchers chose their dig site after noticing four large tree roots that 
displayed pounding marks made by stones. Excavation of trenches at the site 
yielded two more tree roots with similar markings. Fragments of nutshells were 
recovered around all six roots.

 Moreover, Mercader's group unearthed 479 stone artifacts, often in close 
proximity to the shell fragments. These artifacts included the remains of 
hammering stones, thin flakes that had been pounded off those stones, and 
pieces of shattered rock.

 The earliest known stone tools, made by human ancestors in eastern Africa 
around 2.6 million years ago, consisted of sharpened chopping implements and 
larger rocks used as anvils. Chimps' hammering stones recovered at Panda 100 
are about the same size as those ancient choppers, Mercader says. However, 
implements used by human ancestors show more evidence of having been 
intentionally modified than do those attributed to chimps, he notes.

 The Tai forest discoveries suggest that archaeologists may be able to 
investigate links between nut-cracking tools employed by chimps and human 
ancestors, says wild-chimp researcher William McGrew of Miami University in 
Oxford, Ohio. Homo species cracked nuts with stone implements at least 780,000 
years ago (SN: 2/23/02, p. 117: Available to subscribers at .).

"There seems to be a signature of chimpanzee archaeology at Panda 100, which is 
pretty cool," remarks Nicholas Toth of Indiana University in Bloomington, who 
studies ancient stone tools. Still, he adds, "the Tai forest material that I've 
seen looks fairly crude."

 In contrast, human ancestors' earliest known tools exhibit remarkably 
sophisticated workmanship, Toth says. In a study presented at the 
Paleoanthropology Society meeting, he and his coworkers discerned that 
2.6-million-year-old stone tools and present-day stone chopping implements 
fashioned by experienced tool makers required similar skills.

 Toth also notes that two captive bonobos, or pygmy chimpanzees, have learned 
to make chopping tools out of rocks with considerable proficiency, though not 
up to human skills. Chimps' tool-making disadvantage largely derives from 
having large hands that can't manipulate objects as well or generate as much 
striking force as human hands can, Toth says.


