Hot Cereal: Rice reveals bumper crop of genes: Science News Online, April 6, 
2002

 Hot Cereal: Rice reveals bumper crop of genes

 John Travis

 For about a third of the world's population, rice equals life. The cereal 
provides more than half the daily calories that these people consume.

 In the April 5 Science, two research groups report that they have 
independently deciphered almost the complete genetic code, or genome, of rice. 
This worldwide staple becomes only the second plant-and the first crop plant-to 
have its genome unraveled.

 The advance could help agricultural scientists produce strains of rice that 
are hardier, more productive, and less damaging to the environment than current 
strains are. The rice genome may also provide a boost to the investigation of 
other cereal crops, such as corn and wheat.

 The rice genome "will have a global impact on human health," Ronald P. 
Cantrell of the International Rice Research Institute in Manila, Philippines, 
and Timothy G. Reeves of the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center 
in Mexico City contend in an April 5 Science commentary.

 One of the teams studying rice, a group of scientists from the Beijing 
Genomics Institute in China and the University of Washington Genome Center in 
Seattle, analyzed the subspecies known as indica, the most widely consumed rice 
in China and India. The second team, led by investigators from the San 
Diego-based agricultural firm Syngenta, studied a rice subspecies called 
japonica, which is more commonly grown in Japan and Korea.

 Both groups followed a so-called genome shotgun approach, a DNA-sequencing 
strategy originally developed for microbes and later applied to the human 
genome (SN: 5/23/98, p. 334). The method tends to leave more gaps than 
traditional genome-sequencing strategies do, but it's much cheaper and faster 
to perform.

 The shotgun methods "provide 90 percent of the value for 10 percent of the 
cost," says plant geneticist Jeffrey Bennetzen of Purdue University in West 
Lafayette, Ind.

 The two research groups report overlapping estimates of the number of genes in 
rice. Stephen A. Goff of Syngenta and his colleagues conclude that japonica has 
32,000 to 50,000 genes, while the Beijing-Seattle team reports that indica has 
between 46,022 and 55,615 genes. In either case, that's many more genes than 
the 26,000 or so in the small mustard Arabidopsis thaliana, the first plant to 
have its genome sequenced (SN: 12/16/00, p. 388: ).

 Indeed, rice may contain more genes than a person does. Some 
still-controversial estimates suggest that the human genome possesses just 
30,000 to 40,000 genes. Using gene number to gauge the complexity of an 
organism is problematic, however, because many organisms can read individual 
genes in multiple ways to produce distinct proteins.

"It is entirely possible that humans have many more proteins than rice does, 
even if they do have fewer genes," notes Gane Ka-Shu Wong of the University of 
Washington, who worked on the indica project.

 Because rice and A. thaliana represent the two major classes of flowering 
plants, biologists are eager to compare their genomes. The indica group found 
that more than 80 percent of A. thaliana genes have counterparts in the rice, 
but that only about 50 percent of the rice's genes appear in the mustard's 
genome.

"There's a whole set of novel genes that have never been studied," says Pamela 
Ronald of the University of California, Davis.

 Some scientists caution that the gene-number estimates for rice are probably 
too high because they depended on computer scans of raw DNA sequences for 
certain patterns suggesting a gene's presence. "I think a lot of the 
hypothetical genes [the computers turned up] will turn out not to be genes," 
says Bennetzen.

 Although it's larger than that of A. thaliana, the rice genome is much smaller 
than those of other cereals. That's why crop scientists focused their attention 
on it first. The wheat genome, for example, has 40 times as much DNA as the 
rice genome does.

 Still, researchers contend that the rice genome provides an excellent 
foundation for the study of other crops. Goff and his colleagues, for example, 
found that 98 percent of the known proteins in maize, wheat, and barley have 
counterparts in rice. Wong says that he and his colleagues now plan to use the 
shotgun strategy to tackle the genomes of corn and wheat.

 With the information in the rice genome, scientists expect to more efficiently 
breed strains with desired characteristics, such as higher yields, improved 
disease resistance, or less need of water. "In developing countries, the 
biggest windfall will be accelerated [rice] breeding programs," says Robin 
Buell of the Institute for Genomic Research in Rockville, Md.

 The rice genome may also aid a more controversial crop-improvement strategy, 
the creation of genetically engineered plants. Scientists might, for example, 
take a rice gene that contributes to disease resistance and add to it to corn.

 The International Rice Genome Sequencing Project, a Japan-led public effort to 
provide a gapfree, even more accurate version of the japonica genome, plans to 
have its version ready by the end of the year, says Buell, a project member.


