Scrambled Drugs: Transgenic chickens could lay golden eggs: Science News 
Online, April 6, 2002

 Scrambled Drugs: Transgenic chickens could lay golden eggs

 John Pickrell

 Medications of the future may be made to order-short order from the griddle, 
that is. Scientists have genetically engineered chickens so that they produce 
foreign proteins in eggs. This is an important step toward the goal of 
routinely breeding hens that lay packages of pharmaceuticals.

 Starting in the 1980s, scientists have created a variety of ready-made animal 
drug factories. Genetically altered cows, pigs, sheep, goats, rabbits, and mice 
and have manufactured foreign proteins in mammary tissue. The researchers 
harvest the milk of these animals and extract therapeutic substances such as 
blood-clotting agents and insulin.

 Researchers have also developed mice that secrete useful proteins in urine 
(SN: 1/10/98, p. 21: ), and in January, scientists described bovine mammary 
cells that secrete spider silk (SN: 1/19/02, p. 38: Available to subscribers at 
.).

 Producing drugs in egg white offers many benefits. "The main thing is that 
chickens can produce many, many progeny in a short period of time," says Alex 
J. Harvey of AviGenics, a biotechnology firm in Athens, Ga. A chicken's 
generation time is around 6 months. That's far shorter than the generation time 
of a large mammal, such as a goat, which requires 18 months to grow from 
engineered embryo to milk-yielding adult, adds Harvey.

 Chickens also produce lots of protein. Each of the approximately 330 eggs a 
hen lays annually contains 6.5 grams of various proteins.

 Using engineered viruses as gene carriers, Harvey and his colleagues at the 
University of Georgia in Athens inserted the DNA blueprint for a bacterial 
enzyme called beta-lactamase into embryos of white leghorn chickens. About 2 
percent of these embryos grew into adults that expressed the enzyme in some of 
their cells.

 Next, the researchers bred ordinary fowl with those hens and roosters that 
expressed beta-lactamase in their sperm or ovules. Progeny of these chickens 
were found to have copies of the gene in all their cells, and the females laid 
eggs containing detectable, albeit small, quantities of beta-lactamase.

 As the researchers report in the April Nature Biotechnology, the transferred 
gene remained stable in the chickens. Each hen continued to produce eggs 
containing the enzyme for at least 16 months, and the inserted gene was 
functional over at least four generations of hens.

"The good news is that the protein is there [in the eggs]," comments Robert J. 
Etches, an avian geneticist at Origen Therapeutics in Burlingame, Calif. "The 
bad news is that it's not there in very high quantities." The next generation 
of technology should be focused on getting higher concentrations of the foreign 
proteins in egg whites, he says.

 An additional advantage of producing pharmaceuticals in eggs, notes Etches, is 
that egg white is far less complex biochemically than milk is, and there are 
established methods for easily extracting various proteins from eggs.

 However, Etches adds, the type of virus currently used can only carry small 
genes into the chicken's DNA. That's a significant problem because many useful 
genes are 10 or more times as large as the beta-lactamase gene.

 Though beta-lactamase itself has no pharmaceutical application and was only 
found in minute quantities, the research "demonstrates proof of concept" and 
paves the way for future work, says Anthony P. Cruz, a spokesperson for 
AviGenics.

 The scientists say that they intend to focus next on two efforts: introducing 
genes for therapeutically useful proteins and developing methods that will 
produce more of the foreign protein solely in specific tissues, such as the 
oviduct.


