Osmium is Forever: Rare metal's strength humbles mighty diamond's: Science News 
Online, April 6, 2002

 Osmium is Forever: Rare metal's strength humbles mighty diamond's

 Peter Weiss

 In a surprising overturn, the lustrous, blue-white element osmium has beaten 
diamond in a test of compressibility. Not used much today, osmium has been 
incorporated into alloys for fountain-pen tips and phonograph needles.

 Diamond still reigns as the hardest of materials. However, the finding that 
osmium is actually the high-pressure champ may open up new routes to materials 
that may someday surpass diamond in hardness, says Hyunchae Cynn of Lawrence 
Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory.

"It's stunning that such an incompressible element is only now recognized," 
says Raymond Jeanloz of the University of California, Berkeley. "The additional 
surprise is that a metal could be so incompressible."

 Cynn and his colleagues measured just how sturdy osmium is by putting a powder 
of the metal in a diamond anvil and squeezing it to 600,000 times atmospheric 
pressure. The researchers observed from X-ray diffraction patterns how much the 
volume of osmium's hexagonal atomic structure shrunk with pressure.

 From those data, they then calculated the element's resistance to compression, 
a property called the bulk modulus. It was a hefty 462 gigapascals (GPa). 
Diamond's bulk modulus, which had been considered supreme, is only 443 GPa. The 
researchers report their finding, which they say appears to be the first 
measurement of osmium's compressibility, in the April 1 Physical Review Letters.

 Some theorists had anticipated osmium's extraordinary sturdiness. For 
instance, in 1995, one group estimated that the bulk modulus of osmium would be 
476 GPa. However, because that calculated figure was greater than diamond's 
measured bulk modulus, the prediction was met with some skepticism, Cynn says.

 Although many cutting tools wield diamond or diamond-coated tips, those 
devices work well for only a fraction of the cutting requirements of industry. 
For instance, diamond slices through hot steel poorly because the iron in the 
steel absorbs carbon atoms from the diamond. Moreover, being brittle, diamond 
fails catastrophically when it breaks down. For such reasons, materials 
scientists have long been hunting for diamond substitutes.

 In some previous attempts to create new, hard materials, researchers embedded 
noncarbon elements in diamondlike tetrahedral structures (SN: 7/11/98, p. 28). 
Although calculations predicted that one such compound, called beta-carbon 
nitride, would be harder than diamond (SN: 6/5/99, p. 367), no one has been 
able to make a piece big enough to test.

 Although not as hard as diamond, osmium is the hardest of the metals, at least 
by one common test. Now that it's been found to be the least compressible of 
all materials as well, it may serve as a new starting point for creating 
superhard substances. The recent experiment demonstrated that "you can have 
high bulk modulus even if you don't have a diamondlike structure or bonding," 
says John E. Klepeis, a theorist on the Livermore team.

 Unlike diamond and many other brittle materials, metals are tough. They deform 
rather than crumble under severe pressure, notes Jeanloz. Consequently, "the 
experiments on osmium should open the eyes of both theoreticians and 
experimentalists to new possibilities for very strong, hard, and tough 
materials," he says.


