Vanquishing a Virus: New drugs attack herpes infections: Science News Online, 
April 13, 2002

 Vanquishing a Virus: New drugs attack herpes infections

 John Travis

 Best known for intermittently producing embarrassing sores on the mouth and 
genitals, herpes simplex virus (HSV) is more dangerous than most people 
realize. The virus can blind and even kill people with weak immune systems, 
such as newborns, elderly people, and AIDS patients.

 By targeting one of the virus' enzymes, two pharmaceutical companies have now 
independently identified a new class of drugs that stop HSV from replicating. 
Scientists rate the compounds as the most promising antiherpes agents developed 
in 3 decades. Surprisingly, however, there are no current plans to test the 
experimental drugs in people.

 First developed in the 1970s, the compound acyclovir remains the standard drug 
for treating various forms of HSV. When acyclovir gets into an infected cell, 
an HSV enzyme activates the drug, leading to the inhibition of a protein the 
virus uses to copy its own DNA. However, a treated infection may recur, and 
some strains of the virus are resistant to acyclovir.

 Seeking new drug opportunities, researchers have looked at other proteins that 
the virus relies on to replicate its DNA. More than a decade ago, while at 
Stanford University, James J. Crute discovered a complex of three HSV proteins 
that combine into an enzyme called helicase-primase. The virus uses this enzyme 
to unravel DNA's double helix structure and perform other duties required for 
replication.

"It was immediately recognized as a really great target for drug discovery," 
recalls Crute, now at Aurora Biosciences in San Diego.

 While working at Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceutical in Ridgefield, Conn., 
Crute and his colleagues developed an assay for screening thousands of 
compounds for ones that inhibit the helicase activity of the viral enzyme. They 
identified several compounds that hamper the enzyme's ability to creep along 
the DNA strand and perform its duties.

 Crute's team reports in the April Nature Medicine that these inhibitors block 
HSV replication in infected cells and also help rodents survive HSV infections. 
In mice whose genitals had been infected with HSV, one inhibitor slashed the 
death rate from 60 percent to 10 percent.

 Moreover, the new compounds are effective even when given to the mice up to 65 
hours after an initial infection. In contrast, for acyclovir to work, it must 
be taken within hours after the first symptoms appear.

 Gerald Kleymann and his colleagues at Bayer AG in Wuppertal, Germany, also 
have identified inhibitors of HSV replication. After screening more than 
400,000 compounds, they realized that the most effective ones were interfering 
with helicase-primase.

"It appears that we hit the Achilles' heel of the virus," says Kleymann.

 Like the Boehringer Ingelheim team, the Bayer group found the compounds to be 
effective in rodents infected with HSV. In the April Nature Medicine, the Bayer 
group even reports that its compounds reduce the number of sequelae-the 
subsequent outbreaks of sores after an initial infection.

"The unsolved problem of herpes infections, namely the sequelae, may become 
curable," says Kleymann.

 Both research groups conclude that helicase-primase inhibitors are more potent 
than acyclovir and its derivatives.

"People have been looking for years, and nobody had come up with anything that 
matches acyclovir," notes virologist Priscilla A. Schaffer of Harvard Medical 
School in Boston. "These compounds are tremendously exciting."

 At the moment, though, neither Bayer nor Boehringer Ingelheim plans to launch 
tests of helicase-primase inhibitors in people. "It's unfortunate because these 
compounds do look interesting, but companies have to make choices about what 
they are going to put their money and resources behind," says Paul Anderson, a 
vice president at Boehringer Ingelheim.

"The fundamental issue is that no pharmaceutical company wants to go 
head-to-head with acyclovir [and its derivatives]," says virologist Richard 
Whitley of the University of Alabama at Birmingham. "They do not see it as 
profitable."

 Both pharmaceutical firms say they hope to find other companies willing to 
finance further testing of their compounds.

"It's kind of depressing," notes Schaffer. "We'd all love to see [a 
helicase-primase inhibitor] go into the clinic. One of these days, I dare say, 
it will."


