Steely Glaze: Layered electrolytes control corrosion: Science News Online, 
April 13, 2002

 Steely Glaze: Layered electrolytes control corrosion

 Ben Harder

 Metals may someday rely on gossamer guardians. Ultrathin organic coatings 
offer a new way to slow the corrosion of steel, recent experiments suggest.

 Salt and moisture catalyze corrosive reactions of oxygen with metals. 
Microscopic defects on metal surfaces create sites where salt ions carry 
electric currents and trigger these oxidizing reactions.

 Traditional anticorrosion coatings such as paints and resins work by keeping 
salt and metal physically separated. However, the coatings often don't adhere 
well to the charged surfaces of metals, so they're prone to peeling and flaking.

 Organic films known as polyelectrolyte multilayers, on the other hand, tightly 
adhere to charged surfaces. That's why these coatings could offer metals 
superior corrosion protection, according to Joseph B. Schlenoff and Tarek R. 
Farhat of Florida State University in Tallahassee.

 Polyelectrolyte multilayers are gel-like films of alternating layers of 
positively and negatively charged molecules. Opposing charges pair up, holding 
adjacent layers together. A positively charged bottom electrolyte layer also 
sticks to the negatively charged metal surface. Researchers have identified 
possible applications for these multilayers in the manufacture of products 
including contact lenses and drug-bearing capsules.

 To see whether the films could also inhibit corrosion, Schlenoff and Farhat 
deposited dozens of alternately charged layers of polyelectrolytes on 
millimeter-wide stainless steel wires. The process created a 70-nanometer-thick 
film on each wire. The researchers immersed these treated wires, as well as 
untreated ones, in saltwater. Then, to accelerate natural processes that might 
oxidize the steel, the Florida State scientists created electric potentials 
between the water and steel.

 The treated wires suffered considerably less corrosion at all voltages, the 
researchers report in the April Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters.

 Schlenoff suggests that manufacturers could inexpensively line pipes with 
anticorrosive multilayers by alternately pumping solutions of oppositely charge 
polyelectrolytes through the pipes before they're used.

 The study shows for the first time that polyelectrolyte multilayers may have 
applications in corrosion control, says Gero Decher of the National Center for 
Scientific Research in Strasbourg, France, who is also investigating 
multilayers for anti-corrosion applications.


