Icy Birth? Amino acids form in simulations of space ice: Science News Online, 
March 30, 2002

 Icy Birth? Amino acids form in simulations of space ice

 Jessica Gorman

 In another step toward understanding the origin of Earth's biological 
molecules, two independent laboratory experiments have produced amino acids-the 
building blocks of proteins-by simulating conditions in icy, interstellar space.

 The results, published in the March 28 Nature, suggest that some amino acids 
could have formed in giant clouds of icy particles and then hitched rides on 
comets and asteroids to planets throughout the universe, says Max Bernstein of 
NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif.

 In the search for precursors to life on Earth, various researchers have 
created amino acids and other organic molecules in lab experiments that 
simulate specific environments, such as those on early Earth or asteroids. 
Researchers have also speculated that amino acids might form on interstellar 
ice particles that are exposed to ultraviolet light, yet until now, no one had 
shown that this could actually happen, says Bernstein.

"I think it's a really exciting justification of the notion that these building 
blocks can come from outer space," comments Jennifer Blank of the Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory in California (SN: 5/19/01, p. 317: ).

 In each of the new experiments, performed at very low temperatures and 
pressures, scientists chose small molecules found in space and deposited them 
on a surface while irradiating them with ultraviolet light. Bernstein and his 
colleagues made an icy layer of water, methanol, ammonia, and hydrogen cyanide. 
The other team, which includes scientists from four European institutions, used 
less water than the NASA team did. It also included carbon monoxide and carbon 
dioxide in its mix but no hydrogen cyanide.

 After warming the samples to room temperature, the NASA group detected three 
amino acids: glycine, alanine, and serine. The European group identified 16 
amino acids, including 6 that appear in life's proteins.

 Uwe Meierhenrich of Bremen University in Germany says the creation of amino 
acids in the European group's experiment was a surprise. The team had been 
preparing interplanetary ice samples to test equipment for the upcoming Rosetta 
space probe, which will analyze a comet's chemistry.

 To rule out contamination by natural amino acids, both research teams used a 
heavy isotope of carbon in their initial chemicals and found that same isotope 
in the final amino acids. Moreover, some amino acids have both a left- and a 
right-handed form, but living organisms contain almost exclusively the 
left-handed variety. So, most amino acids on Earth are in that form. The 
researchers produced a 50-50 mix of left-handed and right-handed forms in their 
samples, a confirmation that the amino acids derived from the experiment.

 These studies may help explain how some amino acids formed initially, but they 
do not indicate why life incorporates only left-handed amino acids. One popular 
theory is that certain naturally occurring forms of UV radiation, called 
circularly polarized light, preferentially produce left-handed varieties in 
interstellar space. By running their experiments again with such UV light, the 
NASA group is now pursuing this possibility, says Bernstein.

 Blank says that another question is, How long can such amino acids survive in 
their icy birthplaces?

"Really rich, robust chemistry taking place in the cosmos" contributes to 
making the molecules necessary for life, says Jeffrey Bada of the University of 
California at San Diego. He notes that interstellar ice chemistry is just one 
of many processes-including chemical reactions on asteroids or the early 
Earth-that could form amino acids.


