Deprived of Darkness: Science News Online, April 20, 2002

 Deprived of Darkness

 The unnatural ecology of artificial light at night

 Ben Harder

 In 1988, physician and amateur moth enthusiast Kenneth D. Frank published a 
scientific paper that pulled together much of what researchers then knew about 
the consequences of artificial night-time lighting on moths. That paper is the 
closest thing the nascent field of artificial-light ecology has to a classic 
work. It didn't exactly trigger the response one might expect from a seminal 
study, however. The report has received precious little attention and 
stimulated no immediate cascade of follow-up research. Frank recently searched 
the scientific literature to count how many subsequent papers had made 
reference to his study-and found exactly one.

 Nevertheless, Frank and a handful of other scientists are endeavoring to 
synthesize a coherent understanding of the ecological impacts of artificial 
light on a multitude of organisms. These efforts are gradually gaining momentum.

 From anecdotal reports of little-studied phenomena-such as moths' tendency to 
perish, Icarus-style, in lamps and flames-researchers suspect that artificial 
night lighting disrupts the physiology and behavior of nocturnal animals. In 
many cases, scientists have few reliable data on which to rest conclusions-but 
every reason to be concerned.

 Head for the water

 Some of the best data on light pollution's effects on wildlife come from the 
coast of Florida, where sea turtles are struggling to survive the encroachment 
of urban development on their nesting sites.

 Michael Salmon of Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton considers sea 
turtle conservation efforts "a lab" for studying measures that might protect 
other species. When turtle hatchlings emerge at night from their eggs and head 
for the ocean, lights from hotels and other sources can lead them off course. 
Sometimes the hatchlings get killed trekking in the wrong direction as they 
attempt to cross roads. If their long night's journey stretches into day, the 
turtles often die of exposure or fall victim to hungry predators.

 Low-pressure sodium lamps, which produce light only at a specific yellow 
wavelength, mitigate the turtles' confusion. It seems that these animals don't 
see-or at least aren't distracted by-light at that frequency, Salmon reported 
at a meeting of ecologists at the University of California, Los Angeles in 
February.

 The Urban Wildlands Group, the L.A.^-based conservation think tank that 
organized the gathering, asked ecologists to share whatever information they 
had on artificial light's ecological effects. The conference's co-organizers 
Travis Longcore and Catherine Rich say they expect the knowledge swap to lead 
to new directions of research.

 One theme arising from the meeting was that even when animals aren't exposed 
directly to artificial lights, illumination from urban areas that reflects off 
clouds can produce unnaturally bright conditions at night-an effect known as 
sky glow-that may have biological or behavioral effects.

 Sky glow is already a recognized bane of astronomers, who have trouble 
identifying celestial objects against the background light near urban centers. 
Astronomers have created a movement, led by the International Dark-Sky 
Association in Tucson, Ariz., that advocates limiting light pollution to 
improve sky-viewing.

 Dark skies, wet lands

 Dark-Sky supporters favor, among other measures, broader use of low-pressure 
sodium lights, because astronomical equipment can relatively easily filter out 
their narrow spectra. "Astronomers would like [ecologists] to conclude that 
sodium lights are the most ecologically sound light sources," says Frank, whose 
work suggests that low-pressure sodium lamps are less harmful to moths than 
traditional streetlights are.

 Unfortunately, sodium lights are no panacea, he says. Some animals, it turns 
out, fare no better with narrow-spectrum, yellow light than with any more 
traditional artificial lights. Some even seem to fare worse.

 Frogs and salamanders are among these, says salamander researcher Sharon Wise 
of Utica College in Utica, N.Y. She and Bryant W. Buchanan, a frog researcher 
also at Utica, have found that sudden exposure to artificial light can cause 
nocturnal frogs to suspend normal feeding and reproductive behavior and sit 
motionless long after the light has been turned off.

 Under yellow and red lights, salamanders can't navigate from one pond to the 
next. While they wander, they may fall prey to hungry nocturnal animals or die 
of exposure.

 Wetlands-home to many frogs and salamanders-could be one of the first types of 
habitat to benefit from measures controlling light pollution. "Because wetlands 
are already afforded some protections, it would be relatively straightforward 
to add [artificial light] to the list of things they should be protected from," 
says Longcore. Some recent development proposals in California have run afoul 
of light-pollution concerns and been denied, he says.

 Animals that dwell entirely in water are also susceptible to artificial 
lighting. Marianne V. Moore and Susan J. Kohler of Wellesley (Mass.) College 
have examined how artificial light affects small aquatic invertebrates in New 
England lakes and ponds. Their data show that the nighttime activity of these 
animals near the surface drops off in proportion to the amount of light 
reaching them. That could reduce the invertebrates' predation on algae at the 
surface, potentially leading to algal blooms and poor water quality.

 Limited data also suggest that river ecosystems can be affected by artificial 
light at night. At the UCLA meeting, Barbara Nightingale of the University of 
Washington in Seattle described how several river-navigating fish species, 
including salmon, herring, and sand lance, gather under artificial lights that 
illuminate portions of their waterways. The unnatural concentration of fish, 
along with the illumination the lights provide, may facilitate hunting by bears 
and other predators and negatively affect vulnerable fish populations, 
Nightingale speculates.

 Icarus redux

 For more than a century, observers have reported that birds are attracted to 
towers with lights and, while circling or hovering in large numbers, often 
collide fatally with the structures or with each other. This tower kill can end 
the lives of thousands of birds in a single night and locale during peak 
migration periods.

 Sidney A. Gauthreaux, a bird researcher at Clemson (S.C.) University, has 
studied factors that contribute to tower kill. In research he conducted in the 
late 1980s but is only now preparing for publication, Gauthreaux found that 
towers with red lights may be particularly dangerous for birds.

 Gauthreaux and Carroll G. Belser monitored the number and behavior of birds at 
three different sites on 14 evenings during a fall migration season. Birds more 
often departed from direct flight paths near the two sites that featured 
artificially lit television towers than they did at a site without a tower. One 
of the two towers sported a white strobe light; the other had an array of 
steady red lights. Of the three sites, the red-lit tower showed the greatest 
concentration of birds in the air and presented the greatest avian collision 
risk, Gauthreaux said at the February meeting.

"Birds' magnetic compasses seem to break down in red light," Gauthreaux notes, 
citing others' laboratory research. That effect, he suggests, could explain 
some of the disorientation that appears to occur when birds approach 
communication towers, whose numbers have mushroomed in recent years.

 Richard Podolsky, an independent seabird researcher from Camden, Maine, has 
also observed how artificial light can be problematic. On the Hawaiian island 
of Kauai, he's been studying birds known as Newell's shearwaters.

 The shearwaters nest on land, and fledglings depart on an autumn evening to 
make their first, critical flight to the sea. Urban development presents 
obstacles to these maiden flights, however, and many young birds crash into lit 
bridges and buildings, sometimes fatally.

 A local citizens' group called Save Our Shearwaters, or SOS, has been rescuing 
these birds for more than a decade. Using data collected by SOS and their own 
field studies, Podolsky and his colleagues estimate that 10 percent of Newell's 
shearwater fledglings die each year and an additional 15 percent are injured 
from crashes attributable to artificial light. While this doesn't surpass the 
mortality that can be attributed to cats and other introduced species, it's 
contributing greatly to the birds' decline, the researchers reported in the 
2001 volume of Studies in Avian Biology. However, restrictions on light 
pollution might help reverse the population's precipitous reduction, Podolsky 
says. Such restrictions are already in effect on the nearby island of Hawaii, 
which hosts several observatories.

 Intriguingly, Podolsky notes, Newell's shearwater deaths have been 
consistently lower in years when the October full moon falls near the 
fledglings' midmonth exodus than in years when the young birds take off on 
nights with little moonlight. Natural light's domination over urban lights 
during moonlit migration periods helps the shearwaters navigate, Podolsky 
suggests.

 Light behavior

 In addition to their noted tendency to fly perilously close to street lamps, 
moths and insects may respond to artificial light at night in maladaptive ways, 
Frank and other researchers have found.

 Moths typically go into erratic dives when they sense that they have been 
detected by nearby bats using echolocation. By exposing moths to simulated 
echolocation sounds, Jens Rydell of the University of Goteborg in Sweden and 
his colleagues have found that artificial light reduces moths' use of this 
defensive behavior, thereby interfering with their escape.

 In other experiments, the researchers found that moths don't congregate around 
low-pressure sodium lights as they do around street lamps with broader light 
spectra.

 Certain light spectra may also interfere with the behavior of fireflies, says 
James E. Lloyd of the University of Florida in Gainesville. These insects 
generate light that they use for sexual communication. Although there are few 
data on the effects of artificial light on fireflies, Lloyd suggests that 
because their chemiluminescence has similar spectra to incandescent light, 
fireflies in its presence may not court mates normally.

 Even among animals that can adapt their behavior to cope with the influences 
of artificial light, there may still be a biological price to pay. Certain 
novel qualities may be favored under bright-night conditions that result in 
evolutionary selection of traits not adaptive under more natural conditions. 
Taken to its logical endpoint, such selective pressures could cause animal 
populations living near perpetually illuminated areas to evolve into species 
that are distinct from biological kin in darker wilderness. By reducing the 
effective size of populations that can interbreed, that process could increase 
the likelihood that both populations may go extinct.

 Animals aren't the only organisms that may be adversely affected by artificial 
light. For example, nine different photoreceptors have been identified in a 
popular laboratory plant, the mustard Arabidopsis thaliana. These receptors 
play various roles in leaf and stem growth, the timing of flowering, fruit 
development, and other life processes, says botanist Winslow R. Briggs of the 
Carnegie Institution of Washington in Stanford, Calif.

 Although there aren't rigorous scientific studies on plants' reactions to 
artificial light, anecdotal reports indicate that deciduous plants, which shed 
their leaves as days grow short in the fall, may be particularly affected by 
unnatural light, Briggs says.

 A few trees that fail to show fall colors, or extra moths that become bat food 
aren't necessarily going to catalyze public opinion against light pollution. 
However, says Frank, when people consider that disturbing one component of an 
ecosystem may have ramifications for many other organisms, the case for 
reducing light pollution begins to look more compelling.

 Local governments in Palm Beach, Fla., Malibu, Calif., and elsewhere in the 
United States have taken small steps in that direction. The Czech parliament 
has passed the world's first nationwide law designed to curtail light 
pollution. It takes effect June 1.

 There are other signs that light pollution is entering public awareness. To 
commemorate the victims of the terrorist attacks, New York City beamed two 
pillars of light into the Manhattan sky from the former site of the World Trade 
Center. The memorial fomented some concern about its effects on spring bird 
migrations. Fortunately, the memorial's architects had taken ecological effects 
into account. After consulting the city's Audubon Society about peak migration 
times, they scheduled it to shut off each night at 11 p.m. and to operate only 
through April 13.

 Perhaps the wildlife impact of artificial light at night is finally dawning on 
public consciousness.


