Mammograms on Trial: Science News Online, April 27, 2002

 Mammograms on Trial

 To screen or not to screen, that is the question

 Damaris Christensen

 It's been medical gospel for years: All women 50 years and older-and younger 
women in high-risk groups for breast cancer-should undergo mammography once 
every year or two. But recent reviews of the screening procedure have disagreed 
about whether routine mammograms help prevent breast cancer deaths. In the face 
of that scientific uncertainty, what's a woman to do? There's even disagreement 
among doctors and the groups that make policy recommendations.

 Researchers performing the recent reviews reanalyzed data from often-cited 
mammography trials. Some of these teams concluded there isn't enough evidence 
to support the claim that routine mammography has lessened deaths from breast 
cancer. Other reviewers of these same trials came to the opposite 
conclusion-that mammograms do in fact save lives. One group recently expanded 
its recommendation to include women 40 and older, not just women 50 and over, 
in the group that should get regular screening.

"Everyone agrees that mammograms detect early tumors, smaller tumors, and give 
women more treatment options," says Peter Greenwald, director of the division 
of cancer prevention at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. "The 
question is whether it saves more lives in the long run."

 The screening procedure has a variety of financial and psychological costs, 
although the X-ray exposure of a mammogram isn't considered a significant 
danger. Mammography screening's overall expense in the United States-including 
follow-up procedures-runs into the billions of dollars. During screening, 5 to 
10 percent of mammograms show potential abnormalities, requiring doctors to 
order additional mammograms, ultrasound imaging, biopsies, and other tests. 
However, about 97 percent of women in their 40s and about 86 percent of women 
age 50 and over who have a suspicious initial mammogram turn out not to have 
breast cancer.

 Although the debate over screening has splashed onto the front pages of 
national newspapers and magazines several times in the past 6 months, the 
controversy goes back decades. Questions about studies have simmered since the 
beginnings of routine screening by mammography in the 1970s. The heat 
intensified over the past 2 years, after Danish researchers published a 
troubling report in the British medical journal The Lancet. Their article 
challenged the value of screening with mammograms. This view has been hotly 
contested by other researchers, federal agencies, the World Health 
Organization, and advocacy groups such as the American Cancer Society.

 In the United States, breast cancer now strikes about 192,200 women and kills 
about 40,600 women each year. That reflects a 15 percent drop in breast cancer 
mortality over the past decade, Greenwald says, "so we're cautious about 
pulling out something [screening with mammography] we think contributes to that 
benefit."

 As the debate rages over specific issues of statistics, physicians struggle to 
figure out what to tell their patients, and national organizations are 
rethinking their recommendations. The trouble is, more science may not be the 
answer.

"There's an assumption in American society that if you just do enough 
scientific studies and you try hard enough, you can come up with definitive 
answers," says Barron Lerner of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New 
York. "In the world of breast cancer, we've learned that even trying as hard as 
you can, you can't necessarily get answers."

 Old data, new concerns 

 Both the previous recommendations and the current uncertainty surrounding 
mammography emerge from all or some of the same large trials conducted since 
1963: four in Sweden and one each in the United States, Scotland, and Canada, 
though because the Canadians separated data from women in their 40s and women 
in their 50s, that trial is sometimes considered as two. Each study randomly 
assigned women to receive either mammogram screening or not, the latter being 
the control group. The scientists statistically analyzed their findings to see 
whether differences in breast cancer deaths between groups were large enough to 
show that the screening, rather than chance, was responsible for the overall 
result.

 Two trials found that screening led to significant drops in the number of 
women dying of breast cancer, others found more-modest benefits that didn't 
meet scientists' customary standard for significance. Two trials even came up 
with apparent increases in breast cancer deaths among women receiving 
mammography, but these findings weren't statistically significant and are 
considered simply the result of chance.

 Even these large trials may not enroll enough women to get to the bottom of 
the matter. Out of a thousand healthy women, only a few will develop breast 
cancer and die from it. So, very large numbers of healthy women are needed in 
studies to detect significant differences between screened and unscreened 
women. One way to deal with the relative rarity of deaths would be to consider 
several trials together. For example, in a recent reanalysis of several Swedish 
trials, 511 of 129,750 women (0.4 percent) who received routine mammography 
died of breast cancer, compared with 584 of 117,260 women (0.5 percent) who 
were not screened. These data were statistically significant, the scientists 
calculated.

 However, combining data poses difficulties because each trial was designed in 
a different way. Some trials included manual breast exams along with 
mammography. Some rescreened women every 12 months, while others checked them 
every 28 months. The number and angles of X rays taken during the screening 
also varied across the different trials. Thus the tests' capability to detect 
cancers in different parts of the breast may have varied. Finally, some of the 
control groups got no breast exams during the study, while others were 
routinely examined by physicians.

 There are statistical techniques, however, for pooling and comparing trials in 
what scientists call a metanalysis. Such techniques originally put the value of 
mammography screening at about a 30 percent overall reduction in breast cancer 
deaths. That's the figure that most breast cancer specialists and national 
health associations have used over the years.

 That general agreement was thrown into turmoil in 2000 when Peter C. Gotzsche 
and Ole Olsen of the Nordic Cochrane Center in Copenhagen published their 
article. They argued that troubling inconsistencies in the trials were enough 
to make them useless for recommending mammography as a routine screen for 
breast cancer. It wasn't that the trials proved that there is no benefit, they 
said, but merely that the quality of evidence available is insufficient to 
prove a benefit.

 Gotzsche and Olsen had a variety of specific objections to most of the 
studies. For example, the researchers pointed out that in several trials, women 
who unknowingly had cancerous tissue when the study began were removed from the 
trial when their first screening showed their tumors. However, some of the 
unscreened group probably also had preexisting breast cancer, which often would 
not have been detected early, and so these women would have remained in the 
trial. This difference would be expected to increase the apparent number of 
deaths from breast cancers recorded for the unscreened group, and so make the 
mammograms look more effective than they really are.

 Raising another objection, the Danish scientists eliminated any study in which 
they found even a small difference in average age between the control and 
screened groups. Such differences, they said, might reflect an imperfect 
procedure for randomly assigning women to the groups. Their concern is that 
unknown differences among the women, rather than the presence of screening, 
might underlie findings of fewer deaths from breast cancer in the screened 
group.

 For these and other reasons that scientists continue to debate, the Danes 
threw out data from 80 percent of the women followed in the studies. Only the 
Canadian and one Swedish study-neither of which showed a significant effect of 
routine mammography-met the Danes' standards.

 A flurry of letters disagreeing with the researchers' paper was published in 
the Feb. 26, 2000 Lancet: Responding to those critiques, Gotzsche and Olsen 
reaffirmed their conclusions in the Oct. 20, 2001 Lancet.

 In that response, they added yet another problem that they had detected in 
several of the trials: When researchers in the original studies were uncertain 
about the cause of a woman's death, they were more likely to ascribe it to 
breast cancer if the woman was in the control group than if she was in the 
screening group. As an example, the death of a woman who dies of a tumor in her 
lung might be attributed to the spread of breast cancer if she was in the 
unscreened group but to unrelated lung cancer if she had been regularly 
screened with mammograms.

 In the Feb. 6 Journal of the National Cancer Institute, other researchers 
point out similar problems in assigning the cause of death in the breast cancer 
trials and in tests of screening for lung and colon cancer.

 More voices

 Prompted in part by the work of Gotzsche and Olsen, a U.S. group also 
reevaluated the large studies since 1963. The U.S. Physicians Data Query (PDQ) 
Screening and Prevention Editorial Board is an independent body that evaluates 
the quality of evidence on medical-screening topics. It posts this information 
on the National Cancer Institute's Web site, although it isn't an advisory 
board to the agency. Previously, the group had noted a benefit of screening but 
said that the magnitude of that benefit wasn't clear. At a meeting last month, 
the board indicated that its most recent review raises uncertainty about 
whether there's a benefit to mammogram screening. The PDQ report can be found 
at .

 The board's change in position comes in part from some of the same problems 
that Gotzsche and Olsen raised, says Donald Berry of the University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston and a member of the board. However, the 
PDQ board highlighted some additional concerns about how mammography has gained 
favor. Many doctors, for instance, are convinced of the value of mammograms by 
data showing that the screening prolongs the life of women who have breast 
cancer, says Berry.

 He raises concerns about errors that could creep into a screening trial and 
undermine measurements of how long women with breast cancer survive. "Since 
women whose breast cancers are found by mammography [appear to] do so much 
better, there is a tendency to attribute the benefit to mammography," Berry 
says. "This is a mistake that leads to profound misconceptions."

 Consider two women in a trial whose cancer begins on the same day and who both 
die 10 years later. If one of them has been part of a control group, her cancer 
may not be detected until near the time she dies. But if the other is screened 
regularly with mammography, her disease will probably have been detected much 
earlier, so it will appear as if the screening has prolonged her survival with 
cancer.

 Moreover, Berry says, mammography can detect cancers that would never have 
killed a woman. If two women with such cancers die of other causes, the trial 
would probably detect the breast cancer of the one being screened but not that 
of the woman in the control group. This skews the statistics on length of 
survival, Berry says. The woman whose cancer was found may also undergo 
unnecessary treatments with their accompanying side effects.

 Another group, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, began to review the 
data on mammography's benefits in 1999. When members of this independent body 
that advises the federal government on preventive health issues met this year 
to continue their review, they considered the criticisms that Olsen and 
Gotzsche had raised.

"We found the same flaws," says Janet D. Allan, vice-chair of the task force 
and dean of the School of Nursing at the University of Texas Health Science 
Center in San Antonio.

"They interpreted the flaws as being fatal flaws," she says. "We did not 
interpret the flaws as fatal . . . and concluded that the studies were still 
valid and that mammography screening reduces deaths from breast cancer." The 
task force's reanalysis of the mammography trial data, which hasn't yet been 
published, shows a 23 percent reduction in breast cancer deaths among the women 
who were screened. The group's report and recommendations are available at .

 Another new analysis of the Swedish data-adding information from the country's 
large death-registry system-has considered information on each of the women in 
most of the trials and from some additional women.

 Among 247,000 women who were 40 to 74 years old when they entered the trials, 
and roughly half of whom were regularly screened, regular mammography led to a 
21 percent reduction in deaths from breast cancer in the more than 20 years 
since the trials began, says Lennarth Nystrom of Umea University in Sweden. The 
data are published in the March 16 Lancet.

 Dealing with uncertainty

 Right now, most policy groups-including the National Cancer Institute, the 
American Cancer Society, and the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists-continue to recommend regular mammograms for women over 40.

 Because large-scale trials to test breast cancer screening each take more than 
a decade and cost millions of dollars, policy makers can't wait for scientists 
to collect additional data. Further, both supporters and skeptics of mammogram 
screening say that new studies may not be feasible. It would now be difficult, 
if not unethical, to prevent women in the control groups from getting 
mammograms.

 In the near term, three things can shed light on mammograms' value for 
screening, Berry says. First, many researchers have called for independent 
audits of the Swedish data, some of which is controversial. Second, a U.S. 
survey of changes in overall breast cancer mortality is now under way to pin 
down benefits of screening. It's intended to apportion the relative 
contributions of mammograms and new therapies on recent improvements in breast 
cancer survival. Third, new molecular techniques to identify which tumors are 
likely to progress slowly may reduce overtreatment of cancers detected early, 
thereby changing the balance of benefits and risks from screening.

 There's one sure point of agreement among investigators who support screening 
and those who don't: Mammograms should not be the main thrust of future 
breast-cancer research. There are already new breast-screening methods coming 
into use. It would be better, researchers say, to focus on ways to prevent 
breast cancer from occurring and to develop more early ways of detecting and 
appropriately treating this disease.

..

..

..

.
