Feminized Frogs: Herbicide disrupts sexual growth: Science News Online, April 
20, 2002

 Feminized Frogs: Herbicide disrupts sexual growth

 Ben Harder

 At common environmental concentrations, the popular weed killer atrazine 
strips male frogs of a key hormone and turns some of them into hermaphrodites, 
according to new research. The finding raises concerns that the chemical may be 
contributing to global amphibian declines.

 In use for about 4 decades and currently employed in 80 countries atrazine is 
the most common herbicide in the United States. It's found in virtually all the 
nation's waterways and is especially prevalent around cornfields in the 
Midwest. It has also been identified in tests of preschoolers' drinking water 
(SN: 11/3/01, p. 285: Available to subscribers at ). "There seems to be no 
atrazine-free environment," says Tyrone B. Hayes of the University of 
California, Berkeley.

 Past research has found no evidence that typical environmental concentrations 
of atrazine cause premature death or abnormal growth in amphibians. The new 
research, which Hayes and his colleagues report in the April 16 Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, similarly finds that mortality and overall 
growth of the common lab frog Xenopus laevis are unaffected by atrazine.

 However, the researchers report, the herbicide has significant effects on 
frogs' sexual development. These turn up at concentrations substantially lower 
than the 3 parts per billion (ppb) that the Environmental Protection Agency 
permits in drinking water.

 To investigate atrazine's effects on sexual development, the researchers 
exposed tadpoles to concentrations ranging from 0.01 to 200 ppb. At 
concentrations of 0.1 ppb or above, 16 to 20 percent of the males developed 
extra testes or even ovaries. Concentrations of the male sex hormone 
testosterone in the blood of adult males exposed to atrazine were one-tenth 
those in blood from unexposed males. Exposed males also developed smaller 
larynxes, organs that are important for frogs' sexual communication.

 By looking for more subtle effects than past studies examined, Hayes and his 
team have identified an important environmental problem, says William H. 
Karasov of the University of Wisconsin^-Madison. Because the UC-Berkeley study 
found atrazine acting on frogs at "ecologically relevant" water concentrations, 
it's imperative that scientists gather data on the sexual development of 
amphibians living in the wild, says Karasov.

 These findings are "going to really shake a lot of people up," says Thomas W. 
La Point of the University of North Texas in Denton. Atrazine's effects "could 
very well explain a good portion of why [amphibians] are declining," he adds.

 Work in other labs supports this concern. A recent Canadian study, reported in 
the March Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, finds that atrazine impairs 
testes development in X. laevis.

 Research by Warren P. Porter of the University of Wisconsin^-Madison indicates 
that atrazine also disrupts other hormonal systems, he says.


