Rebranding the Hyena: Science News Online, April 27, 2002

 Rebranding the Hyena

 Researchers unravel the private life of this weird, wonderful carnivore

 John Pickrell

 In the movie The Lion King, hyenas are the villains. They're portrayed as 
slobbering, mangy, stupid scavengers always ready to do someone else's dirty 
work. It's entertaining, but the caricature perpetuates wrong ideas about these 
social carnivores, bemoans zoologist Kay Holekamp. She should know. For the 
past 14 years, she has followed the soap opera played out by a clan of around 
70 spotted hyenas in the Talek area of Kenya's Masai Mara National Reserve, and 
she's out to set the record straight.

 The truth of the matter, Holekamp exclaims, is that the spotted hyena ( 
Crocuta crocuta) is highly intelligent, with mental abilities and social skills 
to match many a primate. These hyenas are also superb predators, feeding mostly 
on fresh meat. Their hunting skill equals that of lions or cheetahs. Moreover, 
Holekamp continues, "once you've seen a female delicately carrying babies in 
those great bone-crushing jaws, you realize what wonderful mothers they are."

 Holekamp and her colleagues at Michigan State University in East Lansing have 
a deep affection for hyenas. They've given the animals names of U.S. 
presidents, ancient gods and goddesses and goodies, such as Hot Dog, Moon Pie, 
and Jujubee. The zoologists have been monitoring the Talek clan from dawn until 
dusk since 1988. At any one time, several members of Holekamp's team are 
stationed in Kenya.

 In their jeep, the researchers follow the hyenas. The scientists collect data 
on behavior and interactions and take blood samples. They have used the 
information to investigate topics ranging from immunology to conservation. 
Recent studies focus on social structure and how it passes between generations, 
mating preferences, variation in reproductive success, and the evolution of 
intelligence

 The study by Holekamp and her colleagues "is without a doubt one of the best 
long-term studies on a social carnivore," says Marc Bekoff, a behavioral 
ecologist at the University of Colorado at Boulder. "They ask really neat 
questions . . . and in terms of breadth, [their work] is the best you can get."

 Evolutionary oddity

 Hyenas, which are more closely related to cats than to dogs, come in four 
species. Only the spotted hyena lives in a clan with a rigid hierarchy. It's by 
far the most prevalent hyena and, in fact, the most abundant large African 
carnivore-outnumbering the lion many times over.

 Spotted hyenas are unique in many ways. They live in large clans whose members 
occupy a common territory. The Talek clan's homeland covers 65 square 
kilometers, equivalent to the area of a medium-size city. The clan is a loose 
entity in which animals travel, forage, and rest in fluid subgroups that can 
change composition by the day or even hour. In the rigidly structured clan, 
high-ranking animals enjoy the best access to food. Within a clan's related 
female lineages, rank is passed from a mother to her cubs.

 The spotted hyena differs from most mammals-with the exception of lemurs-in 
that the females are the dominant sex. They outrank males and are the more 
aggressive gender.

 This female dominance comes by way of a rare degree of masculinization. Female 
hyenas, which are often larger than males, have higher concentrations of the 
typically male hormone androstenedione in early life and are host to some 
bizarre genital morphology. The hyena clitoris is an elongated structure that 
resembles the male's penis. The females urinate, mate, and give birth through 
this highly elastic pseudopenis.

 The reversal of gender roles in the spotted hyena raises compelling questions, 
not the least of which is, How do males fare in a mating game where the females 
call the shots?

 In many mammal societies, the reproductive success of males is tightly tied to 
rank. Male carnivores from polar bears to meerkats attempt to defeat each other 
in competitions. Victors attain a higher rank and tend to father more 
offspring. Does this behavioral dynamic hold true in spotted hyena clans?

 To answer this question, Holekamp and her colleagues examined a behavioral 
pattern common among mammals. Female hyenas remain in the clan of their birth, 
while even high-ranking males between 2 and 5 years of age say goodbye to home. 
Life is tough for a lone hyena, and many perish, but with luck, the male is 
accepted into a new clan.

 The immigrant male enters at the back of the hierarchical queue. Even a 
top-ranking male with easy access to food in his original clan is forced to 
feed on scraps in his new clan.

"We wanted to know why they would leave such a great situation" for one that 
was uncertain at best, says Anne Engh, also of Michigan State.

 Could it be that the highest-ranking male hyenas don't have the reproductive 
advantage described in other mammals? Engh wondered. She and her coworkers 
examined DNA to determine the paternity of all Talek cubs born between 1988 and 
1999. The team compared the number of cubs sired by young, sexually mature 
males who hadn't yet left home with that by immigrant males.

 The researchers found that an astonishing 97 percent of cubs are fathered by 
immigrant males, even though they are outranked by the younger native males. 
This is a powerful confirmation that absolute rank is not the major factor in 
defining reproductive success, the researchers say. The tenure of the immigrant 
does matter, however. The longer he stays with a new clan, the more likely a 
hyena is to father offspring. The findings are reported in the March Behavioral 
Ecology.

 Female hyenas have the reproductive ball in their court, partly because their 
strange genital morphology gives them a rare sexual power-it's impossible for a 
male to force them to mate. To complete the difficult task of penetrating the 
pseudopenis, the male needs the female's cooperation. As a consequence, male 
success becomes completely dependent on the whims of females.

"Spotted hyenas stand in marked contrast to virtually all other [promiscuous, 
group-living] mammals," Holekamp adds. "Large size and aggressiveness appear 
not to do male hyenas much good."

 Lucky in love?

 Although female choice plays a domineering role in hyena mating, males can 
also be picky, even if they're the mate-and-run type.

 Female animals typically invest more time and energy in pregnancy and parental 
care, so it pays for them to be selective about mates. However, in species 
where males also invest heavily in parenting, or where there's a wide range in 
mate quality, it makes sense for males to be choosy, too.

 The quality of hyena mothers varies widely. High-ranking females have greater 
access to resources than their clanmates do, so they get pregnant earlier and 
produce more offspring, says Micaela Szykman, formerly of Holekamp's group but 
now at the Smithsonian Institution Conservation and Research Center in Front 
Royal, Va. "High-ranking females can produce 6 to 10 times the number of 
offspring that a low-ranking female produces," she says.

 Szykman and her Michigan colleagues decided to test whether immigrant males 
distinguish between females of varying rank and state of fertility. Observers 
can identify individual hyenas by their constellation-like spot patterns, each 
as unique as a human fingerprint.

 The researchers chronicled how much time immigrant males spent approaching and 
associating with specific females. Previous research had indicated that males 
increase chances of mating with a particular female by spending time with her.

 The researchers observed 15,353 interactions of males and females between 1988 
and 1995. They then created so-called association indices for each possible 
male-female pair. The higher the score, the more time the couple spent hanging 
out together. The researchers also turned to the stored blood samples and 
examined DNA markers to determine the paternity of the cubs. The findings 
confirmed that male hyenas spend more time with the mothers of their cubs than 
with other females.

 The scientists used the same body of data to identify those females with whom 
the males initiated the most interactions. The results showed that males know 
exactly what they are doing. Overall, males preferentially associated with 
females of high rank and in a fertile reproductive state.

 Male rank was also a significant factor. High- and middle-ranking males 
associate most commonly with top females, while low-ranking males associated 
more equally with females of all ranks. Szykman and her colleagues reported 
these findings in the May 2001 Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology.

 Even though investing a lot of time with one female can preclude exploring 
other reproductive opportunities, says Szykman, the investment can pay off by 
increasing the chances of siring offspring with a first-class mother. 
"Traditionally, the males of a species dance, and the females choose," adds 
Szykman, but in hyenas, females vary so much in reproductive success that it 
makes sense for males to select wisely.

 Aping monkeys?

 Another puzzling aspect of the spotted hyena's social structure is that it 
closely resembles that of the socially complex old-world monkeys, a group 
including baboons and macaques.

 These primates also live in permanent social groups-which include adult males 
and multiple lineages of adult females with offspring-and have well-established 
pecking orders. Social status is usually not based on size, strength, or 
fighting ability, but instead passes from a mother to her offspring.

 Scott Creel, an ecologist at Montana State University at Bozeman, says he's 
often been struck "by the view of anthropologists that [primates] were unique 
and qualitatively different from the rest of the animal kingdom . . . ." 
Largely due to the work of Holekamp's group, "it's now widely recognized that 
'primatelike' social complexity can be found in other species," he says.

 Considering the similarities between the monkeys and hyenas, Holekamp and her 
coworkers wondered whether any of the existing theories about how primates pass 
their rank from generation to generation could apply to young hyenas.

 One theory holds that rank is based on physical characteristics and is 
therefore genetically inherited. Another suggests that higher-ranking animals 
preferentially direct unprovoked aggression-a sign of dominance-toward the 
offspring of lower-ranking females. Yet another theory says that mothers differ 
in how they defend their offspring when the youngsters are engaged in fights 
with peers-stepping in more frequently when the opponents are offspring of 
lower-ranking females. A fourth theory suggests that when youngsters tussle, 
animals of higher rank provide third-party support to unrelated offspring of 
equal or higher rank.

 Engh and her coworkers tested whether any of these theories applied to hyenas. 
The scientists counted all instances of antagonistic and submissive behavior 
expressed by 67 cubs born during an 11-year study and used statistics to 
correlate the tallies with the eventual rank of each cub.

 The researchers found that the first two theories were unlikely to apply to 
hyenas. Because low-ranking coalitions occasionally overthrow their 
high-ranking superiors, genetic inheritance of rank doesn't seem to hold true 
in primates or hyenas, says Engh. And cubs of all ranks appeared to endure 
similar amounts of harassment.

 The two remaining theories are based on adult support during fights among 
cubs. Both theories appear compatible with the hyena behavior, the researchers 
reported in the September 2000 Animal Behaviour.

 High-ranking mothers intervened in fights more frequently and more effectively 
than their low-ranking counterparts did. Also, most support from unrelated 
animals was given when cubs behaved aggressively toward lower-born opponents. 
These two factors also appear to be the most common ones in those primates with 
hyena-style social structures, the researchers note.

"Maternal-rank inheritance is similar in hyenas and primates not just in 
appearance, but in the process by which it occurs," concludes Engh.

 Holekamp adds that the research hints that cognitive processes in hyenas 
resemble those documented in primates. So, similar selection pressures have 
probably guided evolution in both groups.

 There's a great deal of detailed information on behavior and life history in 
primates, but it's important to learn about other complex social mammals, says 
Susan Alberts, an ecologist at Duke University in Durham, N.C., who studies 
baboons. Then, interspecies comparisons can be made to answer general questions 
about the pathways of evolution.

 Hyena studies may even reveal something about humanity, says Bekoff. The 
social structure of the hyena may be surprisingly similar to that of early 
humans. "Looking to carnivores may teach us about the evolution of sociality in 
our own species," he suggests.

 There's far more to hyenas than their social structures. Engh and Holekamp say 
that they will soon publish additional evidence of complex mental capabilities 
shared between primates and social carnivores. Recent research has shown that 
hyenas are able to recognize third-party relationships, for instance between a 
mother and her offspring. Holekamp points out that a third-party relationship 
is an abstract concept, an understanding of which is thought by researchers to 
indicate highly developed levels of social intelligence.

 Hyenas are forever doing things that are unexpected and difficult to explain, 
says Holekamp. "Each time you think you've got one thing figured out, they 
throw you a curveball," she notes.


