Super Wallops: Tracking the origin of cosmic rays: Science News Online, April 
27, 2002

 Super Wallops: Tracking the origin of cosmic rays

 Ron Cowen

 When it comes to revving up subatomic particles, the heavens leave the biggest 
particle accelerator on Earth in the dust. Our galaxy abounds with charged 
particles carrying energies that are thousands to millions of times as high as 
those that the most powerful atom smashers can muster. Known as cosmic rays, 
the particles-mostly protons-heat and ionize the interstellar medium, 
profoundly altering its chemical composition.

 Two reports this week shed light on the longstanding mystery of where these 
particles come from.

 One study focuses on lower-energy cosmic rays that originate within our galaxy 
and have energies up to 1,000 trillion electronvolts. The findings support the 
popular notion that the particles are generated by shock waves from supernovas, 
the explosive death of massive stars.

 That scenario has been difficult to prove because magnetic fields in the Milky 
Way divert these cosmic rays from their original paths. Even so, researchers 
had previously demonstrated that supernova remnants-expanding shells of 
jettisoned material-can accelerate electrons to cosmic ray energies. But there 
was no evidence that protons are accelerated by the same mechanism.

 In the April 25 Nature, Ryoji Enomoto of the University of Tokyo in Kashiwa, 
Japan, and his colleagues report that they have for the first time associated a 
supernova remnant with cosmic ray protons. When high-energy protons collide 
with atoms and molecules in space, they create a short-lived subatomic particle 
called a neutral pion. Its decay produces gamma rays with energies of a 
trillion electronvolts. When those slam into Earth's atmosphere, they generate 
showers of visible-light photons. On several occasions, Enomoto's group 
detected photon showers emanating from the patch of sky that contains a 
supernova remnant called RX J1713.7-3946. Their spectra indicated that they 
were generated by protons.

 If the findings are confirmed and astronomers can demonstrate that the 
supernova remnant is typical, "the production of cosmic rays within our galaxy 
could be conclusively linked to the aftermath of supernovas," says Felix 
Aharonian of the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg, 
Germany, in a commentary accompanying the Nature report.

 Another study examines the much rarer ultra-high-energy cosmic rays, which 
originate outside our galaxy and rank as the most energetic particles known. 
Packing as much punch as a major league baseball pitch, these particles have 
such high energies-up to a million trillion electronvolts-that our galaxy's 
magnetic field can't divert them.

 The source of these cosmic rays has proven elusive. Researchers now report the 
first experimental links between ultra-high-energy cosmic rays and possible 
sources.

 Analyzing data from high-energy cosmic ray detectors in Japan and England, 
Elihu Boldt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., and his 
colleagues have traced the trajectories of several of the particles to four 
galaxies known to surround dead or dormant quasars and suspected to contain 
supermassive black holes. Boldt reported the findings at a joint meeting of the 
American Physical Society and the American Astronomical Society in Albuquerque.

 The finding fits with a scenario in which a spinning, supermassive black hole 
acts like a giant battery. Magnetic field lines in close contact with the 
rotating hole would generate a billion trillion volts, which accelerate charged 
particles to ultrahigh energies. In this theory, the quasar must be dormant. If 
the cosmic rays revved up by the black hole were to collide with intense 
radiation from an active quasar, their energy would be drained away.

 The findings "are the first indication of a correlation between candidate 
objects and actual events," says Michael L. Cherry of Louisiana State 
University in Baton Rouge.


