The Social Net: Science News Online, May 4, 2002

 The Social Net

 Scientists hope to download some insight into online interactions

 Bruce Bower

 Ten years ago, computer aficionados had the Internet pretty much to 
themselves. Today, their electronic playground has become a grand, weird, 
unpredictable social experiment. About half of U.S. households now have 
Internet access, although only 5 percent were connected in 1995. Europe and 
many other parts of the world also contain mushrooming numbers of Net users.

 There's a complementary growth industry in studies of how this wildly 
successful technology affects social life. Behavioral scientists are grappling 
with a seismic shift in communication that's been more hospitable to armchair 
speculation than to empirical investigation.

 Confusion about the social implications of new technology is hardly new. It 
existed in post-Civil War America, when booting up occurred mainly among 
cowboys. After inventing the telephone in 1876, Alexander Graham Bell described 
it as a broadcasting instrument that would perhaps provide "music on tap." 
Early telecom executives regarded the telephone mainly as a business tool. 
Nearly 50 years after the phone's invention, telephone companies finally 
realized that people wanted to use the product for talking with friends and 
family.

 The Internet is poised to transform society far more profoundly than 
telephones, or even cell phones, have.

 Two contrasting schools of cyberthought offer explanations for what's 
happening. Optimists regard the World Wide Web and e-mail as realms for making 
and keeping friends, joining global communities, and exchanging ideas freely 
outside the bounds of oppressive government restrictions. Pessimists argue that 
online endeavors pull people away from real-world interactions, make them less 
concerned about their communities, and provide a forum for hate groups. They 
also charge that the Internet creates unprecedented opportunities for 
governments to monitor citizens' private lives.

 Both views simplify an unsettled situation. Much of the Internet's allure lies 
in its flexibility. People adapt it to their own purposes, whether for good or 
ill. For instance, in the 48 hours after the terrorist attacks of last Sept. 
11, more than 4 million people contacted family and friends by e-mail to check 
on their safety and used e-mail and the Internet to find out what had happened. 
Yet government investigations indicate that the Al Qaeda terror network used 
hard-to-trace e-mail missives to organize the attacks and has since expanded 
its Internet presence.

 Amid this online ferment, there's little that investigators know for certain. 
Robert Kraut, a psychologist at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, was 
among the first to peer into the Internet's social side. "Scientists are on the 
cusp of being able to say something sensible about the effects of the Internet 
on social life," he says. "It's premature to make any sweeping statements about 
what's going on."

 Clash of the surveys

 Several surveys have probed the social repercussions of Internet use. They 
offer starkly different portraits of life online.

 On the upbeat side, two national surveys of about 2,000 adults each, conducted 
in 2000 and 2001 by the University of California, Los Angeles Center for 
Communication Policy, found that regular Internet users reported spending as 
much time on most social activities as nonusers did. The online crowd cut back 
on television time, watching the tube 4.5 fewer hours per week than the no-Net 
group did.

 National surveys in the same years, coordinated by the Pew Internet and 
American Life Project in Washington, D.C., yielded even rosier findings. 
Project researchers concluded that the online world is a "vibrant social 
universe" in which people widen their contacts and strengthen ties to their 
local communities.

 Data published last November in the American Behavioral Scientist supported 
the Pew findings. In national telephone surveys of as many as 2,500 people 
conducted annually from 1995 to 2000, Internet users reported more community 
and political involvement, as well as more social contacts, than nonusers did, 
reported sociologist James E. Katz of Rutgers University in New Brunswick, 
N.J., and his colleagues.

 A 1998 survey of about 39,000 visitors to the National Geographic Society Web 
site also noted a social boost from Internet use. In this population, which 
included many veteran Internet users, online interactions typically 
supplemented in-person and telephone contacts, says University of Toronto 
sociologist Barry Wellman.

 However, two other national surveys, released in 2000, indicated that regular 
Internet use may often lead people to spend less time with friends and family. 
Stanford University researchers directed one survey (SN: 2/26/00, p. 135: ). 
The other was a joint project of National Public Radio, the Kaiser Family 
Foundation, and Harvard University.

 Internet users tend to be more sociable than nonusers to begin with because 
they're better educated, wealthier, and younger, says Stanford's Norman H. Nie. 
As people in this pair of surveys spent more time on the Internet, though, they 
reported increasingly less face-to-face contact with family and friends, 
according to Nie.

 He finds this trend particularly troubling in light of evidence that community 
involvement in the United States had already fallen substantially by the time 
the Internet debuted. In Bowling Alone (2000, Touchstone), Harvard political 
scientist Robert D. Putnam makes the case for a nationwide civic retreat over 
the past 30 years.

 Perhaps the most exhaustive attempt to see whether people tend to end up 
computing alone occurred in England. University of Essex sociologist Jonathan 
Gershuny directed a study of 1,000 randomly chosen households in which adults 
kept a diary of their own and their kids' daily activities over the same 1-week 
period in 1999, 2000, and 2001.

 Internet users, who made up nearly half the sample by 2001, generally engaged 
in as much social activity as nonusers, Gershuny says. Moreover, those who 
first went online after entering the study showed big boosts in the amount of 
time allotted to sociable leisure activities, such as going to movies and 
eating at restaurants.

 The results don't establish that Internet use makes people more social than 
they were to begin with. Gershuny suspects, however, that online access to 
friends, theaters, group discussions in so-called chat rooms, and so on makes 
it easier to arrange social get-togethers of all sorts.

"In short, the Internet makes going out more efficient," he says. "And so, we 
might be tempted to do more of it."

 The rich get richer

 Disturbing signs that the Internet fosters loneliness and depression first 
emerged in a study of more than 200 individuals in 93 Pittsburgh households 
given online access in 1995 and 1996 (SN: 9/12/98, p. 168). Up to 3 years 
later, however, the heaviest Internet users in these households reported being 
happiest and having the most social contacts, concludes Kraut's team in the 
spring Journal of Social Issues.

 From 1995 to 1998, the Internet's rapid spread may have made the online world 
"a more hospitable place," the researchers propose. Moreover, given long-term 
Internet access, adults and teens who had extraverted personalities showed most 
of the gains in social life, community involvement, and personal well-being. 
Introverts gravitated away from social contacts and felt more alone after 2 to 
3 years online.

"You're more likely to use the Internet to expand your social world if you're 
already a social person, but not if you're introverted," Kraut asserts. His 
team calls this personality-based process the "rich get richer" model of 
Internet use.

 In a related finding in the same households, the scientists find that women 
use e-mail far more than men do to maintain family relationships and to keep in 
touch with friends who live far away. Previous research had shown that women 
generally take more interest than men do in cultivating relationships in person 
and on the telephone.

 The intensity of instant messaging-in which correspondents immediately see and 
respond to each other's e-mails-may particularly appeal to women, Kraut 
theorizes. He plans to examine this possibility in further research.

 Still, gregarious folk may not be the only ones reaping online social capital, 
argues psychologist Katelyn Y.A. McKenna of New York University. Internet 
communication encourages individuals to disclose personal traits that are 
difficult to reveal in person, especially to a new acquaintance, McKenna and 
her colleagues report in the spring Journal of Social Issues. Friendships form 
especially quickly among the people who offer such personal revelations online, 
even if they're anxious and depressed, the researchers contend.

 McKenna's group first randomly surveyed 568 men and women who posted messages 
on any of 20 Internet newsgroups, sites where people discuss politics or some 
other common interest. A majority had formed online friendships that had 
progressed to telephone conversations and personal meetings. Members of both 
sexes who said they could disclose their self-described "true" selves on the 
Internet better than in other social situations formed the bulk of these 
friendships, which typically had lasted for at least 2 years.

 For instance, a relatively reserved man who is best able to reveal his 
"sensitive side" with people he meets online stands a good chance of making 
friends in a newsgroup, McKenna says.

 In initial encounters among college students, the Internet's anonymity and 
absence of cues about physical appearance promoted self-disclosure and a 
tendency for partners to think more highly of one another than they did after 
meeting in person, she adds.

 Groups and loops

 It's no secret that communication sometimes turns nasty online. The act of 
electronically denigrating a person even has its own name-flaming.

 Internet-based negotiations of various kinds provide fertile ground for 
communication breakdowns, according to Leigh Thompson and Janice Nadler, both 
psychologists at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill. Over the past 5 
years, the researchers have studied pairs of business students-neither of whom 
knew the other-randomly assigned to be either a buyer or a seller in an 
experimental negotiation. This task, working out details of the purchase of a 
company's cars, was conducted over about a week via either e-mail or personal 
meetings.

 E-mail negotiations often dissolved in disagreement and acrimony, whereas 
in-person negotiations more frequently yielded mutual accords, the researchers 
note. E-mail negotiators routinely got frustrated with what they perceived as 
inappropriate delays in responses to their questions and proposals. They then 
became unwilling to take turns in sending and receiving messages, a breach of 
etiquette that doomed the negotiations. In these anonymous encounters, 
negotiators tended to issue ultimatums, favor intimidation over cooperation, 
and attribute sinister motives to their partners, the Northwestern scientists 
say.

 In their studies, the most successful e-mail negotiators first engaged in 
pleasant small talk before hammering out agreements.

 In contrast, people who already know one another often work quite well online, 
contends psychologist Russell Spears of the University of Amsterdam. Spears and 
his coworkers have studied Internet chat rooms organized by college students to 
discuss course material and to work on projects. These groups rapidly developed 
distinctive rules of communication etiquette. Each group's members increasingly 
conformed to these guidelines over time.

 Moreover, many messages that at first looked to the researchers like instances 
of flaming turned out to be humorous put-downs that reflected warm feelings 
within a tight-knit group, Spears says.

 It may also be possible to inject a warmer social atmosphere directly into the 
Internet's architecture. Scientists at IBM's T.J. Watson Research Center in 
Yorktown Heights, N.Y., have designed a pair of software systems that use 
simple visual cues to convey social information to participants in online 
corporate work groups.

"These systems support conversations and promote a sense of group trust," says 
psychologist Wendy Kellogg, who directs the project.

 The first system, called Babble, displays a window in which dots within a 
circle denote who is in a current group conversation. The proximity of dots to 
the circle's center indicates how recently each person has entered the 
discussion. In an adjoining window, users create and prioritize a list of 
discussion topics.

 Babble also provides a text of current and past discussions on each topic. 
Users immediately know whether remarks have been separated by seconds, minutes, 
days, or months.

 Over the past 4 years, about two dozen groups within IBM have used Babble, 
often to organize collaborative efforts that lasted a month or more. Most 
groups liked the intimate atmosphere fostered by the system and employed it 
successfully, Kellogg says.

 A second system, called Loops, is now being tested at IBM. Loops runs on the 
World Wide Web and expands on Babble's format. For instance, Kellogg says it 
provides cues to the physical location of conversation members and includes an 
area for inserting informational "Post-its," such as Web sites to share with 
others. Systems such as Loops may prove to be a boon for the growing number of 
business teams with members dispersed around the globe, she adds.

 The dark side

 Authoritarian governments regard the Internet as a two-sided technology that 
offers tempting economic opportunities while raising daunting political 
dangers. For instance, Chinese officials have aggressively pushed for expansion 
of information technologies in business. At the same time, they have exerted 
strict controls over prodemocracy groups' e-mail communications and blocked 
access of all Chinese Internet users to Web sites deemed politically 
unacceptable.

 Chinese dissident groups have increasingly found ways to evade government 
Internet restrictions, such as linking their computers to foreign Internet 
hubs, which can then reconnect users to banned Web sites, says University of 
Toronto political scientist Ronald J. Deibert. China's dispersed masses pose a 
tough challenge to Internet regulators, he proposes.

 The Internet troubles democratic governments because it provides an 
unprecedented forum for hate groups and terrorists. In the February American 
Behavioral Scientist, John J. Stanton of the National Defense Industrial 
Association in Arlington, Va., surveyed the growing number of sophisticated Web 
sites run by such groups to organize activities and recruit new members. Their 
causes range from enforcing separation of racial groups to destroying the 
property of companies deemed to be exploiting the environment.

 Some researchers hope to use the Internet to explore the largely hidden world 
of such groups. For instance, psychologist Jack Glaser of the University of 
California, Berkeley and his colleagues posed as curious, naive visitors to ask 
38 participants in several white supremacist chat rooms about their ideas on 
biracial marriage and other racial issues.

 Glaser considers this technique ethical because participants were contacted in 
a public forum, weren't coerced, addressed common topics of conversation in 
their chat rooms, and were not personally identified by the researchers. 
Surreptitious interviewing might also yield new insights into such denizens of 
the Internet as child pornographers and illegal weapons traders, Glaser says.

 However, deceiving people on the Internet in the name of science "is ethically 
on the edge," remarks New York University psychologist John A. Bargh. No 
ethical guidelines for conducting online research currently exist, he notes.

 It's just one more unsettled issue in the hazy realm of the social Net.


