Baby Facial: Infants monkey with face recognition: Science News Online, May 18, 
2002

 Baby Facial: Infants monkey with face recognition

 Bruce Bower

 Between ages 6 months and 9 months, a baby accomplishes a heads-up feat, of 
sorts. That's when he or she transforms a budding aptitude for detecting animal 
faces in general into a proficiency at discerning different human faces. This 
finding bears on the controversial issue of what types of knowledge a baby 
comes equipped with at birth.

 Infants learn to recognize faces through a process that exchanges perceptual 
breadth for depth, say psychologist Olivier Pascalis of the University of 
Sheffield in England and his colleagues. By 9 months of age, daily exposure to 
people has prepped babies' perceptual system to identify human-specific facial 
features so that they no longer detect subtle facial differences between 
members of other species, Pascalis' group proposes in the May 17 Science.

"Perhaps we're looking at how innate knowledge about faces changes over time 
due to visual experience," Pascalis says. "But it's impossible to say for sure, 
since experience with faces begins as soon as a child is born."

 Pascalis' group had previously observed brain wave changes in 6-month-olds, 
indicating that the babies recognized previously seen monkey faces even when 
presented in new orientations. Adults exhibited no brain wave signatures of 
recognition on this task.

 The researchers then conducted face-recognition tests with 60 babies-half 6 
months old and the rest 9 months old-and 11 adults. In a series of trials, each 
participant first viewed the face of a white man or woman and then saw the same 
face paired with another of the same sex and race. Further trials presented 
pairs of macaque monkey faces, one of which had just been seen.

 Six-month-olds looked much longer at both novel human and monkey faces than at 
the just-seen faces, a sign the researchers took for both recognition of and 
preference for the novel images. Adults and 9-month-olds looked longer at new 
human faces, but not at new monkey faces.

 A similar refining of perception also occurs as infants learn native speech 
sounds, the researchers note. After being able to discriminate between sounds 
from various languages, babies by age 6 months notice novel sounds solely from 
their native tongue (SN: 2/8/92, p. 91).

 Early facial and language perception is probably governed by a common "tuning 
apparatus," Pascalis theorizes. These skills usually develop together; infants 
learn to recognize both their mother's face and her voice by around 2 months of 
age.

 The new findings on facial perception make sense, comments psychologist Paul 
C. Quinn of Washington and Jefferson College in Washington, Pa. "With enough 
experience, some types of expertise can develop in infants," he says. However, 
Quinn suspects that face recognition arises from babies' innate preferences for 
certain perceptual features, such as curved contours, rather than from more 
complex innate knowledge about faces, as other scientists suspect (SN: 7/7/01, 
p. 10: ).

 Harvard University psychologist Jerome Kagan agrees. Although the new study 
highlights the role of experience in face recognition, it's difficult to 
pinpoint what an infant knows based solely on increased time spent looking at 
previously seen faces, Kagan cautions.

 With adults, however, face-recognition proficiency appears firmly grounded in 
human-specific features. Even primatologists who have long studied monkeys 
prove unable to discriminate between previously seen and new monkey faces, 
according to an unpublished study by Odile Petit of the Primate Ethology and 
Behavioral Ecology Center in Strasbourg, France.


