September's Science: Shutdown of airlines aided contrail studies: Science News 
Online, May 11, 2002

 September's Science: Shutdown of airlines aided contrail studies

 Sid Perkins

 Immediately after four hijacked airliners slammed into New York's World Trade 
Center, the Pentagon, and a field in southwestern Pennsylvania, the Federal 
Aviation Administration shut down all U.S. commercial air traffic for 3 days. 
The unprecedented grounding of airliners enabled airports to step up security 
measures. At the same time, scientists stepped up to a unique opportunity to 
study the influence of high-flying aircraft on Earth's climate.

 One way that aircraft may affect climate is through their cloud like 
contrails, which appear behind jets flying at high altitude. Contrails are made 
of ice crystals that form within seconds around the small particles present in 
aircraft exhaust, says David J. Travis, an atmospheric scientist at the 
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater. Although jet fuel produces water vapor as 
it burns, more than 90 percent of the ice in long-lived contrails comes from 
water vapor already present in the air, says Travis.

 Wispy cirrus clouds are the only ones that form naturally at the high 
altitudes where jets cruise. These thin clouds slightly cool Earth's surface by 
blocking some incoming sunlight, but they moderately warm the lower atmosphere 
by trapping a portion of Earth's outbound infrared radiation. Scientists have 
suspected that contrails have similar but stronger effects.

 Travis and his colleagues looked at the average diurnal temperature range 
(DTR)-the difference between the day's high and low temperatures-reported at 
more than 4,000 weather stations across the continental United States. During 
the 3-day hiatus of air traffic last September, the average DTR was a little 
over 1@C wider than normal, even though the average DTRs computed for the 3-day 
periods immediately before and after that period were below normal.

 Furthermore, says Travis, the Pacific Northwest, the Midwest, and the 
Northeast-areas of the country typically blanketed with aircraft contrails in 
mid-September-showed the largest changes in diurnal temperature range, mostly 
from increased daytime high temperatures. This bolsters the argument that 
contrails can significantly affect climate, Travis contends. He and his 
colleagues will report their findings next week in Portland, Ore., at a 
conference of the American Meteorological Society.

 Travis' results are difficult to argue with, says Patrick Minnis of NASA's 
Langley Research Center in Hampton, Va. He and his colleagues will report their 
analyses of satellite images of contrails at the same conference. In a series 
of photos taken Sept. 12, individual cloud trails of high-flying military 
aircraft stand out clearly in a nearly cloud-free region west of Washington, 
D.C. In just a few hours, six contrails-each of which started out a few meters 
wide-spread to cover more than 20,000 square kilometers. The observations of 
these single contrails along aerial highways normally crowded with dozens of 
aircraft may help scientists develop better models of how contrails spread and 
affect climate, says Minnis.


