Amyloid Buster? New drug hinders Alzheimer's protein: Science News Online, May 
18, 2002

 Amyloid Buster? New drug hinders Alzheimer's protein

 Nathan Seppa

 By disabling a dementia-linked protein, a synthetic drug is showing a 
tantalizing capacity to interfere with the formation of waxy amyloid deposits 
like those that accumulate in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease.

 In those people, the protein, serum amyloid P, seems to exacerbate the buildup 
by linking amyloid molecules into more durable deposits. Research hasn't 
revealed whether these deposits cause Alzheimer's disease or are the result of 
it, but many scientists argue that limiting amyloid deposits will benefit 
patients (SN: 11/3/01, p. 286: Available to subscribers at .).

 Immunologist Mark B. Pepys of the Royal Free and University College Medical 
School in London and his colleagues report taking a step in that direction. In 
the May 16 Nature, they show that a drug called CPHPC can reduce the amount of 
serum amyloid P in the blood and in amyloid deposits. CPHPC is merciful 
shorthand for R-1-[6-[ R-2-carboxy-pyrrolidin-1-yl]-6-oxo-hexanoyl] 
pyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid.

 The drug works by binding to serum amyloid P, which then can't bind to amyloid 
molecules. Further, like its abbreviation, the structure of CPHPC is 
palindromic-it looks the same from either end. With its two binding sites, the 
drug can hold together two serum amyloid P molecules. Liver cells then 
recognize the structure and mark it for destruction.

 The researchers developed CPHPC by first searching a collection of roughly 
100,000 compounds for molecules that interact with serum amyloid P. The team 
chemically modified one promising candidate so that it would bond decisively to 
serum amyloid P. The drug candidate, CPHPC, did just that in test-tube and 
mouse studies. In mice genetically engineered to make human serum amyloid P, 
CPHPC lowered the concentration of serum amyloid P in the blood and shrank 
amyloid deposits.

 The researchers then gave 2-day CPHPC infusions to eight people with 
amyloidosis, a life-threatening disease in which amyloid deposits accumulate 
not in the brain but in the kidneys, liver, heart, and other organs.

 The body normally maintains a uniform concentration of serum amyloid P in the 
blood. In the study volunteers, the CPHPC infusion depleted the blood's supply 
of serum amyloid P, so the protein was drawn out of the organs. When treatment 
ended, the serum amyloid P started to go back into the organ deposits. However, 
several weeks after the treatment, some patients still had less serum amyloid P 
in both their blood and amyloid deposits than they had when the study began.

 In another trial, the teams gave up to 9 months' of daily doses of CPHPC to 19 
amyloidosis patients whose disease was progressing despite other treatments. An 
autopsy on one patient who died 6 months into the treatment showed that his 
amyloid deposits were surprisingly low in serum amyloid P.

 This study revealed no side effects. Although the researchers haven't yet 
tested whether the treatment broke up amyloid deposits, most of the patients' 
conditions stabilized. Stopping the disease progression "is better than 
nothing," says immunologist Carolyn Mold of the University of New Mexico School 
of Medicine in Albuquerque. In that sense, she says, CPHPC represents "an 
exciting possibility" that deserves further testing.

 Pepys and his colleagues plan to begin testing the drug on Alzheimer's 
patients soon. Although the researchers have great hopes for CPHPC, Pepys 
cautions that all testing is still in the early phase and that there are 
significant differences between Alzheimer's disease and amyloidosis.


