Bugs on Mars: Science News Online, May 25, 2002

 Bugs on Mars

 Unearthly aircraft may explore the Red Planet-and beyond

 Peter Weiss

 Anthony Colozza hopes to unleash flying robots on Mars. That may sound like 
the brainchild of a crazed, sci-fi film director, but the proposed bird-size 
robots are actually a technology designed for serving planetary science. 
Aerospace engineer Colozza and his colleagues are convinced that the machines, 
which will fly as insects do, may be the perfect explorers for the Red Planet.

 Compared with rovers hobbling over all kinds of terra incognita, unmanned 
flying machines could peruse much more of a planet and do it faster, say 
Colozza and other proponents of flying robots. And unlike planetary orbiters 
that scan a lot of terrain at low resolution, autonomous aircraft would enjoy a 
closer view and might even be able to drop down at selected spots to examine an 
area in detail or to take and analyze samples.

 Aeronautical engineers have been designing aircraft for missions to Mars since 
the 1970s. Some researchers are investigating the use of giant balloons, but 
most proposals are for fixed-wing fliers, like conventional airplanes. However, 
because there are no runways for landings and take offs on Mars' rubble-strewn, 
canyon-streaked surface, the first launch of a fixed-wing plane into the 
Martian atmosphere would also most likely be the aircraft's last.

 Given those limitations, a handful of researchers, including Colozza of the 
Ohio Aerospace Institute (OAI) in Cleveland, have begun looking into robotic 
aircraft that could land and take off vertically in the extremely thin Martian 
atmosphere. With the right power source and an efficient design, such craft 
could carry out prolonged surveillance missions as well as detailed 
investigations of selected locations on the planet.

 The insectlike machines being pursued by OAI and the Georgia Institute of 
Technology in Atlanta would carry out those tasks by vigorously flapping their 
wings-a means of flight long used by birds and insects but never mastered by 
human aviators. With that approach, Colozza and his colleagues are making a 
leap into the unknown. Although flapping as a means of flight propulsion is 
still in its infancy for aircraft on Earth, Mars' "strange combination of low 
air density and low gravity make that place perfect for flying large bugs," 
Colozza says.

 Other researchers are pursuing more conservative designs that resemble 
helicopters. However, under the Red Planet's exotic flight conditions, even 
those more ordinary vehicles may have to assume unfamiliar forms. In one 
design, for instance, the rotors of the proposed Mars whirlybirds resemble the 
vanes of windmills.

 Out of thin air

 Despite his current passion for flapping wings, Colozza started out working on 
Mars flight as a fixed-wing guy. He was part of a now-defunct NASA project that 
would have celebrated in 2003 the centennial of human flight on Earth by 
launching a small, fixed-wing airplane into the Martian skies.

 The idea of using flapping-wing vehicles came later to him and his colleagues, 
almost as an afterthought, given what they knew already about aerodynamics and 
the Martian atmosphere. The alien air is so thin-roughly equivalent to Earth's 
atmosphere at 30,000 meters-that a fixed-wing plane would have to fly faster 
than 400 kilometers per hour (km/h) to avoid crashing. Below that speed, it 
wouldn't be able to generate enough lift to stay airborne. For comparison, 400 
km/h is about the top speed of a single engine, four-passenger plane traveling 
in Earth's skies.

 To carry sufficient scientific gear, the Martian aircraft have to be bigger 
than flies or bees. However, if an aircraft's wings flapped in the manner of 
those of insects, Colozza and his colleagues realized, the flier's increased 
size and the decreased Martian air density could balance each other out.

"The size of a vehicle and the viscosity and density of the fluid [the air] are 
the main factors" in whether the vehicle can fly, Colozza notes. "You can play 
with those and, as long as the equation gives you the same final number, [the 
aircraft] should be the same aerodynamically."

 Colozza had read in Scientific American that Georgia Tech was developing a 
50-gram, flapping-wing flier for use on Earth. It has a wingspan of 15 
centimeters. The Atlanta team's research, funded by the university and military 
agencies, was part of a broader effort in academia and industry to develop 
palm-size fliers called micro air vehicles (MAVs).

 Unobtrusive and potentially cheap, those miniature craft are expected to be 
able to slip into buildings or caves and take pictures and sensor readings. 
Once inside such places, MAVs might also unleash weapons on holed-up enemies or 
help find missing persons.

 Recently, findings on the aerodynamics of insect flight have convinced 
researchers that flapping-wing MAVs may offer an advantage over rotary or 
fixed-wing versions. Insects "don't fly like birds or planes-they use 
completely different principles of aerodynamics," Colozza says.

 An insect's wing motions create vortices of air along the wings' edges that 
produce exceptionally strong forces for upward and sideways propulsion (SN: 
6/19/99, p. 390).

"Those vortices generate huge amounts of lift," says Colozza. So, flapping-wing 
MAVs could potentially carry heftier payloads and outmaneuver other microfliers.

 In spring 1999, Colozza bounced his idea for a Martian flier off Robert C. 
Michelson, leader of the Georgia Tech group that was making the 50-gram fliers. 
"He didn't seem to think there was any reason we couldn't 'grow' the vehicle" 
to much larger sizes, Colozza recalls. For the past year and a half, the 
OAI-Georgia Tech team has been working on a feasibility study of the idea.

 The NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts (NIAC), a think tank established in 
Atlanta in 1998, has been paying for the study. NIAC fosters innovative 
space-related ideas expected to prove important 10 to 40 years from now, says 
the institute's director, aerospace engineer Robert A. Cassanova. Recently, the 
institute also sponsored Ilan M. Kroo of Stanford University to look into tiny 
helicopters-called mesicopters-that may also have some potential for use on 
Mars.

 Cassanova says that flapping-wing and rotorcraft fliers that could work in 
Martian skies look like they'll be ready for action in about 10 years rather 
than 40. Moreover, he predicts, "there are going to be some breakthroughs here 
in understanding the aerodynamics of flapping wings and very small rotary 
blades," advances that could change the character of Earth's own flying fleets.

 Bug juice

 There's no insect on Earth quite like the one that Michelson and his crew are 
putting together. They've dubbed their sparrow-size vehicle the entomopter-a 
name derived from the Greek words entomon for insect and pteron for wing.

 The device resembles an oversize dragonfly, although one of its twin pairs of 
wings is at its tail. It also appears to be clasping to its abdomen a 
cylindrical beetle-actually, the flier's engine to which are attached four 
movable legs for short-distance crawls.

 Although the researchers have made a plastic scale model of the entomopter, 
they have yet to miniaturize the motor sufficiently. In the meantime, the 
engineers have demonstrated the flight-worthiness of their design with a rubber 
band powered model of the aircraft made from paper and wood. They expect the 
final entomopter to cruise along about as fast as a person runs.

 The team envisions the Mars-exploring versions-existing now only in designs 
and computer simulations-as hunkering down on the flat top of a wheeled rover 
like fighter jets hugging the deck of an aircraft carrier. "This whole unit 
will explore slowly across the surface. The entomopters fly off and come back, 
and they guide the rover," says Colozza.

 During each of their brief flights, the entomopters might venture a couple of 
kilometers from their mother rovers and measure magnetic fields, take 
high-resolution images, or perform other duties.

 The fliers will flap their wings constantly at about 10 times per second and 
cruise at 50 km/h, Michelson says. However, by modifying their flying angles 
and other maneuvers, the vehicles will be able to fly at the much lower speeds 
needed for many scientific missions. "The whole intent is to try and get a slow 
flyer on Mars," Michelson says. "Theoretically, we'll be able to hover."

 With nearly a meter wingspan, the Mars fliers will be a lot bigger-and much 
more massive at 2.5 to 3 kg-than the Georgia team's Earth version. However, 
because Mars' gravity is only 37 percent of Earth's, the entomopter should 
still be able to carry a payload of up to 1.5 kilograms of scientific equipment.

 To make the entomopter especially efficient, the researchers are planning 
other innovations. In particular, they intend to recycle exhaust from the motor 
back through the vehicle in a half dozen ways. For instance, waste heat will be 
converted to electricity by a thermoelectric device. Discharged gases shot 
through orifices will create beams of ultrasound that the entomopter will use 
to detect obstacles, much as bats do with the high-pitched clicks they emit 
when they fly.

 Also, by being vented through strategically placed openings on the wings, 
those gases will steer the entomopter and squeeze more lift out of the 
flapping-wing design. Robert J. Englar, a member of the Georgia Tech team, had 
demonstrated that such gas jets can boost the lift of fixed-wing aircraft and 
may also improve the aerodynamics of large tractor-trailer trucks (SN: 
10/28/00, p. 279: ). However, "running gas through a flapping wing is something 
absolutely new," Michelson says.

 Weird whirleys

 Rather than gambling on an approach with so many aerodynamic and other 
engineering unknowns, other researchers are exploring vertical-lift Martian 
fliers based on well-established helicopter technology.

 To generate enough lift to raise a craft of a certain mass in the thin Martian 
air, conventional rotors would have to spin much more rapidly than they do on 
Earth. Yet, rotorcraft designers can't simply develop vehicles with very fast 
spins because of troubling shock waves they would produce.

 The mix of gases in the Martian atmosphere makes the speed of sound 20 percent 
slower than it is on Earth. A rotor blade exceeding the speed of sound 
generates shock waves that interfere with its lifting action. Fortunately, 
there are other ways to generate greater lift-by increasing the area of the 
blade, for instance. That comes with a vexing cost, however. It increases the 
drag on the blade, costing more fuel to drive the aircraft.

 A team of graduate aerospace engineering students at the University of 
Maryland in College Park has confronted these conflicting challenges.

"The cross-sections of our rotor blades do not look like helicopter blades but 
like [wind] turbine blades," says Anubhav Datta, who led the student team. 
Because wind turbines are designed to harvest wind energy, they're made to work 
in slow-moving air-aerodynamically the equivalent of thin air. Also, they're 
shaped to keep the air flowing close to more of the blade's surface than a 
helicopter blade does.

 The students also tailored the shape and proportions of their blade to keep 
the airflow subsonic. The design earned the Maryland team the top award in 2000 
for the American Helicopter Society's annual student-design contest.

 NASA researchers, too, are exploring Martian helicopter design. This spring, 
Larry A. Young of the Army/NASA Rotorcraft Division at NASA Ames Research 
Center in Moffett Field, Calif., and his colleagues have begun testing the 
aerodynamic performance of other prototype Martian rotor blades. The tests take 
place in a vacuum chamber more than 6 meters across. The researchers have also 
begun building pared-down models of whole rotorcraft, which they plan to test 
for lift and other performance features.

 A series of Mars Scout missions, which NASA has slated to begin in 2007, may 
use some type of aircraft. Both Young and Colozza say they expect to see 
fixed-wing planes fly on Mars first, but vertical-lift fliers may not be far 
behind. "People will see the benefits [of aircraft], and then further-out 
technology like the entomopter will be the next generation," Colozza predicts.

 Young is looking even further out in time-and space. He has been giving talks 
at engineering meetings around the world promoting what he calls planetary 
aerial vehicles for exploring any planet with an atmosphere. He's particularly 
enthusiastic about fliers that take off and land vertically.

 Venus is a potential candidate for such craft, he says. It's the only planet 
other than Earth where aircraft have already flown: Two Soviet balloons drifted 
above the planet in the mid 1980s.

 Young is also co-organizing a NASA-sponsored contest for next fall in which 
university students will design a vertical-lift vehicle for Saturn's moon 
Titan. Scientists suspect that this body harbors molecular precursors to life 
(SN: 11/1/97, p. 284).

 After nearly a century of artificial flight on Earth, he says, the time is 
right for a new age of flight on other worlds.


