Cosmic Dawn: Science News Online, June 8, 2002

 Cosmic Dawn

 Pinning down the origin and nature of the first stars

 Ron Cowen

 Most parents will tell you that the arrival of their firstborn was a 
life-altering event. Abraham Loeb, a first-time father and cosmologist at the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., is no 
exception. Standing in front of an audience of NASA astronomers one recent 
Friday afternoon, Loeb begins his lecture by flashing a slide of his 1-year-old 
daughter, Klil. "It's always fascinating to study the infant universe," he 
jokes.

 Loeb says he now views his life in two parts-before and after the birth of his 
daughter. Similarly, he divides the history of the universe into two 
eras-before and after the birth of the first stars.

 New, sophisticated computer simulations of those baby stars are providing a 
more accurate estimate of when they formed and how massive they were. 
Characterizing these first stars is crucial, notes Volker Bromm of 
Harvard-Smithsonian, because they not only lit up the cosmos, but also 
profoundly influenced the birth and evolution of galaxies.

 Ten or 15 years ago, he notes, most cosmologists assumed that galaxies formed 
wholesale, during a very limited window of time, and they devoted much of their 
research to pinpointing that era. Astronomers now accept that galaxy formation 
is an ongoing process, with smaller galaxies forming first and later merging to 
build more massive ones. "But there was a group of the very first stars, and 
they are the beginning of this chain" of galaxy formation, says Bromm. "These 
stars set the stage for everything that happens afterwards."

 Unveiling the nature of the first stars, he adds, will help solve cosmology's 
fundamental riddle: How did an almost perfectly smooth, dark universe become 
lumpy and littered with stars? Although the first stars lived and died billions 
of years ago, their explosive demise may have left a calling card that 
telescopes on Earth can detect, he adds.

 Stellar models

 Before astronomers can hope to successfully scour the universe for signs of 
the first stars, they have to know exactly what to look for. That's where 
modeling comes in. Star birth, especially as it happens in the tumult of the 
universe today, is notoriously difficult to model. Several features of the 
first stars simplify that challenge, notes Tom Abel of Pennsylvania State 
University in State College. Theorists only have to keep track of hydrogen, 
helium, and small amounts of a few heavier elements, since these were the only 
atoms forged in the Big Bang. Unlike later episodes of star formation, there 
was no dust, stellar winds, magnetic fields, or cosmic rays to complicate star 
birth.

 The fireball that begat the universe some 14 billion years ago left it 
searingly hot and blindingly bright. After about 300,000 years, however, the 
expanding universe cooled sufficiently for the radiation left over from the Big 
Bang to shift to longer, invisible wavelengths and travel freely into space. 
The cosmos' brilliant beginning ended, giving way to an era of blackness. 
Nearly structureless and featureless, the universe remained in the murk for 
millions of years. But even in the darkness, the tiny, primordial fluctuations 
in the density of matter were growing bigger.

 A supercomputer simulation of the early universe developed by Abel and his 
collaborators assumes the existence of cold dark matter-slow-moving, invisible 
material that is believed to make up 90 percent of the mass of the universe. 
According to the cold-dark-matter scenario, small objects formed first and then 
coalesced into galaxy-size bodies.

 The simulation by Abel, Greg L. Bryan of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, and Michael L. Norman of the University of California, San Diego 
begins 13 million years after the Big Bang. That's when cold dark matter 
started to clump and form invisible halos in regions that contained slightly 
higher-than-average concentrations of matter.

 After about 100 million years, cold-dark-matter halos weighing about 100,000 
times as much as the sun had begun to form, according to the team's model, 
which was described in the Jan. 4 Science. That was a watershed, notes Abel, 
because cold-dark-matter halos this massive are the first to pull in and 
confine small amounts of hydrogen and helium gas-the stuff of which the first 
stars were made.

 That was no mean feat because gravity had to overcome the outward pressure 
exerted by the gases, which became ever more compressed and hot as they were 
jammed into a smaller volume.

 To make stars, compressed gas must grow even denser. To do so, it must cool 
down to a few degrees above absolute zero. But in order to cool, the gas must 
first become relatively hot.

 Because these first halos of matter weren't very massive, they compressed the 
trapped gas only slightly, and the material therefore never reached a 
temperature much greater than 1,000 kelvins. At that temperature, the gas has 
enough energy to excite molecular hydrogen but not atomic hydrogen. The excited 
molecules cool the gases by converting their heat into radiation, which escapes 
into space. Nevertheless, molecular hydrogen is a much poorer coolant than 
atomic hydrogen.

 The simulations show that the clouds of gas within each of the 
cold-dark-matter halos weigh as much as 1,000 times the sun-an early, 
lightweight version of the giant molecular clouds that would later give birth 
to thousands of stars in the Milky Way and countless other galaxies. At the 
very core of each cloud, a chunk of material about as massive as the sun 
rapidly condensed. But before this small, relatively dense bit of material had 
a chance to turn into a relatively lightweight star, gas as massive as 100 suns 
piled on top of it. It, too, was cooled by molecular hydrogen.

 The entire process, from first halo to first star, happened so rapidly-in no 
more than about 10,000 years-that there was no time for the material to 
fragment. Instead, a single massive star was born. As similar stars flashed 
into existence across the universe a few hundred million years after the Big 
Bang, the cosmic Dark Ages ended.

 These first stars, each weighing 50 to 300 times the mass of the sun, "are 
very rare beasts," notes Bromm. "If we could look at the universe then, it 
would look very, very boring, dark with a very few beacons of light." Bromm, 
along with Paolo S. Coppi and Richard B. Larson of Yale University in New 
Haven, Conn., described their model in several recent articles in the 
Astrophysical Journal.

 But that's just part of the story told by the new models. Although these stars 
illuminated the universe, they didn't last long. Like most massive stars, they 
shined at a furious rate and burned out quickly, after just 3 million years. 
The supernova explosions that ended the brief lives of this first generation of 
extremely massive stars were 100 times more powerful than the famous supernova 
1987A, which astronomers witnessed in a nearby galaxy 15 years ago.

 The early explosions had several consequences for future generations of stars 
and the formation of the first galaxies, notes Abel. These early supernovas 
forged and spewed into space the first elements that astronomers think of as 
metals-any atom heavier than helium. By polluting space with metals at such an 
early time, the first stars altered the composition of the raw material 
available for making new stars. Metals also radiate heat away better than 
hydrogen can, providing a more efficient way for compressed gas to cool and 
form stars.

 The early seeding of space with metals dovetails with observations of the 
spectra of light from distant quasars. Light from these brilliant beacons 
pierces numerous gas clouds and fledgling galaxies as it travels to Earth, and 
the radiation absorbed by these intervening systems indicates their 
composition. So far, no matter how far back in time astronomers have looked 
using the most distant quasars known, they've yet to find a cloud devoid of 
metals.

 Along with the newly forged metals, the first supernovas also blew out 99 
percent of the gas that hadn't yet condensed into stars. The eruptions 
scattered matter across the universe and halted star formation for several 
million years.

 Our very existence may depend on such an interruption, says Martin Rees of the 
University of Cambridge in England. If most gas had condensed quickly into 
stars and stayed there, the universe would have rapidly used up its star-making 
material. Today the cosmos would be full of elderly, red stars in dwarf 
galaxies, which were the first galaxies to form. Large spiral galaxies such as 
our Milky Way, which are rich in gas, would be rarities rather than the rule.

 Super cool

 According to Abel and his colleagues, the cold-dark-matter halos continued to 
grow bigger regardless of the supernova explosions or any other 
nongravitational force. That's because cold dark matter, say theorists, reacts 
only to gravity and is impervious to pressure.

 A few million years after the first stars exploded, each halo weighed as much 
as 100 million suns, roughly the mass of a dwarf galaxy today. Halos this 
massive mark another milestone in star formation, Abel says, because they could 
pull back the gas dispersed by the supernovas and compress it to temperatures 
as high as 10,000 kelvins. Gas that hot can cool much more efficiently because 
it has enough energy to excite atomic hydrogen.

 Because atomic hydrogen is such a good coolant, much more of the gas condenses 
into stars than was possible during the very first episode of star formation. 
This time, a few hundred thousand stars form-the equivalent of a globular 
cluster. It would still take a few billion years for spiral and elliptical 
galaxies, as seen around us today, to assemble. On the other hand, some of 
these early objects would resemble the smallest galaxies that now surround the 
Milky Way. These blobby halos and the stars they contained-some 500 million 
years after the Big Bang-could be considered the first galaxies in the 
universe, Bromm says.

 These objects are the targets of NASA's Next Generation Space Telescope 
(NGST), the proposed successor to the Hubble Space Telescope. When it launches 
about a decade from now, NGST may glimpse clusters of some of the very first 
stars in the universe. Groups of these stars would have emitted copious amounts 
of ultraviolet light, which would have then been absorbed by surrounding 
hydrogen gas and reemitted at longer wavelengths.

 A near-infrared spectrograph on NGST should have the capability to detect this 
radiation, says Nino Panagia of the Space Telescope Science Institute in 
Baltimore and the European Space Agency. The spectrograph should also detect 
the small amounts of carbon and oxygen-one part in a hundred, relative to 
hydrogen-that these first stars would have produced when they exploded.

 But astronomers may not have to wait a decade to find far more dramatic, 
albeit indirect, signposts of the first stars. Their explosive deaths may have 
left behind signals that can be detected with current telescopes. According to 
one popular theory about gamma-ray bursts, these energetic flashes of radiation 
form when an extremely massive star explodes as a supernova. The explosion is 
so powerful that the cinder left behind by the supernova turns into a black 
hole. The explosive deaths of the first generation of stars could therefore be 
detected today as gamma-ray bursts.

 Several researchers agree that some of the bursts now reaching our planet may 
have come from the earliest stars to form in the universe and then traveled for 
nearly 14 billion years. Bromm and Loeb calculate that the first 15 percent of 
stars that formed in the cosmos could be responsible for a significant fraction 
of all gamma-ray bursts that may be observed from Earth.

 Telescopes such as the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which orbited Earth from 
1991 to 2000, have detected thousands of bursts. A few of them might already 
have come from the first stars, says Loeb. Although astronomers can only study 
the bursts briefly, their afterglows-the radiation emitted at X-ray, 
visible-light, infrared, and radio wavelengths-can last for weeks to months.

 Detecting the afterglow of a distant gamma-ray burst isn't as daunting a task 
as it might at first appear. For a steady source of light, such as a quasar, 
the greater the distance and the farther back in time the light was emitted, 
the fainter it appears. But the afterglow isn't steady-it's brightest just 
after the burst ends. That turns out to be a fortunate happenstance.

 Because of the expansion of the universe, an observer on Earth views light 
emitted by a distant, receding object as being stretched, or shifted, to longer 
wavelengths. The more distant the object, the greater the stretch. Likewise, 
the same observer also views the interval of time between distant light signals 
as being longer, as if time had slowed.

 The afterglow from a distant gamma-ray burst therefore takes longer to fade 
than the afterglow of a nearby burst, and astronomers have a better chance of 
catching the remote afterglow when it's at its brightest. For an extremely 
distant gamma-ray burst, this time-stretching effect counteracts the decrease 
in brightness that results from the burst's great distance.

 A property of the early universe may also aid in the detection of gamma-ray 
bursts it generates, Loeb says. If a burst originated so far back in time that 
stars and quasars hadn't yet ionized the vast reserves of atomic hydrogen in 
the universe, then its afterglow would have a large absorption gap, or trough, 
in its spectrum. Bursts that occur later, after hydrogen has ionized, don't 
have such a gap. That phenomenon, known as the Gunn-Peterson effect, indicates 
the absorption of the burst's ultraviolet afterglow by unionized atomic 
hydrogen. The spectra of some extremely distant quasars, in fact, show the 
Gunn-Peterson effect (SN: 8/11/01, p. 84: ).

 Next year, NASA plans to launch a gamma-ray-burst observatory called Swift, 
which will have the capability to record, on average, one burst a day and 
pinpoint its position in the sky. Among the hundreds of bursts that will be 
detected by Swift each year, it's likely some will have come from objects that 
originated deep in space and far back in time, Loeb says.

"It would be a wonderful thing if we were so lucky that the first stars that 
formed in the universe also produced the brightest signposts," says Abel.


