Science Derby: Student research and inventions nab awards: Science News Online, 
May 25, 2002

 Science Derby: Student research and inventions nab awards

 Sid Perkins

 Just a week after Louisville hosted the Kentucky Derby, a different sort of 
horse race came to town. On May 12, more than 1,200 high school students 
entered the home stretch for more than $3 million in scholarships and prizes at 
the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair (ISEF).

 Award ceremonies on May 18 capped a week in which budding young scientists 
from 39 countries rubbed elbows with Nobel prize winners. Students also met 
three of the five surviving Rocket Boys, the West Virginians who dabbled with 
home-built rockets in the 1950s and were memorialized in the 1999 movie October 
Sky.

 In a photo finish, three students each garnered a $50,000 scholarship, a 
high-performance computer, and a trip to the Nobel prize award ceremony in 
Stockholm this December.

"I didn't expect this at all," said 17-year-old Naveen Neil Sinha of Los 
Alamos, N.M. He developed a technique that could measure the temperature, 
density, and viscosity of a liquid by monitoring the effect of ultrasonic waves 
on bubbles in the fluid. For his physics project, Sinha designed and cobbled 
together prototype equipment costing about $100. A version of this sensor could 
be used in chemical, environmental, food-processing, and medical applications, 
he notes.

 Nina Vasan, 18, of Parkersburg, W.Va., earned honors for a behavioral sciences 
research project that compared how quickly and effectively people learn using 
images versus written words.

 Alexander C. Mittal, 17, of Greenwich, Conn., won for research that 
demonstrated a method of using DNA and a related chemical to assemble extremely 
small electronic components. The technique may give scientists an inexpensive 
way to fabricate electronic devices that are much smaller than those made today 
and could therefore operate at higher speeds. Like Sinha and 17 percent of the 
other students at this year's ISEF, Mittal has applied for a patent on his 
research.

"The Intel ISEF students exemplify what our countries and businesses need in 
tomorrow's workforce: students who excel in science and math," said Craig 
Barrett, chief executive officer of the Santa Clara, Calif.-based Intel Corp. 
"These young people will go on to become tomorrow's science and technology 
pioneers, delivering ideas and inventions that will fuel the global economy."

 Two teams of students won trips to present their research in further 
competitions. Laurie-Anne Daniele Haller, 17, and Upton Au, 16, of Manhasset, 
N.Y., investigated ways to increase crop yields. They will compete this 
September in Vienna at a European Union contest for young scientists. Brendan 
Joseph Quinn and Enda Young, 19-year-olds from Maghera, Northern Ireland, 
developed a self-propelled robot that rides high-voltage power lines to scare 
birds away, thereby protecting areas beneath the wires from the birds' 
droppings. In July, the pair will vie for more honors at a science expo in 
Bratislava, Slovakia.

 Top winners in other ISEF categories received $5,000 scholarships and earned 
$1,000 grants for their high schools. Those categories and winners are: 
biochemistry, Debarshi Mustafi, 17, of Chicago; botany, Kevin Kuan Gao, 17, of 
Austin, Texas; computer science, Ezra Jacob Rapaport, 18, of New York; Earth 
and space sciences, Sabrina Curie Snell, 16, of Washington, D.C.; engineering, 
Mordechai Joseph Bronner, 18, of Lawrence, N.Y.; environmental sciences, Vijay 
Yanamadala, 15, of Rolling Hills Estates, Calif.; gerontology, Swalpa Udit, 16, 
of Humboldt, Neb.; mathematics, Jacob Licht, 17, of West Hartford, Conn.; 
medicine and health, Eva Lily Vertes, 17, of Dundas, Ontario; microbiology, 
Maria Elena De Obaldia, 15, of Moorestown, N.J.; zoology, Mingzhi Qu, 16, of 
Shanghai, China.

 Science Service, the publisher of Science News, has administered the ISEF 
competition since its inception in 1950. This year marks Intel's sixth year of 
sponsoring the contest.


