Deep Vision: Science News Online, June 1, 2002

 Deep Vision

 When walls become doors into virtual worlds

 Peter Weiss

 It was when he was being measured for a new suit that Thomas A. DeFanti, a 
computer scientist and photographer at the University of Illinois in Chicago, 
came up with a new angle on virtual reality. DeFanti recalls looking at himself 
in the tailor's three-mirror booth and wondering whether he could combine 
computers and a projection system into a high-tech imaging system that would 
recreate a three-dimensional likeness that would look right from any viewing 
angle.

 Back then in 1991, the only way to create the illusion of being immersed in a 
computer-generated world was to don a helmet outfitted with tiny computer 
monitors that fit directly over your eyes.

 A few months later, DeFanti, Daniel Sandin, also of the University of 
Illinois, and some of their colleagues had turned the concept into something 
they called the CAVE, which stands for Cave Automatic Virtual Environment-a 
cubic room of screens onto which rear-screen projectors throw 
computer-generated views of a virtual scene.

 A visitor to a CAVE sees-and, these days, sometimes hears, feels, and even 
smells-a three-dimensional world that seems to engulf him or her. That virtual 
world can include anything a computer can simulate, from the inside of an atom 
to an ancient Greek temple or the heart of the Milky Way. What's more, the CAVE 
dweller can move around the objects and experience them from all sides, just as 
he or she might in the real world.

 Today, 11 years after DeFanti's tailor-shop revelation, CAVEs and wall- or 
desk-size displays using the same technology are proliferating at universities, 
businesses, and military and government sites (SN: 2/27/99, p. 136: ). 
Scientists use them to analyze data in new ways. Engineers use them to design 
new products with less reliance on physical prototypes. And many others, 
including artists, architects, and game designers, are using the systems to 
devise and display their creations. In short, CAVEs are coming out of the 
closet.

 Most recently, an offshoot of CAVE technology has brought virtual reality to a 
much wider audience. Show goers at major planetariums and science centers have 
begun experiencing the sensations of flying through space or other virtual 
scenes rather than just looking at them. More and more of these entertainment 
productions embody the scientific simulations once confined to laboratories. 
Meanwhile, scientists working at these centers are also using the new 
facilities, after hours, as giant CAVE-like displays for their own research 
projects.

 Room with your view

 With traditional visual media, from paintings to photographs to television 
sets, viewers can't opt for different viewing angles or perspectives. In CAVEs, 
they can.

 To help keep the changing perspectives realistic, a CAVE user wears an 
eyeglass frame fitted with an electromagnetic or ultrasonic tracking device. It 
enables the computer to monitor the orientation of the person's head and eyes 
and redraw images in corresponding perspectives. If several people use a CAVE 
simultaneously, only the one with the tracker gets the full effect.

 In addition to simulating various virtual perspectives, the computers behind 
some CAVEs can create an illusion of stereovision (SN: 11/12/94, p. 319). In 
real life, each eye sees a slightly different view of the world. The 
differences between those views enable our brains to construct 3-D portraits of 
objects.

 To create that 3-D effect in a CAVE, each projector cycles through alternating 
images of right- and left-eye views at, typically, 60 repetitions per second of 
each. The CAVE user's eyeglasses are equipped with shutters or polarizing 
filters that make sure each eye sees only its intended view. The brain then 
melds those images into a single stereoscopic view (SN: 9/18/99, p. 184: ).

 Submerged in data

 In a CAVE at the University of Maryland in College Park, an image of a tube 
with a propeller at one end floats in space. The propeller turns lazily as the 
cylindrical shell expands and contracts in full 3-D, as if it were breathing.

 This particular simulation is designed for probing the vibrations of a 
torpedo's casing as the weapon travels through the water. The goal of this 
Navy-funded work is to find ways to dampen the vibrations and thereby make the 
weapons stealthier, says Amr M. Baz, a mechanical engineering professor and 
leader of the project.

 With a few manipulations of a wand, graduate student Wael Akl zooms in on the 
torpedo until the view shifts from the outside to the inside of the cylinder. 
For Akl and the other two people in the CAVE, the cylinder appears to undulate, 
out then in, all around them. With more wand action, Akl installs different 
sets of virtual reinforcing rings into the shell so the group can observe how 
the rings affect the vibration pattern.

 This CAVE provides more than just visual simulations of the device's behavior. 
Ten speakers broadcast sounds calculated to match what the vibrating torpedo 
casing would transmit into its surroundings. A researcher also can slip on a 
so-called haptic device, in this case a glove with which one person can "touch" 
the casing at different locations and feel its vibrations.

 For these types of engineering studies, CAVE technology can save time and 
money by enabling designers to test their ideas before actually building 
anything. Today, every major car company and some airplane builders do vehicle 
design using CAVEs or less-elaborate systems that run on single walls or even a 
tabletop, says Jeff Brum, a product manager at FakeSpace Systems in Kitchener, 
Ont.

 Many oil and gas companies are using such systems to create images of 
underground formations from existing seismic data. The 3-D projections help 
analysts locate fault lines and other features that provide clues to good 
drilling locations.

 Some investigators are proving that some of the grandest CAVE-like displays 
can include whole audiences sitting in theater chairs. In one, people lean back 
and zoom through a 3-D representation of 100,000 stars derived from actual 
satellite-telescope data or see dramatic, simulated astronomical events.

 After the show, however, the same theater has proven valuable for scientific 
research. Astrophysicist Michael M. Shara of the American Museum of Natural 
History in New York describes the museum's Hayden Planetarium as "the CAVE gone 
wild."

 Some evenings, after the planetarium's virtual-reality shows have ended, he 
and Jarrod R. Hurley, also of the museum, have used the dome to project their 
computer simulations of dense clouds of stars known as globular clusters. The 
dome's enormity enables the astrophysicists to simultaneously view stars that 
are nearby one another yet quite distant from others, all the while maintaining 
proper scale, Shara explains.

 With this unique tool of scientific visualization, Hurley and Shara have found 
evidence that stars in globular clusters come together and then break apart 
again into small groups far more frequently than previously thought.

 Most theories of stellar evolution portray stars as lone entities or perhaps 
in a pair with one other star. The newly recognized "promiscuous" behavior, as 
Hurley and Shara have described it, allows for all kinds of unexpected swapping 
of stellar gases and other interactions that may dramatically change the life 
histories of as many as 70 percent of the stars in a cluster. "Things not 
explainable by conventional stellar evolution became crystal clear," Shara 
says. He and Hurley describe their ideas about stellar promiscuity in the May 1 
Astrophysical Journal.

 Before exploiting the planetarium as a CAVE-like display for research, the 
scientists had been running their simulations on ordinary computer monitors 
without fully realizing what they were seeing. In the dome, however, "there was 
a set of these 'eureka' moments when you look up on the dome and you say, 'Oh, 
geez. That's what's happening!'" Shara recalls.

 Never static

 Three years after inventing the CAVE, DeFanti, Sandin, and their colleagues 
had also developed a compact version dubbed the Immersadesk. The device is a 
table-like workstation that a user, wearing stereo glasses, stands in front of. 
By 1995, FakeSpace had begun manufacturing CAVEs and related products for the 
commercial market. Today, several other manufacturers are also building 
CAVE-style displays. The family of devices has grown to include large, 
single-panel walls and modular CAVEs that can be readily broken down and 
reassembled for trade shows and other traveling exhibits. And CAVE technology 
continues to evolve.

 Last year, manufacturers introduced digital projectors based on microchips 
covered with millions of tiny, moving mirrors. DeFanti says the new projectors 
deliver images in CAVES seven times as bright as their predecessors, which are 
like ones in projection televisions. "Finally, the CAVE does not feel like it's 
in moonlight," he declares.

 DeFanti and other virtual-reality researchers are also developing CAVE-like 
systems that use computer monitors rather than projectors. By eliminating 
distances between projectors and screens, monitors might make CAVE-like 
displays possible in a fraction of the space of current systems. Theoretically, 
each cubicle in an office could have its own CAVE, DeFanti speculates.

 Researchers are also trying to make CAVE-like displays better for group 
experiences. To foster collaborative use for such applications as virtual 
travel, architectural tours, and training sessions, researchers at the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Media Communication in Sankt Augustin, Germany, 
unveiled in March a new booth called i-CONE. With its curved, high-resolution 
projection screen, i-CONE allows up to a dozen people to simultaneously view 
undistorted scenes, claims Martin Gobel of the institute.

 Some attempts to push the technology further have failed. For example, Gobel 
recalls that 3 years ago, the Fraunhofer Institute outfitted a display with 
odors, but no one noticed them unless they were danger signals, such as the 
smell of smoke. "It was disappointing that people couldn't smell what we were 
injecting," he says.

 In a new and growing trend, the users of CAVEs and CAVE-like systems are 
networking them together. For instance, to create the visual sequences used in 
the current Hayden Planetarium show-"The Search for Life: Are We Alone?" which 
opened March 2-producers were able to connect the dome via the new high-speed 
academic network, Internet 2, to a CAVE at the National Center for 
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) in Urbana-Champaign, Ill. NCSA's greater 
computing power and specialized software enabled the producers to run elaborate 
astrophysical simulations and to transfer excerpts from those simulations to 
New York for the show.

 Despite their different equipment, in one after-hours work session, the two 
far-flung teams simultaneously inhabited the same scene and consulted about how 
to manipulate it.

"We both got into the same space, although we were 1,000 miles apart," says 
Carter Emmart, visualization director at the Hayden Planetarium.

 Other networked users are sharing data, touring each other's virtual 
environments, or staging cyber-art exhibits. Whether stand-alone or networked, 
room-shaped or domed, CAVE-like displays are becoming portals to anywhere you 
can imagine.


