Transplant Triumph: Cloned cow kidneys thrive for months: Science News Online, 
June 8, 2002

 Transplant Triumph: Cloned cow kidneys thrive for months

 John Travis

 On the eve of a U.S. Senate vote that could ban similar experiments in people, 
scientists have successfully transplanted into cows miniature kidneys and other 
tissues generated through cloning. The experiments offer the most convincing 
indication yet that the controversial transplant strategy called therapeutic 
cloning can produce genetically matched cells that a person's immune system 
won't reject as foreign.

"This shows that [therapeutic cloning] really does work. That could help shape 
the debate in Congress," says Robert Lanza of Advanced Cell Technology in 
Worcester, Mass. He and his colleagues describe their new results in the July 
Nature Biotechnology.

 As envisioned for people, therapeutic cloning would take the DNA of a person 
needing a transplant and insert it into a woman's egg that had been stripped of 
its own chromosomes. Scientists would then trigger the egg to start dividing, 
and they would harvest so-called embryonic stem cells. These immature cells 
could be transformed, in theory, into any kind of tissue and would almost 
perfectly match the genetic profile of the intended recipient.

"The ability to generate immunologically compatible tissue using cloning would 
overcome one of the major scientific challenges in transplantation 
medicine-namely, the problem of organ and tissue rejection," says Lanza.

 Yet there has been a theoretical roadblock to therapeutic cloning. Egg cells 
have organelles called mitochondria that possess their own snippets of DNA. 
This mitochondrial DNA, totaling 13 genes in people, remains in the egg when 
its other DNA is removed. Researchers wondered if proteins produced by the 13 
genes could make a person's immune system reject cloned tissue.

"It was a legitimate concern," says study coauthor Anthony Atala of Children's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston.

 Earlier this year, another research group used therapeutic cloning to repair 
the immune system of mice (SN: 3/16/02, p. 163: ). At the time, however, Lanza 
argued that this wasn't a stringent test of the strategy because the animals 
were inbred and mice don't have as strong an immune system as people do.

 Seeking a more formidable challenge, Advanced Cell Technology turned to cows, 
which have a sophisticated immune system resembling people's. The company's 
scientists took the DNA from the skin of a Holstein cow and inserted it into 
egg cells of another Holstein, chosen at random.

 Because researchers can't yet derive embryonic stem cells directly from cow 
eggs growing in a lab dish, as they can from human eggs, they implanted the cow 
eggs into a surrogate mother and let them develop into fetuses. The team then 
harvested various kinds of cow fetal tissue, including heart, muscle, and 
kidney cells. The investigators transplanted this cloned tissue into the cow 
that had provided the original DNA and saw no sign of immune rejection after 3 
months.

 The findings "show that even though mitochondrial DNA could potentially make a 
problem, it doesn't invariably do so," says Kirsten Fischer-Lindhal of the 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, who studies immune 
reactions to mitochondrial proteins.

 Atala notes that the experiments represent more than a success of therapeutic 
cloning. This is first time, he says, that an artificial kidney fashioned from 
cells and biocompatible materials has produced what seems to be urine.

 Next week, the Senate is expected to debate a bill that could ban both 
therapeutic cloning and efforts to clone a person.


