Snooze Power: Midday nap may awaken learning potential: Science News Online, 
June 1, 2002

 Snooze Power: Midday nap may awaken learning potential

 Bruce Bower

 Naps aren't just for the very young, old, and slothful. Daytime dozing may 
enhance a person's capacity to learn certain tasks.

 That, at least, is the eye-opening implication of a new study in which college 
students were challenged to detect subtle changes in an image during four 
different test sessions on the same day.

 Participants improved on the task throughout the first session, says 
psychologist Sara C. Mednick of Harvard University and her colleagues. The 
students' speed and accuracy then leveled off during the second session.

 The scores of the participants who didn't nap declined throughout the final 
two sessions. In contrast, volunteers who took a 30-minute nap after completing 
the second practice session showed no ensuing performance dips. What's more, 
1-hour nappers responded progressively faster and more accurately in the third 
and fourth sessions.

"Napping may protect brain circuits from overuse until those neurons can 
consolidate what's been learned about a procedure," says neuroscientist Robert 
Stickgold of Harvard Medical School, a coauthor of the new study.

 A version of this phenomenon occurs among musicians, according to Stickgold. A 
nap or a night's sleep often leads to a breakthrough in learning a complex 
musical piece.

 Slumber's alleged assist to learning (SN: 7/22/00, p. 55) has usually been 
attributed to brain activity during rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep. In the new 
study, slated to appear in Nature Neuroscience, the performance-enhancing naps 
consisted mainly of a non-REM sleep stage known as slow-wave sleep.

 In this work, Mednick's group trained 30 volunteers on a task requiring them 
to identify the vertical or horizontal orientation of three diagonal bars 
flashed in the lower left quarter of a computer screen against a background of 
horizontal bars. Hour-long sessions occurred at 9 a.m., noon, 4 p.m., and 7 p.m.

 Ten participants didn't nap. Beginning at 2 p.m., the others took either a 
30-minute or a 1-hour nap. Brain-wave measurements established that the nappers 
slept throughout most of their allotted times.

 Additional trials indicated that naps refresh specific neural circuits 
involved in the perceptual task, Mednick and her colleagues say. Another 12 
volunteers completed four sessions without napping but viewed the diagonal bars 
on the right side-instead of the left side-of the screen during the final 
session. Their performance improved substantially after this switch, a sign 
that a different, now fresher, neural circuit mediated the learning in the 
right portion of the visual field.

 Fatigue or boredom can't explain performance declines among non-nappers, 
Mednick says. These individuals reported no surges of sleepiness on 
questionnaires administered after each training session. Moreover, even after 
they were offered $25 at the start of the third session if they could stay at 
their previous performance levels, 10 additional non-nappers still suffered 
declines. Finally, 10 volunteers who rested quietly for an hour without napping 
after the second session also did more poorly thereafter.

"This new linkage of naps to learning a repetitive task is exciting, but it's 
too soon to say that naps work like this for everybody," remarks psychologist 
Rosalind Cartwright of Rush-Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.

 Still, comments psychologist Mark Blagrove of the University of Wales, 
Mednick's group has raised the profile of slow-wave sleep as a possible means 
by which naps might foster learning.


