Plight of the Iguanas: Hidden die-off followed Galápagos spill: Science News 
Online, June 8, 2002

 Plight of the Iguanas: Hidden die-off followed Galapagos spill

 Susan Milius

 The 3-million-liter oil spill in the Galapagos Islands last year may not have 
been as mild as touted at the time. A research team now blames the spill for a 
62 percent loss in one island's famed marine iguanas.

 The iguanas on Santa Fe Island didn't keel over in huge numbers immediately 
after the spill, says Martin Wikelski of Princeton University. However, when 
his research team returned about a year later, the iguana population had shrunk 
dramatically and skeletons littered the shores.

 The researchers have been tracking this colony for 20 years, and they say 
they've never recorded such a die-off in a year with otherwise favorable 
climatic conditions. In the June 6 Nature, they attribute the carnage on Santa 
Fe to "a small amount of residual oil contamination in the sea."

 Biological consultant Robert Spies of Applied Marine Sciences in Livermore, 
Calif., has studied the aftermath of the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska. He 
laments that scientists know much less about the dangers of lingering traces of 
oil than about the immediate effects of spills (see "Most oil enters sea from 
nonaccidents," in this week's issue: Available to subscribers at ). He 
acknowledges the difficulties of tracing effects of dilute pollutants, and he 
calls the new report a "very strong case for low-level effects of marine 
pollution in this setting."

 The big, surf-diving iguanas of the Galapagos, Amblyrhynchus cristatus, were 
just one of the species that the world's nature lovers feared for during the 
tense days after a tanker struck San Cristobal Island on Jan. 17, 2001. Some 
individual animals perished, but the oil largely dispersed out to sea without 
doing as much immediate damage as biologists had dreaded. Wikelski's assistants 
on the island found that the iguanas had unusually high concentrations of the 
stress hormone corticosterone in their blood but otherwise seemed to be feeding 
and behaving as usual.

 When the researchers returned the following winter, however, they found that 
many of the iguanas they'd known from hatchlings had disappeared. The study 
colony's previous population of some 4,000 iguanas had plunged to about 1,500.

 Unlike Santa Fe, the small island of Genovesa to the north wasn't in the path 
of the drifting oil. Its iguana population last winter hadn't declined from the 
previous year, the researchers found.

 They had seen four earlier major declines on Santa Fe-all after El Ninos 
caused food shortages. This time, climate didn't explain the drop, says 
Wikelski. He suggests that when iguanas ate oil-tainted food, their gut 
bacteria failed, and they could no longer digest algae.

 Spies says that Santa Fe offered an unusual opportunity to look for the 
biological effects of oil residues. For example, researchers didn't have to 
worry about confounding effects of predators or many other pollutants there.

 Judith E. McDowell of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts 
advises caution, though. In the Galapagos, "the circumstantial evidence would 
certainly suggest that oil exposure was a critical factor in controlling 
survival of the iguanas," she notes. However, there's no data on actual oil 
concentrations in water, food, or animal tissue, so "it would be difficult to 
say more," she adds.


