Pharm Pollution: Science News Online, June 29, 2002

 Pharm Pollution

 Excreted antibiotics can poison plants

 Janet Raloff

 Patrick K. Jjemba was curious about the interplay of protozoa and the bacteria 
they eat in soil. As part of his research, he began altering the organisms' 
environment. When he applied large amounts of protozoan-killing antibiotics to 
dirt around the roots of soybeans, Jjemba was amazed at what happened. The 
drugs-widely used in human and veterinary medicine-did far more than subtly 
alter the balance of microbial predators and prey. One drug stunted soybeans, 
and another killed the plants.

 The University of Cincinnati microbiologist realized he was sailing into 
largely uncharted waters. Though a growing body of research has documented the 
presence of antibiotics in the environment, most concerns have focused on what 
harm these antimicrobials might pose to people, fish, or aquatic birds (SN: 
3/23/02, p. 182: Available to subscribers at ). These drugs, excreted by people 
and livestock treated with them, enter open waters primarily from sewage 
effluent and farm runoff.

 The widespread environmental presence of such antibiotics raises the prospect 
that an increasing share of microbes will become resistant to them (SN: 6/5/99, 
p. 356: ). However, there's been little discussion of whether these drugs could 
harm plants.

 Farmers apply large quantities of sewage sludge and manure to their fields, 
yet only a few studies have probed possible crop impacts of the accompanying 
antibiotics. Preliminary findings from those investigations, most conducted in 
Europe, paint a disquieting picture: A wide range of plants-from weeds to field 
crops-are susceptible to antibiotic poisoning.

 Furthermore, plants that aren't severely injured by the drugs might convey 
antibiotics from the soil into the food supply.

 Pooped out

 People and livestock collectively shed torrents of urine and mountains of 
feces into the environment daily. Sewage from some 1 million U.S. households 
enters the environment essentially untreated (SN: 4/1/00, p. 212: ). Animal 
wastes-sometimes with little processing-are applied to farm fields as 
fertilizer.

 Manure and human waste products both can contain residues of drugs. Because 
the engineers of North America's sewage-treatment plants never designed these 
facilities to remove excreted drugs, the effluent from such facilities-and even 
some drinking water-bears traces of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals (SN: 
11/3/01, p. 285: Available to subscribers at ). Like manure, leftover solids 
from sewage treatment plants can carry drug residues, scientists reported in 
April at an American Water Works Association meeting in Cincinnati.

 According to a 1999 report by the Environmental Protection Agency, farmers 
spread some 7 million tons of sewage sludge-known in the trade as 
biosolids-onto fields each year. A recent National Academy of Sciences report 
indicates that U.S. growers also annually recycle an estimated 3 million tons 
of manure this way. Not only are biosolids and manure low-cost soil amendments, 
but their use provides important means of recycling wastes.

 The surface water used for irrigation can also host a dozen or more drugs. So, 
there are plenty of routes by which pharmaceuticals can reach crops. Nobody has 
yet quantified this contamination.

 A quarter-century ago, soil microbiologist Arthur R. Batchelder was disturbed 
at the thought that people were unwittingly seeding crop soils with 
antibiotics. Then working for the Agricultural Research Service at Colorado 
State University in Fort Collins, he focused on farmers who were fertilizing 
their crops with manure from cattle feedlots. Then, as today, U.S. feedlot 
operators fed animals antibiotics to promote their growth. Most European 
countries have banned drug use that's strictly for promoting growth in 
livestock.

 In the early 1980s, Batchelder laced the soil of young greenhouse plants with 
up to 180 parts per million (ppm) of chlortetracycline or oxytetracycline, 
which are common livestock-growth promoters. Though radishes, wheat, and corn 
were unaffected by these antibiotics, pinto bean plants showed ill effects.

 Compared with bean plants grown drugfree, those planted in sandy loam soil 
containing an antibiotic were shorter, weighed less, produced smaller yields of 
beans, fixed less soil nitrogen, and picked up fewer nutrients from their 
environment. However, when grown in clay soil, the beans exhibited no effects 
from the antibiotics. Batchelder speculates that the drugs bound to the clay 
and remained unavailable to the roots.

 In a published report, he concluded that "manure that contains either 
[antibiotic] should not be applied to sandy loam soil just before pinto beans, 
and possibly other seed legumes, are planted."

 Batchelder had hoped to follow up with analyses of the drugs' uptake by 
plants. "I worried that you might be feeding antibiotics to people," the 
retired scientist recalls, "but I was pulled off the work."

 If Jjemba had been aware of Batchelder's findings, he might have been less 
startled by the outcome of his studies with soy, another legume. Using 
chloroquine, quinacrine, or metronidazole, he heavily polluted soil in his lab 
with drug concentrations between 0.5 and 16 parts per thousand. In the February 
Chemosphere, he reported that each drug killed the plants, though at different 
doses.

 Working with another antibiotic, sulphadimethoxine, Luciana Migliore of 
Universita degli Studi "Tor Vergata" in Rome and her colleagues uncovered a 
similar toxicity in plants other than legumes. In four papers published over 
the past 6 years, her team showed that the drug can severely stunt the growth 
of barley, corn, the water fern Azolla filiculoides, and the three common 
garden weeds redroot pigweed, broad-leafed plantain, and sheep sorrel.

 Her group used parts-per-thousand soil concentrations of the drug, which are 
comparable to those in the manure of swine treated therapeutically, Migliore 
says.

 Root of the problem

 Jjemba's studies couldn't establish whether the antibiotics he tested were 
poisoning plants directly or indirectly by wiping out soil microbes. To resolve 
that issue, Migliore conducted some of her studies in a sterile, synthetic 
growth medium. Here, too, antibiotics stunted plant growth.

 Overall, Migliore reports that plant development was affected by the type of 
soil and the concentrations of the drug in the plant. As Batchelder had 
discovered, the Italian team found that clay tended to bind and disarm the 
drug. However, Migliore reports that she was surprised to find that all of the 
plants she assayed took in and stored significant amounts of the drug. Those 
that took in the most showed the greatest stunting.

 Among animals on land, pollutants that accumulate in the body tend to be oily 
compounds preferentially stored in fat. So, many chemists have downplayed the 
potential for antibiotics, most of which are water-soluble, to accumulate in 
plants. Migliore now suspects that a plant's reliance on water to deliver its 
nutrients permits waterborne antibiotics to enter readily. Once inside, the 
drug can remain in water-rich tissues.

 In general, the ecotoxicologist finds that roots accumulate the highest 
concentrations of drugs. In a 1997 month-long study of barley, she recorded 50 
and 80 ppm of an antibiotic in roots, roughly four times the concentration in 
foliage. Her earlier studies had shown similar patterns in millet, garden peas, 
and corn.

 In an upcoming issue of Water Research, Migliore's team reports that water 
ferns sop up even more of the drug-up to 1,000 ppm in their tissues. Other 
plants grown in water had lower tissue concentrations but higher values than 
plants grown in dirt did.

 If these antibiotic-storage patterns prove common, crops-especially root 
vegetables and hydroponic crops-might carry traces of antibiotics to the dinner 
table. It's a concern that Migliore plans to address in future experiments.

 Stinky science

 The researchers' concern would prove moot if antibiotics survived only a few 
hours in manure or sludge. Recent data, however, suggest that the drugs persist.

 For instance, Michael Kuhne of the Hannover School of Veterinary Medicine in 
Germany and his colleagues have studied the longevity of tetracyclines in 
liquid manure, a slurry of urine and feces. In the United States, feedlot 
managers frequently administer low doses of tetracyclines to promote the growth 
of pigs and cattle and higher doses to treat disease. The animals excrete up to 
95 percent of a tetracycline administered, Kuhne says.

 In the July 2000 Journal of Veterinary Medicine A, his group reported that 
when the liquid manure was kept under conditions resembling those of a typical 
farm holding tank, concentrations of the antibiotic declined by 50 percent over 
8 days. Antibiotic concentrations declined by 70 percent during that period if 
the sample was ventilated with forced air.

 Even this drug-reduction rate "is not really good," Kuhne says. "And I would 
not expect a continuing reduction to zero during storage." What's more, he 
notes, some of the apparent reduction stems from conversion of the drug to one 
of its metabolites, which, under certain conditions, can convert back into the 
parent drug.

 Chemist Diana Aga of the State University of New York at Buffalo has made 
similar observations with liquid manure from swine feedlots in Nebraska. At 
some stages of the animals' growth, their wastes appear antibiotic-free. Other 
times, concentrations can run to nearly 1 ppm.

 While Aga's preliminary data indicate that the drugs begin breaking down under 
exposure to sunlight-with reductions of perhaps 50 percent in a week-she notes 
that at least in Nebraska, livestock producers typically truck their manure 
offsite quickly. In some cases, she says, "it could be on fields within several 
days."

 Large, fuzzy estimates

 With large parcels of cropland relying on such natural fertilizers, wouldn't 
crop losses already have been reported if antibiotics injure plants? They might 
be difficult to detect. Soil scientist Chi Chang of Agriculture and Agri-Food 
Canada's research center in Lethbridge, Alberta, notes that the chemical makeup 
of manure can vary even between batches, depending on what the animals have 
been fed, their health, and how wastes have been handled. Moreover, a drug's 
role in the health and yields of crops might be camouflaged by effects of 
weather, rainfall, and pests.

 In fact, Migliore doubts that antibiotic tainting of manure and sludge is high 
enough today to cause anything beyond subtle crop-yield declines that could 
easily be attributed to something else.

 But that could change, she and others worry. If some antibiotics prove 
persistent in the environment, they could gradually accumulate in soils. 
Moreover, if drug-use or fertilization rates increase on farms, crop effects 
might also.

 Right now, projecting antibiotic trends is hampered because "in North America, 
there's no systematic collection of antibiotics-use data, either in human or 
veterinary medicine," notes veterinary epidemiologist Scott McEwan of the 
University of Guelph in Ontario. The estimates, he notes, are "all over the 
map."

 In a May report by the Boston-based Alliance for the Prudent Use of 
Antibiotics, McEwan and Paula J. Fedorka-Cray of the U.S. Agricultural Research 
Service in Athens, Ga., highlight those inconsistencies. Two-year-old figures 
from the pharmaceutical industry estimate that 14.7 million pounds of 
veterinary antibiotics go to treat disease annually and another 3.1 million 
pounds are used as growth-promoting feed additives. Last year, the Boston-based 
Union of Concerned Scientists offered numbers that contradict the alliance's: 
just 2 million pounds for veterinary therapy and an estimated 27.5 million 
pounds for growth promotion. The group noted that people consume only 4.5 
million pounds of antibiotics annually.

 Whatever the number for total antibiotic usage, it's huge.

 That's why Aga's team has begun investigating factors such as sunlight, 
composting, and ventilation that farmers might employ to help break down the 
antibiotics in fertilizers made from wastes. After all, she says, "we recognize 
the importance of fertilizing fields with manure and sludge."


