Numbers in Mind: Science News Online, June 22, 2002

 Numbers in Mind

 Babies' ballyhooed counting skills add up to controversy

 Bruce Bower

 In 1992, Karen Wynn's numbers came in big. The numbers in question were tiny 
in an absolute sense, but they counted for a lot among investigators of child 
development. The reason: Wynn claimed to have exposed intuitive arithmetic 
skills of 5-month-old babies. The young psychologist, having received her 
doctorate in psychology just 2 years earlier, reported that infants show a 
facility for adding and subtracting small numbers of items, on the order of 1 + 
1 = 2 and 2 ^- 1 = 1. Her results appeared in a major scientific journal, 
attracted worldwide media coverage (SN: 8/29/92, p. 132), and inspired a wave 
of research into what she regards as infants' seemingly innate "number sense."

 Now at Yale University, Wynn is more convinced than ever that babies, along 
with many nonhuman animals, carry an evolutionary legacy of basic number 
skills. She's also aware, however, that a spirited debate has emerged about 
whether the line of research that she's championed really taps into an inborn 
counting mechanism in the human brain.

 Some scientists argue that babies use non-numerical visual cues, such as the 
area and length of the border around visible items, to make quantitative 
judgments. These handy perceptual features, which vary along with changes in 
item number, may eventually serve as building blocks when youngsters really 
learn to count, between ages 2 and 4, in these researchers' view.

 Or perhaps babies rely on an innate facility for making automatic distinctions 
of up to three or four items without counting them out, as some other 
scientists theorize. Calculation-free perception of small quantities could 
jump-start mathematical thinking in the preschool years.

 These divergent explanations reflect a broad philosophical split among 
explorers of mental development. Researchers on one side hold that babies are 
born with the neural keys to unlock specific types of knowledge, including 
language use (SN: 5/3/97, p. 276: ) and face recognition (SN: 5/18/02, p. 307: 
). Across the gap stand scientists who regard learning as akin to a series of 
chemical reactions, in which a baby's inborn motor and perceptual inclinations 
and natural desire for stimulation and contact mix together and precipitate new 
types of knowledge (SN: 3/20/99, p. 184).

 These positions leave little room for compromise. Nonetheless, scientists who 
study infants' number capabilities see themselves as engaged in a constructive 
dispute. "The debate about the foundations of numerical thinking has been 
incredibly productive over the past decade," Wynn says. "Our science has become 
better as a result of it."

 Tots who total

 If you want a baby to count, get a screen and two or three rubber Mickey Mouse 
dolls and then toy with the child's curiosity. That's the tactic Wynn took in 
her 1992 study.

 In a "1 + 1" task, for example, 5-month-olds watched an experimenter place a 
doll on a table and then put a screen in front of it. The babies then observed 
the experimenter hide a second Mickey behind the screen. In a "2 ^- 1" task, 
infants saw the experimenter place two dolls on a table and then hide them with 
a screen, followed by the experimenter reaching behind the barrier and removing 
one doll in full view of the baby. Behind the screen, a second experimenter 
could remove or add dolls without the baby's knowledge.

 At that point in each task, the screen was removed. In three out of six 
repetitions of a task, an incorrect number of dolls appeared when the screen 
was removed, corresponding to "1 + 1 = 1" or perhaps "2 ^- 1 = 2." The other 
trials concluded with a correct number of dolls.

 Infants looked considerably longer at incorrect numbers of dolls. Since babies 
typically spend more time looking at new or surprising items than at familiar 
ones, Wynn concluded that her pint-size participants counted up how many toys 
were behind the screen and were intrigued by errant results.

 This finding built on earlier evidence that, at about the same age, babies 
know that an object exists when it moves behind a barrier. Moreover, a 1980 
study had indicated that 6-month-olds can discern when a small number of 
drumbeats matches the number of items shown in a picture.

 Some researchers, however, doubt that babies actually manipulate numbers when 
confronted with small quantities such as those in Wynn's addition and 
subtraction tasks. The infants' impressive feats may rest on estimates of the 
total surface area of objects, not their number, report Harvard University 
psychologist Elizabeth S. Spelke and her colleagues Lisa Feigenson and Susan 
Carey in the Feb. 1 Cognitive Psychology.

 In a variation of Wynn's original study, 6-month-olds first looked at a small, 
irregularly shaped toy made of Lego pieces. A researcher then lowered a screen 
in front of the toy and openly placed a second, same-size Lego toy behind the 
screen.

 When the screen was removed, infants showed little interest if they saw one 
large Lego toy that equaled the total area of the previous two small toys. If 
babies understand numbers, this incorrect result should have attracted their 
attention. However, the same babies looked longer if the raised screen revealed 
two large Lego toys-the correct number result that should have left them 
nonplussed-that covered twice the total area of the initial two toys.

 Spelke says that in Wynn's addition-and-subtraction study, infants looked 
longer at incorrect numbers of Mickey Mouse dolls because those displays also 
deviated from the dolls' expected total surface area.

 Since Wynn's original experiments, she has devised other means of testing 
infants for number knowledge. A recent study directed by the Yale psychologist, 
slated to appear in Cognition, finds that 5-month-olds identify and count 
groups of dots that move in cohesive bunches across a computer screen. Half of 
24 infants sat and watched a computer display in which each of two groups of 
three dime-size, red dots traveled a straight path from the bottom of the 
screen to the top. The rest viewed a display of four ascending groups of three 
dots each.

 After tiring of these presentations, the infants saw alternating displays of 
two groups of four dots each and four groups of two dots each. Babies looked 
much longer at the display with the number of moving groups that they hadn't 
seen before. The altered number of dots in each group didn't seem to matter.

 To make the task more difficult, each of the alternating groups contained 
eight dots. As a result, infants couldn't distinguish on the basis of cues 
other than the number of groups, Wynn says. For instance, the total area of 
dots in each group and the total length of the borders around each group's dots 
was the same in the two-group and four-group conditions.

 Human infants share a numerical penchant with much of the animal kingdom, 
according to Wynn. Over the past 60 years, researchers have reported that 
creatures such as rats, birds, and monkeys (SN: 11/7/98, p. 296) display basic 
counting skills after training. "Given that numerical abilities are present in 
so many animal species, it would be surprising if humans didn't have a similar 
inborn capacity," Wynn says.

 Count us in

 Babies show signs of being versatile counters. They can tally not just items 
and groups but also small numbers of actions and sounds, Wynn finds. In one 
experiment, half of a group of 6-month-olds watched a puppet jump up and down 
twice, then pause briefly before executing additional pairs of hops. The rest 
saw the same puppet perform three-jump sequences. Babies gradually lost 
interest in each routine and spent less time looking at the puppet's capers.

 In an ensuing session, the same infants saw the puppet switch between short 
sets of two jumps and three jumps. Novel numbers of jumps attracted much longer 
gazes from the babies, indicating to Wynn and her coworkers that the babies had 
monitored how many jumps occurred in each sequence.

 Puppets also play a role in Wynn's tests of sounds. After hearing sequences of 
either two or four sounds coming out of a speaker hidden in a puppet's belly, 
7-month-olds looked markedly longer at the puppet when it then emitted the 
sequence that they hadn't previously heard. These data were presented by Wynn 
in April at the International Conference on Infant Studies in Toronto.

 Big numbers don't necessarily baffle babies, Spelke reports. In fact, infants' 
numerical skills shine when they compare relatively large sets of items. Babies 
show particular skill at discerning one cluster of items from another if the 
number of items in each group differs by a 2:1 ratio, according to Spelke. In a 
study she conducted with psychologist Fei Xu of Northeastern University in 
Boston, 6-month-olds saw a succession of arrays of either 8 or 16 dots. From 
trial to trial, the positions and sizes of the dots changed. As a further 
perceptual precaution, arrays of 8 and 16 dots were equated for surface area 
and overall brightness.

 Infants eventually lost interest in checking out dot clusters. In a subsequent 
session, though, they looked longer at novel-number displays when shown 
alternating arrays of 8 and 16 dots. In contrast, the same babies failed to 
discriminate 8 from 12-or 16 from 24-dots when tested in the same way.

 Infants understand more than basic ratios, contends psychologist Elizabeth M. 
Brannon of Duke University in Durham, N.C. She finds that 11-month-olds 
distinguish between increasing and decreasing numbers of items in visual 
displays. In her experiment, babies first saw sequences of three displays 
portraying an ascending or descending number of blocks, such as 4 then 8 then 
16 or 16 then 8 then 4. In subsequent tests, they saw alternating presentations 
of the previous block sequence and a sequence going in the opposite direction.

 Novel sequences elicited longer looks from 11-month-olds but not from 
9-month-olds, Brannon reports in the April Cognition. "Infants appreciate 
greater-than and less-than relations between numerical values before they've 
learned to speak," she asserts.

 Quantify this 

 Youngsters simply don't have number knowledge until they're preschoolers, 
argues Harvard's Jerome Kagan. Babies operate in a perceptual world devoid of 
linguistic concepts such as number, in his opinion. Kagan argues that infants 
distinguish between a cup that's three-quarters full and one that's one-quarter 
full without possessing a concept of fractions, so they may show interest in 
unexpected clusters without counting up the items.

 Real-life situations contain a range of perceptual cues to the quantity of 
visible items that are far simpler for infants and toddlers to use than a 
counting system, says psychologist Kelly S. Mix of Indiana University in 
Bloomington.

 Consider a baby trying to choose between one plate of food or another. He or 
she may be swayed by the food's total area, its edge length, its volume, the 
number of pieces, the ratio of food size to plate size, the time it took to 
dish the food up, or the rate at which food was dished.

"I think children build a concept of number out of basic perceptual abilities," 
Mix says. "If babies really do use purely numerical knowledge in some 
situations, I'd want to know why they're ignoring the many perceptual cues to 
quantity that are available."

 Infant quantification studies typically leave one or more crucial perceptual 
cues unaccounted for, contend Mix and her University of Chicago colleagues 
Janellen Huttenlocher and Susan C. Levine in the March Psychological Bulletin. 
Spelke's finding that total surface area trumps counting for infants confirmed 
results reported by Mix and a colleague in 1999.

 Aside from surface area, researchers have found that infants are sensitive to 
the rate, duration, and rhythm of sounds and visual events. These time-related 
cues could easily have influenced babies' performance on Wynn's jumping-puppet 
exercise, Mix says.

 Infants use various perceptual cues to estimate the overall amount of 
something that appears to them as a solid mass, whether it's a blob of whipped 
cream or a row of boxes, she theorizes. For sets of items-such as Wynn's 
moving-dot entities-estimates of amount achieve rough accuracy from several 
characteristics, including contour length, area, and volume of items in each 
group.

 A related theory posits that infants apply basic visual and spatial skills to 
numerical tasks. For instance, infants as well as many nonhuman animals may 
automatically distinguish among small numbers of items without having to count 
them, a process known as subitizing, says neuroscientist Tony J. Simon of 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. When shown large sets of items, infants 
may notice quantitative differences only if the discrepancies are large enough, 
Simon proposes.

"Using current experimental methods, we can't be sure we really know what 
infants know," remarks psychologist Robert S. Siegler of Carnegie Mellon 
University in Pittsburgh, who studies how children learn math. For now, he 
favors Mix's emphasis on the importance of perceptual cues to quantity during 
infancy.

 Wynn differs but looks forward to the continuing debate. "Agreement in science 
is highly overrated," she says.


