Cell-Phone Buzz: Contradictory studies heat up radiation question: Science News 
Online, June 29, 2002

 Cell-Phone Buzz: Contradictory studies heat up radiation question

 John Pickrell

 A new long-term animal study of cell-phone radiation suggests that emissions 
don't cause cancer. However, studies by a second team hint that cell phones may 
damage people in other ways.

 As cellular phones' popularity has soared, so have concerns about health 
effects from an electromagnetic-radiation source held so near the brain. 
Although the small amount of energy from a cell phone has been reported to 
generate stress responses in animals' cells and affect people's reflexes, 
scientists are still at a loss to say whether such radiation poses significant 
health risks (SN: 2/12/00, p. 100: ; 5/20/00, p. 326).

 To collect more information, researchers at Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis exposed rats to the two frequencies of radiation emitted 
most commonly by cellular phones, says study leader Joseph L. Roti Roti. For 2 
years, the scientists placed 480 rats in chambers adjacent to radio antennas. 
For 5 hours each day, a third of the animals was exposed to the frequency 
produced by a digital cell phone and another third, to the frequency of an 
analogue cell phone. The remaining rats received no radiation.

 At the end of the experiment, the team examined the animals for tumors in the 
brain and 30 other tissues. The researchers found no significant difference in 
tumor incidence among the groups. The team presented the findings this week in 
Quebec City at a meeting of the Bioelectromagnetics Society.

"As far as I can tell . . . the greatest hazard with cell phones is driving a 
car while talking on one," says Roti Roti, whose study was partially funded by 
telecommunications-industry giant Motorola.

 Other scientists aren't as convinced. The type of emissions the team tested 
isn't the most common or the most penetrating, comments W. Ross Adey of Loma 
Linda University in California. Though Roti Roti tested the variety of signal 
that is used in the United States, says Adey, most of the world uses another 
signal type, which can travel further into tissue.

 Adey also notes that other long-term animal studies have shown mixed results.

 Other findings presented at the bioelectromagnetics meeting link cell phones' 
radiation to molecular changes in cells. A team from Finland examined the 
activity of about 4,500 genes in human cells cultured in the laboratory and 
exposed to cell-phone radiation for 48 hours. The researchers, led by Dariusz 
Leszczynski of the Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority in Helsinki, found 
that in cells exposed to radiation, more than 20 genes were either more or less 
active than usual. They also noted changes in the amounts of proteins produced 
by these genes.

 Preliminary results suggest that some of the genes control cell proliferation 
and response to stress. "It's difficult to speculate on potential health 
effects at this stage," says Leszczynski.

 At the meeting, he also revealed results of an experiment exploring how 
cellular phones might increase blood-vessel permeability in the brain, as 
suggested by previous rodent studies. The effect would permit molecules 
normally excluded from the brain to seep in.

 In the experiment, which used cultured human blood-vessel cells, Leszczynski 
found that the active form of a protein known as heat shock protein 27 
increases in abundance when cells are exposed to cell-phone radiation. This 
activity leads to an accumulation of stress fibers, which are part of a cell's 
internal scaffolding. The extra fibers may distort the cells that make up 
blood-vessel walls and thereby increase permeability, Leszczynski says.

 Leszczynski's work is "absolutely fascinating," comments Alan Preece of the 
University of Bristol in England. "If repeated in the intact body, it has 
horrific implications." Preece chaired a conference session on electromagnetic 
radiation and cognition.


