Making a Little Impression: New chip-making method may mold the industry: 
Science News Online, June 22, 2002

 Making a Little Impression: New chip-making method may mold the industry

 Peter Weiss

 Microchip manufacture is horrendously complex. As designers cram more 
components onto minuscule patches of silicon, the enterprise just gets 
tougher-so much so that some industry savants worry that the march of 
miniaturization may end in just a few years (SN: 5/5/01, p. 286: Available to 
subscribers at ).

 Now, researchers at Princeton University have demonstrated a new process for 
modifying silicon surfaces that may simplify chip manufacturing and reduce its 
costs.

 The most time-consuming and expensive step in constructing microcircuits 
focuses a pattern of light onto a semiconductor surface coated with a 
photosensitive film (SN: 11/8/97, p. 302: ). The resulting image subsequently 
serves as a stencil that permits acids to etch away selected portions of the 
semiconductor surface. By alternately etching the surface and depositing new 
and different materials, manufacturers build multilayer components, including 
transistors.

 The new approach, described in the June 20 Nature, would do away with the 
stencils and the optical paraphernalia that goes with them. Stephen Y. Chou, 
Chris Keimel, and Jian Gu have instead sculpted the silicon surface by pressing 
a sturdy mold of etched quartz against it. An ultraviolet laser shoots through 
the clear quartz into the underlying silicon, briefly melting the surface. The 
mold sinks slightly, embossing its pattern as the silicon resolidifies.

 In today's chip-manufacturing plants, $10 million machines called steppers 
shift precisely from one position to the next across a silicon wafer, pausing 
briefly at each chip location to project the pattern for one level of a 
circuit-to-be (SN: 7/21/01, p. 38: Available to subscribers at ). Chou 
envisions a faster method in which an array of identical molds presses into a 
wafer all at once to imprint one layer onto hundreds or thousands of chips.

"This method is a genuinely innovative and unexpected way of making 
microstructures in silicon," comments George M. Whitesides of Harvard 
University. It should work for other semiconductors and metals, too, adds Chou.

 Although making the molds themselves requires the most-advanced techniques of 
patterning and etching, those steps would be required for only a single master 
per layer, Chou explains. "Once you have your first mold, you're home free," he 
says.

 The new technique also shows promise for making circuitry with much smaller 
components than are currently feasible. Today's commercial chip-making methods 
can carve surface structures as small as 65 nanometers across, whereas the new 
imprinting method has generated features in silicon less than a sixth that size.

"On the grounds of cost, speed and resolution, [the new method] may displace 
optical technology as the preferred manufacturing technology for fashioning 
silicon chips," predicts R. Fabian Pease of Stanford University in a commentary 
in the same issue of Nature. If so, he adds, the industry can probably maintain 
its breathless pace of miniaturization for another 20 years.


