Aphids with Attitude: Science News Online, July 6, 2002

> Aphids with Attitude

 An army of real-life adolescent clones

 Susan Milius

 It's not often that Arnold Schwarzenegger gets compared to an aphid. An ant, 
maybe-many ants spend all day lifting heavy weights and defending the homeland. 
Unlike ants, bees, or Hollywood heroes, most of the world's 4,000 or so aphid 
species aren't by any stretch of the definition self-sacrificing social 
animals. Most aphids spend their lives as independent, pinhead-scale, 
six-legged versions of cows. They're specialized for grazing but not much 
else-high throughput, low drama.

 Yet a few aphid species turn out to be more like killer bees than like cows. 
These aphids live together in colonies, each founded by a highly fertile, 
queenlike female. While her daughters are still adolescents, they grow the 
outsized fighting legs that earned them a favorable comparison to 
Schwarzenegger in a scientific journal.

 The armed youngsters risk their lives defending the colony against predatory 
insects, such as a lacewing larva. Such a marauder can easily outweigh the tiny 
aphid soldiers, but defense en masse brings it down. In some species, the 
military daughters never mature or reproduce, living out their lives as part of 
a sacrificial teen army.

 Researchers are studying diverse sides of this miniature military life, from 
soldierly housekeeping to the recruits' tendency to goof off. To scientists 
interested in the conditions that favor group living, these aphids make an 
especially interesting addition to the short list of social species. Unlike the 
fighters among social bees, ants, or even plant-sucking thrips, a 
Schwarzeneggerlike teenage-aphid army consists entirely of clones.

 Plant vamps

 Aphids live basically as vampires of plants. The insect families that 
scientists lump together as aphids belong to the huge order of true bugs, which 
typically deploy sucking mouthparts much like built-in soda straws. Aphids 
manage to make a living in one of the more challenging versions of this 
lifestyle, by feeding on plant sap rather than on pollen or other bugs. Sap's 
abundant and loaded with sugars. Unfortunately, it offers only small amounts of 
essential amino acids.

 Most aphid species reproduce both sexually and asexually, sometimes producing 
several cloned generations one after another. "They hardly ever have sex," says 
Patrick Abbot of the University of Texas, Austin. "Aphids are basically little 
plants with legs."

 The first report of a social aphid, a species with specialized soldiers 
risking their lives for the colonial good, came from Southeast Asia in 1977. 
Shigeyuki Aoki, now of Rissho University in Kumagaya, Japan, and his colleagues 
described an aphid species in a group called pemphigids. A mother and her 
daughters cluster, and when an intruder appears, the daughters swarm over it, 
piercing its body-sometimes fatally-with their mouthparts.

 Today, researchers recognize some 50 species of group-living aphids with 
heroic defenders. In 1991, Nancy Moran of the University of Arizona in Tucson 
discovered the first North American aphid with a soldier class, again one of 
the pemphigid species. This aphid, Pemphigus obesinymphae, turned out to be a 
good species for studying a soldier's life.

 The species has a soap-opera life. In spring, fertilized aphid eggs hatch 
under the bark of a cottonwood tree. All sexually produced eggs are females. 
Each dot of a hatchling makes an epic crawl under the loose bark until she 
comes to a leaf bud. She stabs the growing tissue and settles down to feed. The 
leaf bud responds by forming a living chamber called a gall around her. The 
aphid will spend the rest of her life inside this gall.

 Genetically identical embryos were already developing inside the aphid as she 
crawled toward her new home. Inside each of these clones, yet another 
generation was growing. This nesting of embryos within embryos permits rapid 
population growth.

 The gall-founding female doesn't lay eggs but gives birth to already 
developing daughters. These are the soldiers, which spend much of the summer in 
a state of arrested development and fight whatever threatens their gall. In the 
Oct. 9, 2001 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ( PNAS), Joan 
Strassmann and David Queller of Rice University in Houston say, "Evolution has 
endowed them with bulked-up Schwarzenegger arms (six of them, of course) and 
turned their soda straws into lethal weapons."

 Eventually, the soldiers return to civilian girlhood, grow into a new shape 
that includes wings, and fly away.

 These dispersers next alight on plants in the mustard family, work their way 
below ground, and spread along the root. Without forming galls, they give birth 
to the daughters already formed within them.

 Before winter comes, the youngest generation migrates back to a cottonwood. 
There, at last, these aphids produce a few sons as well as a few daughters. The 
new two-sex generation finds mates, sometimes among siblings, and females lay 
sexually formed eggs. All is ready for the cycle to start up again in the 
spring.

 Clone rangers

 Some aphid observers have suspected that aphid soldiers can shift allegiance 
and move to another gall. However, the residents of neighboring galls are so 
hard to distinguish that clone mixing has been a difficult idea for scientists 
to test.

 Abbot, Moran, and their colleagues finally managed to work out genetic methods 
for identifying clones within cottonwood aphids. The researchers sampled 
soldiers from galls late in the summer. Typically, about 40 percent of aphid 
daughters in a gall came from an outside nest, the researchers reported in the 
Oct. 9, 2001 PNAS.

 To see how these newcomers behave in their adopted galls, the team set up fake 
attacks with "invading" fruit fly larvae. The larvae can't hurt an aphid, but 
the soldiers attack anyway. After the gall defenders had clustered around the 
supposed menace, the scientists checked which aphids were doing the work. A 
disproportionate number of the attackers were native to the gall, with the 
newcomers more likely to evade guard duty.

 The tendency to shirk when living in an alien gall confirms predictions, says 
Abbot. Taking risks to benefit close kin offers a way, albeit a roundabout one, 
of spreading one's genes. Gambling life and limb for the sake of hosts that 
share fewer genes doesn't offer as much evolutionary payoff.

 Aphid armies take risks for the good of the colony even when they aren't 
fighting. They do "altruistic housekeeping," in the words of Tim Benton of the 
University of Stirling in Scotland and William Foster of Cambridge University 
in England.

 The huge volume of plant sap that aphids process can create a major 
housekeeping challenge for creatures confined inside a gall with growing 
numbers of relatives. Aphid galls often have a small opening for waste disposal 
and the insects' eventual departure, even though the hole invites predators to 
invade. That breach in defenses is well worth it, say the researchers, or else 
aphids would drown in their own honeydew excretions.

 That's exactly what happened in an experiment with aphid colonies of a 
European species that feeds on poplar trees. Benton and Foster turned the galls 
upside down so the entrance hole no longer allowed easy drainage, and the 
colonies perished from sewage backup.

 The researchers found that in a properly oriented gall, soldiers in this 
species double as sanitation workers, clearing out the honeydew. Soldiers on 
latrine duty may make the ultimate sacrifice for the good of the colony. Many 
of the aphids fall out of the gall along with waste, says Foster.

 Remarkable details of the aphid soldier's housekeeping became clear last year 
after a group of physicists described a phenomenon that they called "liquid 
marbles," water droplets coated with a water-repellant powder so they roll 
around without wetting a surface (SN: 7/28/01, p. 57: Available to subscribers 
at .). Foster says that as soon as he saw the physics article, he realized that 
aphid soldiers make honeydew marbles. The aphids coat their liquid waste with a 
layer of wax, then roll it out of the gall.

 On Nov. 8, 2001, Nature published a short item acknowledging that aphids had 
beaten physicists in developing the technology. Foster and his Cambridge 
colleague Nathan Pike teamed up with another group of physicists to describe 
the insect system in a paper entitled "How aphids lose their marbles" in the 
June 22 Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B.

 Aphids may also engage in altruistic home repair, according to work in 
progress from Utako Kurosu of Tokyo University of Agriculture, Takema Fukatsu 
of Japan's National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology in 
Tsukuba, and their colleagues. At the 6th International Symposium on Aphids in 
Rennes, France, last year, the research team described Asian aphids that repair 
rips in their galls with a gluey substance that comes out of their bodies. In 
the process of releasing the glue, many of the repair aphids essentially 
explode and die.

 All together now

 Just how soldier-making aphids fit into the array of social animals depends on 
who's doing the fitting. To pick a recent categorization, though, Bernard 
Crespi of Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, British Columbia, divides the 
soldier-making aphids between two of his major groups of social animals.

 He calls the aphids with temporary soldiers-those that eventually grow up to 
reproduce-"cooperative breeders." In contrast, Crespi categorizes aphids with 
permanently sterile armies, known mostly in Asia, as "truly social," in the 
group with bees and ants.

 Theorists expect close kinship to favor self-sacrificing social behavior, and 
many of the world's aphid galls outstrip anthills and beehives in terms of 
close kinship. At first glance, the aphids' widespread cloning seems to provide 
"an ideal situation in terms of social evolution," says Crespi. Yet so far, 
only about 1 percent of aphid species turns out to have social leanings. 
Clearly, researchers need to look beyond kinship for other factors that might 
push animals into group living.

 One of those factors could be a taste for high-value real estate. So far, 
soldiering has turned up only in aphids that at some point in their lives 
cluster in galls. To insects that feed on plants, these hollow swellings are 
gingerbread castles that both protect and nourish. Crespi compares them to the 
fortress-food combos of such social species as termites that feed on the wood 
of their home tunnels or mole rats that eat tubers they find as they expand 
their burrow network. There's no reason to leave home to forage and lots of 
reason to cooperate in defending such a dream abode.

 Crespi has also studied Australian thrips that raise young inside galls. 
There, too, he finds soldier sons and daughters.

 More evidence for the importance of galls, Crespi says, is in their 
durability: Some of the fiercest soldiers show up in thrips with galls that 
last unusually long, sometimes up to a year. Perhaps the long-lasting galls are 
worth an extra-hard fight.

 Foster and his colleagues are finishing an analysis of a similar pattern in 
aphids. Among three related Pemphigus species in Europe, the one that spends 
only a brief period in its gall doesn't field soldiers, the intermediate gall 
dweller produces mildly aggressive soldiers, and the aphid with the 
longest-lasting gall fields an army of highly specialized, very aggressive 
soldiers. Foster and Philip Rhoden describe the system in an upcoming Insectes 
Sociaux.

 Researchers have barely begun to discover the ways of social aphids. The 
Japanese laboratories in particular have ambitious research underway. Fukatsu, 
for example, is working on the chemistry of soldiering. His lab has found a 
protein abundant in soldiers that they seem to inject into their quarry.

 The reputation of aphids has come a long way in recent years from the image of 
mindless minicows. In their PNAS article, Strassmann and Queller sum up social 
sap suckers of the 21st century: "Not only are the aphids fierce, but they are 
also sneaky and clever."


