X Rays to Go: Carbon nanotubes could shrink machines: Science News Online, July 
6, 2002

> X Rays to Go: Carbon nanotubes could shrink machines

 Jessica Gorman

 Carbon nanotubes have been the darlings of the technology community for a 
decade. Researchers around the world have been touting them as promising 
components for making products ranging from microchips to medicines. Now, these 
tiny tubes have found their way into a novel X-ray machine that could improve 
examinations of patients in the hospital, victims at the scene of an automobile 
crash, or luggage at airport-security checkpoints.

 Unlike conventional machines, the new one doesn't require high temperatures to 
generate high-energy electrons for producing X rays. A thin layer of carbon 
nanotubes operating at room temperature does the job, says developer Otto Zhou 
of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

"There's been an enormous amount of hype about what carbon nanotubes can do, 
and very little actually has happened in terms of this kind of application," 
comments Walter de Heer of the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta. The 
X-ray method is "an application whose time has come," he says.

 A conventional X-ray machine generates electrons by heating metal filaments 
inside a vacuum chamber to temperatures as high as 2,000@C. When those 
electrons hit another piece of metal, they produce X rays. The prototype 
devised by Zhou and his colleagues uses carbon nanotubes in place of the metal 
filaments. When exposed, unheated, to an electric field, the nanotubes behave 
like tiny electron guns.

 Since metal filaments burn out easily at their high operating temperatures, 
the new devices will last longer, Zhou says. They should also save energy and 
time. Moreover, because the prototype operates at room temperature, researchers 
will be able to develop very small machines for portable X-ray work, such as in 
an ambulance or airport-security and customs operations, says Zhou.

 He and his colleagues describe the prototype machine in the July 8 Applied 
Physics Letters. The report includes X-ray images of a fish and of a medical 
model of a hand containing human bones.

"This important work . . . brings carbon-nanotube X-ray sources much closer to 
commercializable products," comments Ray Baughman of the University of Texas at 
Dallas. X-ray sources based on carbon nanotubes might even be small enough 
someday for use in catheters inserted into the body, he says.

 According to Zhou, he and his colleagues are working with manufacturers to put 
the first generation of carbon-nanotube X-ray machines on the market within 2 
years.

 A new family of technologies using similar methods might become possible. Says 
Baughman, "This X-ray application is one of the many exciting potential uses of 
carbon nanotubes as electron sources, from light-emitting flat-panel displays 
and high-intensity lamps to microwave generators and electrical-discharge tubes 
for electrical-surge protection."


