Let Them Eat Cake: Altered mice stay svelte on a high-fat diet: Science News 
Online, June 22, 2002

 Let Them Eat Cake: Altered mice stay svelte on a high-fat diet

 Kristin Cobb

 A protein that links gluttony and weight gain may be a novel target for 
antiobesity drugs. Mice lacking this protein can indulge in fatty food but 
remain as slim as mice on a lower-fat diet, a new study reports. The finding 
suggests a new avenue to help morbidly obese people lose weight.

 When food is scarce, stockpiling energy in fat cells is a survival advantage. 
But when food is plentiful, as in industrialized countries, genes that promote 
fat storage lead to obesity (SN: 4/14/01, p. 238: Available to subscribers at 
). The molecular mechanisms that translate extra calories into fat deposition 
are largely unknown.

 Now, researchers at Kyoto University in Japan have identified a key pathway in 
the process. Scientists have long known that the hormone called gastric 
inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) is secreted into the bloodstream by the small 
intestine in response to ingested foods, particularly fatty ones. GIP binds to 
cell-surface receptors on distant fat cells, signaling food intake.

 In an upcoming Nature Medicine, the Kyoto team shows that if this sequence is 
disrupted, mice burn excess fat rather than store it, and they become obesity 
resistant.

 Previous research focused on GIP's effect on pancreas cells, not on fat cells, 
notes Yuichiro Yamada, one of the new study's authors. Because the hormone 
boosts insulin release from pancreatic cells, scientists have long speculated 
on a role for GIP in type II diabetes, which is marked by an inefficient 
response to insulin. But the new study is the first to clearly link GIP and 
obesity, Yamada and his colleagues say.

 The scientists genetically engineered mice to lack the GIP receptor. When fed 
a high-fat diet during their first year, unaltered mice became obese and 
developed insulin resistance, a precursor to diabetes. GIP-receptor-deficient 
mice remained lean and responsive to insulin. These mice were fat-burning 
machines but appeared otherwise normal, the researchers report.

 Then the scientists mated mice deficient in the GIP receptor with mice that 
lack leptin, a hormone that signals satiety. Leptinfree mice chronically 
overeat and are extraordinarily obese (SN: 7/29/95, p. 68). On an 
all-you-can-eat diet, mice that were missing both GIP receptors and leptin 
gained significantly less weight and body fat than mice that lacked only leptin 
did.

 The next research step will be to develop drugs that block GIP receptors in 
people, Yamada says. Eventually, a GIP blocker could reduce the need for 
dangerous therapies, such as stomach-stapling surgery, to reduce food intake in 
morbidly obese people, he predicts.

"That taking away GIP action might have beneficial effects for obesity and, 
indirectly, diabetes is a pretty startling new concept," says Daniel J. Drucker 
of the University of Toronto in Canada. The research is sound, but it defies 
conventional thinking about GIP, he explains. Researchers previously had 
focused on boosting GIP action in people with type II diabetes. Now, it seems 
that inhibiting GIP might counter diabetes.

"It's an intriguing result," adds Jeffrey M. Friedman of the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute (HHMI) at Rockefeller University in New York. The gene for 
the GIP receptor joins a growing list of genes whose inactivation in mice leads 
to reduced weight and increased metabolism, he says (SN: 6/02/01, p. 342: 
Available to subscribers at ).

 The challenge for drug makers will be to find the "magic bullet" that 
selectively blocks the GIP receptor but doesn't react with closely related 
receptors, says HHMI investigator Donald F. Steiner of the University of 
Chicago. Even then, what works in mice may not work in people.


