Frogs Play Tree: Male tunes his call to specific tree hole: Science News 
Online, Dec. 7, 2002

> Frogs Play Tree: Male tunes his call to specific tree hole

 Susan Milius

 Borneo's tree-hole frog may come as close to playing a musical instrument as 
any wild animal does, according to new tests.

 Plenty of animals make structured sounds, but this inch-long rain forest frog 
adjusts its vocal performance to create a specific quality-resonance-from an 
object in its environment, says Bjorn Lardner of the University of Lund in 
Sweden.

 That object is a tree with a cavity holding a puddle of water. Courting males 
of Metaphrynella sundana sit partly submerged in these puddles while chirping 
nighttime advertisements for females. When starting his call, the male raises 
and lowers the pitch until it hits the frequency that resonates in his 
particular cavity. Then he lengthens individual calls and shortens the time 
between them as he settles down for serious chirping, report Lardner and 
Maklarin bin Lakim of Sabah Parks Research and Education Division in Malaysia.

"If they gain a resonance effect, which is a bonus, they take the opportunity 
to invest even more energy in their calling efforts so as to become supersexy 
males," says Lardner.

 The researchers say in the Dec. 5 Nature that as far as they know, these frogs 
rank as the first examples of animals that test for resonance and alter their 
calls accordingly. "They do this actively-that's the interesting part," says 
Lardner.

 Certain crickets and burrowing frogs build amplifiers, but they adapt their 
instrument instead of their performance for peak sound, Lardner notes. For 
example, mole crickets dig burrows of a size that resonates to their calls. 
Other crickets use cut leaves to amplify broadcasts.

 To study the tree-hole frog, Lardner and bin Lakim recorded hundreds of 
calling sessions during Bornean-jungle nights. "We didn't realize what was 
going on at first," Lardner says. The crucial clue came near the end of their 
project when they put a male frog into a partially flooded artificial cavity 
made from a pipe. As the male started to chirp, the researchers gradually 
drained the water. When analyzing recordings, the researchers noticed a 
distinctive pattern of varying pitches produced until the frog hit the 
resonating frequency of its niche. As water dripped away, the frog matched the 
resulting changes in resonating frequency.

 When Lardner and bin Lakim reviewed their earlier recordings, they detected 
similar patterns in frogs in natural settings, they report.

 Lardner says that a person can imitate the courting frog by humming in the 
shower until the stall resonates.

 Animal-acoustics researcher Michael Greenfield of the University of Kansas in 
Lawrence says that if the tree-hole frogs indeed use acoustic feedback to 
adjust their calls, they are unusual. People can easily listen to their 
attempts to sing a tune and then correct pitches, but "there's no evidence for 
that in insects, and I don't know of any in frogs," says Greenfield. "That's 
what's special here."

 Greenfield cautions that more research will be necessary to figure out whether 
the frogs use solely acoustic feedback or get clues from other senses. Even if 
their feat is not exclusively acoustic, Greenfield says, "it's still neat."

**************** Listen to the sounds of Borneo's tree-hole frog at .

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .

 To subscribe to Science News (print), go to .

 To sign up for the free weekly e-LETTER from Science News, go to .


