In Silico Medicine: Science News Online, Dec. 14, 2002 

> In Silico Medicine

 Computer simulations aid drug development and medical care

 Damaris Christensen

 Like millions of people in the United States, Bill and Allen have asthma. 
They're lucky enough to take the newest therapies, sometimes even 
before the drugs come to market. Yet neither Bill nor Allen has ever been to a 
doctor's office or the hospital. After all, it's okay if they 
get sick or even die-a simple click of a mouse can restore these patients to 
perfect health. Bill and Allen are two of the newest subjects in 
a growing research area called in silico biology. As basic researchers, drug 
developers, doctors, and health-care administrators struggle with 
the sheer volume and complexity of scientific information that they face every 
day, information gathered from computer-generated patients like 
Bill and Allen may lead to better decisions.

 Computer simulations aren't new in nonmedical research and development. Much 
of climatology and geology is modeled with computers, and 
engineers routinely design products-from airplanes to tire treads-using 
mathematical simulations rather than building and testing prototypes. 
But such computer applications have been slow to reach people studying the 
vagaries of the human body. Today, however, researchers are 
increasingly turning to computers to explore medical science.

"Computer simulation is the modus operandi for the future of biomedical 
research," says James B. Bassingthwaighte of the University of 
Washington in Seattle. "The complexity of [biological] systems is such that 
intuition is of no help in figuring out where an intervention 
might have an effect or what is the most efficient means of diagnosis and 
treatment."

 Developing drugs

 The company that Bill and Allen call home created its model of asthma patients 
by compiling information from more than 3,500 scientific 
studies on the disease. Next, scientists at the company-Entelos in Menlo Park, 
Calif.-wrote equations that account for more than 7,500 
parameters of a person's health that may be important in asthma. These include 
the thickness of the mucous lining in the lungs and the effects 
of inflammation in blocking the airways.

 From one to the next, virtual patients may respond differently to drugs 
depending on their health parameters, just as real patients do, and 
their diseases may take different courses. But because the researchers know the 
exact differences between their virtual patients, they can 
more easily tease out the most important factors in complicated interactions.

 Virtual patients may also respond differently when the modelers use different 
views of how a disease develops. Bill and Allen, for example, 
represent two hypotheses about how asthma attacks begin. Bill reflected the 
idea that the immune-signaling molecule interleukin-5 
overstimulates immune cells called eosinophils. Those cells then trigger 
inflammation and asthma attacks. Allen, in contrast, had an asthma 
attack when immune cells called macrophages blocked his airways.

 Entelos developed Bill and Allen when the Bridgewater, N.J.^-based drug 
company Aventis was considering tests of whether compounds that block 
interleukin-5 work as treatments for asthma attacks. When exposed to virtual 
allergens and no drugs, Bill's asthma attacks lasted 3 days, much 
longer than is typical for people with asthma. Simulated injections of 
interleukin-5 blockers prevented Bill's asthma attacks but not Allen's.

 Because Bill's asthma didn't seem to reflect real life and Allen didn't 
respond to the interleukin-5 blockers, Aventis didn't pursue these 
compounds as potential asthma therapies. The Entelos model seems to have been 
accurate. Despite promising animal studies, when other companies 
recently tested interleukin-5 blockers in people, they found that the compounds 
have much less effect than the researchers had originally 
expected.

 Each simulation of a disease begins by modeling the normal physiology and 
interaction of the organs involved. "We are striving for a 
whole-body approach to health and disease," says Jeff Trimmer of Entelos. "We 
want to use [our models] to understand how a person gets sick." 
Even when models don't seem to simulate what happens in real life-as in 
Bill-the findings can help researchers better understand physiological 
factors that are important in causing diseases, says Trimmer.

 To date, computer simulations of basic human biology are closely intertwined 
with the commercial quest to develop new drugs quickly and 
inexpensively. Pharmaceutical companies can now take more than a decade to move 
a compound from the lab to the clinic, and many potential 
drugs fall by the wayside in that journey. Companies report that about 20 
percent of the drugs that succeed in preliminary trials are 
abandoned once doctors test them in large, expensive clinical trials: Either 
they don't work as expected, or troubling side effects emerge.

 The current system is so bad that anything would be an improvement, says Lewis 
Sheiner of the University of California, San Francisco, who 
models drug responses.

 Drug companies hope that computer simulations will focus their efforts on the 
candidate drugs most likely to work in people. With biological 
models of cells, organs, and metabolic pathways, industry scientists can pick 
out genes or proteins involved in a disease and then sort 
through various drug candidates. Only the most promising ones would then be 
tested in cells and animals. Such modeling is gaining proponents, 
says Karin Jorga of Hoffmann-La Roche in Basel, Switzerland.

 Computer simulations may also reduce the number and size of human trials that 
a company has to conduct on the way to a drug's approval by the 
Food and Drug Administration, Jorga says. The simulations can indicate the most 
efficient trial designs to reveal beneficial effects. Some 
computer models that simulate how drugs are broken down in the body can predict 
the most effective dose, she says. At a meeting on drug 
effects in the Netherlands earlier this year, Jorga reported that such modeling 
reduced the time Hoffmann-La Roche needed to develop and test 
a new formulation of a drug for preventing bone loss. With the new formulation, 
people could take the drug once a month rather than once a day.

 Another example of how computer simulations have guided drug design is a 
virtual heart developed by Denis Noble of the University of Oxford 
in England. The model consists of a mass of virtual cells, each processing 
virtual sugar and oxygen. On a computer screen, this heart beats 
just like the real thing. The virtual heart can be programmed to develop 
different diseases, and scientists can see how it responds to 
treatment with different drugs.

 Noble's model has been used, for example, to predict whether one drug is 
likely to cause abnormal heart rhythms, a widely recognized, 
potentially dangerous side effect. Computer simulations, however, aren't good 
at predicting unexpected side effects.

 Greater advantages could result if biomedical researchers combine the models 
they're developing. Entelos is trying to hook together models of 
several different diseases to increase its chances of detecting side effects or 
spotting dangerous drug interactions. For example, heart 
disease, obesity, and diabetes tend to occur in the same patients, Trimmer 
says, so it would be useful to model all those ailments at the same 
time.

 Bassingthwaighte and other researchers are combining individual computer 
models of genes, proteins, cells, organs, and metabolic pathways. 
With such a set of coordinated models, he suggests, medical scientists might 
see effects of disease that are hidden by the complexity of the 
human body.

 This effort-sometimes called the virtual human or physiome project-is just 
beginning. Many technical and scientific hurdles remain: getting 
the models to communicate with one another, finding the powerful computers to 
run such simulations, even gathering the data needed to develop 
some of the models.

 And not everyone is convinced that unified models will offer helpful 
information. "If you're an engineer, it isn't useful to use a quantum 
mechanical model of the world to talk about girders and bridges," says Sheiner. 
"Getting the scale of the model to match the scale of the 
question is tricky, so that working from the genes up may not be an efficient 
way to determine the best ways of treating particular diseases."

 Modeling medical care

 Some researchers are applying computer simulations to an even broader realm of 
health care. Rather than studying cells and organs, 
researchers associated with the Oakland, Calif.^-based health-care plan Kaiser 
Permanente have created a computer simulation of a virtual 
world where people develop diseases-asthma, diabetes, and heart disease so 
far-and go to doctors for tests and treatments. Called the 
Archimedes model, it may help Kaiser Permanente set guidelines for patient care 
and find ways to monitor caregivers' performance, says 
physician David M. Eddy, a consultant to Kaiser Permanente. He and physicist 
Leonard Schlessinger of Kaiser developed the model.

 Archimedes may also predict results from clinical trials that simply can't be 
carried out in the real world. It may also give physicians 
results more quickly than would be possible with an actual trial. Eddy cites a 
variety of obstacles for carrying out real-world trials: "the 
pace of innovation, the high cost of doing research, the long follow-up times 
required, the large number of options to be compared . . . and 
the unwillingness of the world to stand still until the research is done."

 All those factors "severely limit our ability to evaluate all the options [for 
patient care] through clinical research alone," he adds.

 The model takes into account many influences on disease in real people, says 
Eddy. For example, each virtual patient has a virtual liver and 
pancreas. The health of these organs affects the concentration of sugar in a 
virtual patient's blood. When sugar concentrations rise high 
enough, a patient may experience symptoms of diabetes, such as thirst or 
frequent urination, and go to a doctor. Although the underlying 
causes of diabetes aren't well understood, Archimedes uses equations that 
reproduce the disease's known characteristics, such as the observed 
incidence of the disease in different ethnic groups.

"As in reality, each patient is different," says Eddy. Some patients may take 
medicine or follow a doctor's recommendations more meticulously 
than others do. Moreover, patients may receive care of different quality. 
Reflecting studies of doctors' habits, a virtual primary-care 
physician is less likely to accurately follow treatment guidelines than is a 
virtual specialist. These factors, in turn, affect a number of 
physiological variables in the computer, as in life.

 For example, different simulated diet and exercise plans reduce the 
cholesterol, blood pressure, and weight of the virtual patients by 
different amounts. Those changes then affect the likelihood that, say, an 
overweight patient would develop diabetes or heart disease.

 At the annual meeting of the American Diabetes Association in June, Eddy 
reported results from an Archimedes simulation of a real-life, large 
clinical trial. The actual trial was known as the Diabetes Prevention Program 
(SN: 9/8/01, p. 159: Available to subscribers at ). Mimicking 
that trial, the virtual one enrolled virtual overweight people with a variety 
of risk factors for developing diabetes. It randomly assigned 
them to receive intensive counseling about diet and exercise, a drug called 
metformin that increases a person's sensitivity to insulin, or a 
placebo.

 To program the model, Eddy and his colleagues used results from a variety of 
real-life studies about the effects of various interventions on 
weight and a variety of other risk factors for diabetes. The first time 
Archimedes simulated the actual diabetes trial, the virtual results 
were very close to the real results-as close as one would expect results of two 
actual trials to be, says Eddy. The simulation almost exactly 
mimicked the clinical trial when the modelers included the weight regained by 
participants.

"If we could not have afforded that trial, we could have predicted the results 
quite well using this model," says Richard Kahn of the American 
Diabetes Association in Alexandria, Va. "The [simulated] health-care system 
responded very much like the real one, and that suggests that 
Archimedes could help improve the way we treat patients."

 Simulating reality

 Despite the promise of technology, "no model is perfect," cautions 
Bassingthwaighte. "The limitation is our database of knowledge. If we 
don't understand it, we can't model it."

 Thanks to the Human Genome Project, which recently decoded essentially the 
entire human genome, researchers now have a large database of 
genes and proteins, he says. A new field of research, called proteomics, is 
adding information about the expression of proteins and their 
interactions in cells. However, Bassingthwaighte cautions, relatively little is 
known about how most of those molecules affect cells and 
organs. He expects that extensive experimenting will be required to tease out 
that information.

 Likewise, simulations of disease processes and health care can reproduce 
what's known, but can't always identify an unexpected side effect. 
For instance, even today, a computerized model probably wouldn't predict the 
damage that the diet drug fenfluramine causes to heart valves, as 
revealed in studies in 1997 (SN: 10/18/97, p. 252: ), says Trimmer. It's for 
such reasons that he notes, "This [simulation] technology is not 
a replacement for traditional research but a complement to it."

"The fundamental idea is that if you can model a real thing on a computer, you 
can answer a lot of questions without experimenting with the 
real thing," says Sheiner. "While models are far from perfect because they 
depend on imperfect information, they can give you an intelligent 
basis for making decisions when you're faced with uncertainty."

 Early progress with computerized biomedicine has modelers enthusiastic about 
its future. "My goal is to move medicine onto a quantitative 
footing," Eddy says. "There's still a long way to go, but simulations will 
certainly help. We've shown that this plane will fly."

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .

 To subscribe to Science News (print), go to .

 To sign up for the free weekly e-LETTER from Science News, go to .



