Ocean View: Science News Online, Dec. 7, 2002

> Ocean View

 Scientists are going 24^-7 in their studies of the deep

 Carol Marzuola

 The last weather ship in the world lies anchored in a severe and lonely place 
in the Norwegian Sea. Since 1948, its crews have taken water temperatures to 
produce the longest continuous set of deep-ocean data available. After about 4 
decades, those data revealed a dramatic, persistent rise in the temperature 
2,000 meters deep. Is it a sign of a fundamental change in deep-ocean 
circulation? Of global climate change? Uwe Send, an oceanographer at the 
University of Kiel in Germany, says no one knows. "The problem is, we don't 
have this information but in a very few places in the ocean," he says.

 Despite satellites that monitor ocean-surface conditions and recent advances 
in sensor technology, less than 5 percent of the world's ocean bottom has been 
explored, according to a recent report from the U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy.

 At an October discussion in Washington, D.C., Send built his case for more 
thoroughly monitoring the open ocean-not with weather ships, but with a network 
of moored surface buoys laden with instruments that communicate with 
satellites. One-third of the proposed network of 50 buoys is already in place.

 Today, scientists are using a variety of unmanned, remote systems to view 
patches of the ocean. These observatories continuously monitor processes along 
the coast, in the open ocean, and at the seafloor. And oceanographers have 
applied for funding to build new, vast networks of sensors.

 John R. Delaney of the University of Washington in Seattle credits the 
pioneering scientists who are operating this growing collection of ocean 
observatories for the ambitious scale of new plans. "It is because those folks 
have been successful that we can now imagine doing something that is the Hubble 
Telescope . . . of undersea work," he says.

 Early successes

 Scientists generally agree that ocean observatories' shining accomplishment 
has been the prediction of El Ninos, the dramatic, periodic climate changes 
brought on by warming seas in the eastern Pacific Ocean. El Nino refers in 
Spanish to the baby Jesus-the phenomenon arrives in South America during the 
winter holiday season.

 Because El Ninos cause fish-population crashes, droughts, and flooding in many 
parts of the world, scientists have long tried to forecast the weather 
pattern's arrival. In the late 1970s, they started using satellites to monitor 
ocean-surface temperature.

 In 1982, however, researchers learned that satellites could be fooled. Because 
dust from Mexico's El Chichon volcano obscured satellite images, the orbiters 
that year recorded too-low temperatures for the ocean surface. Oceanographers 
on the expedition ship Conrad in the tropical Pacific that autumn caught the 
error when they measured ocean temperatures directly.

 Nearly missing an El Nino provided an impetus for beefing up underwater and 
ocean-surface monitoring. In the early 1990s, scientists deployed an El Nino 
warning system made up of an array of 70 surface buoys that measure wind, air 
temperature, and water temperatures from the surface down to 500 m. The array 
covers a 2,000-kilometer-wide area from South America to New Guinea. The buoys 
beam their data via satellite to oceanographers at the Seattle office of the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

 This network of buoys, known as the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project, has 
forecast El Ninos for the past decade. In 1997, the buoys picked up telltale 
signs of the biggest El Nino of the century. Says Marcia McNutt, director of 
the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, "The impact it had on disaster 
preparedness was truly amazing."

 The system currently indicates that El Nino is here again, but at moderate 
strength, for the 2002 to 2003 winter season, reports NOAA.

 Other types of observatories are finding new features in coastal waters. An 
Atlantic Ocean facility completed in 1996 combines several high-tech 
data-collection methods. Rutgers University's Coastal Ocean Observation Lab in 
Tuckerton, N.J., collects information from satellites, land-based radar that 
tracks surface currents off the coast, occasional forays by instrumented 
underwater vehicles, and sensors on the sea floor attached to a 15-m-deep fiber 
optic cable that runs 9 km out from shore. From a control room resembling that 
of a NASA space mission, scientists monitor information arriving from a 
30-square-km swath of coastal ocean.

 This observatory, staffed with both biological and physical oceanographers, 
has already provided scientists with surprising underwater insights. For 
instance, it has suggested a cause for the summer episodes of depleted oxygen 
that can kill bottom-dwelling animals such as clams at the site.

 These ocean hypoxias aren't necessarily the result of pollution or freshwater 
flow from rivers, says Scott M. Glenn, codirector of Rutgers' ocean 
observatory. After analyzing a combination of satellite and radar data, the 
scientists sent ships and underwater robots into the coastal water. They 
detected a 10-m-deep, 4-km-wide current that hugs the coast and brings cold 
water and huge concentrations of phytoplankton from the north. As phytoplankton 
die and sink, bacteria feeding on them use up the oxygen in the bottom waters.

"It's a very small feature that traditional oceanography would have a hard time 
documenting," says Oscar Schofield, codirector of Rutgers' ocean observatory. 
"Nobody knew [the current] was there."

 The Rutgers researchers plan to export their technology to Florida, so they 
and other scientists can track red tides. These toxic algal blooms, which kill 
marine life, occur without warning (SN: 11/30/02, p. 344: Available to 
subscribers at ).

 Rutgers also plans to expand its swath of monitored coastal ocean to 100 times 
its current coverage. This summer, the observatory's Web page was already 
getting 65,000 hits a day from boaters, fishers, and beachgoers looking for the 
equivalent of the ocean's Weather Channel for the relatively small area covered.

 Deep rumblings

 Several of the new generation of ocean observatories use sound to track events 
such as earthquakes and volcanoes (SN: 1/2/99, p. 15; 8/18/01, p. 102: 
Available to subscribers at ). Natural underwater temperature and pressure 
gradients create a corridor in which sound can travel for thousands of 
kilometers. The U.S. Navy uses permanently placed hydrophones to monitor this 
sound fixing and ranging channel, known as SOFAR, in the Pacific Ocean. 
Scientists now have access to those data and also eavesdrop on the ocean via 
portable hydrophones attached to buoys.

 Handling all that information would have been an impossible computer task just 
10 years ago, says Christopher G. Fox, a marine geophysicist at NOAA's Pacific 
Marine Environmental Laboratory in Newport, Ore. Fox says that eight 
researchers in his lab record 10 gigabytes of sound data every week from the 
Pacific Ocean.

 Listening to SOFAR sounds in the Pacific since 1991, the researchers have 
located tens of thousands of ocean-floor earthquakes and several volcanic 
eruptions that weren't detected by land-based seismic monitors. They've also 
identified two distinct groups of blue whales based on their calls.

 Recently, the group took portable hydrophones to the Atlantic Ocean and for 
the first time recorded sounds of volcanic activity in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. 
In this area, segments of the seafloor are slowly spreading apart and magma is 
rising into the seafloor. Fox says, "It has a whole lot of little bangs with 
sort of a background rumble to it."

 Strange new sounds are also being picked up by the Hawaii-2 Observatory, 
originally installed in 1998 to track earthquakes. Hawaii-2 is a seismograph 
and a set of hydrophones attached to an old telephone cable that broke 5,000 m 
below the Pacific's surface. The 1960s-era, sheathed copper-wire cable provides 
power for the station, which is midway between California and Hawaii. This 
coaxial cable also enables scientists in Hawaii to continuously receive data 
from the sensors.

 AT&T had offered the cable to a consortium of research institutions. The 
scientists seized the chance to fill a gap in the global earthquake-monitoring 
network. "Our expectation when they put the hydrophones there was they would 
hear local earthquakes . . . or things coming up through the seafloor but they 
wouldn't hear anything propagating through the ocean," says Fox.

 But a magnitude 6.1 earthquake off the Oregon coast 2,000 km away triggered 
sounds that "were so loud they literally almost went off scale," says Rhett 
Butler, a geophysicist at the consortium, Incorporated Research Institutions 
for Seismology in Washington, D.C.

 Butler says that because Hawaii-2 Observatory sits nearly 1 km below the SOFAR 
channel in the area, he couldn't explain the long-traveling rumbles using 
standard theories about how sound propagates through water. In the October 
Geophysical Research Letters, he and Cinna Lomnitz of the Geophysical Institute 
in Mexico City describe the sound as a new kind of wave that travels along the 
sediment-fluid interface at the bottom of the ocean.

 Fox says that the findings not only give researchers a new tool to use in 
monitoring underwater earthquakes but also have "implications for all of our 
models of acoustic interaction in the ocean."

 Oceans online

 Telecommunication companies are donating more retired telephone cables for 
duty at ocean observatories. Next year, University of Hawaii researchers will 
move a retired coaxial cable 25 km to a site north of Hawaii that they have 
been monitoring with ships.

 More than 22,000 km of early fiber-optic cables are being retired from 
telecommunication, says Fred K. Duennebier of the University of Hawaii. This 
resource might become available to oceanographers, he says. Such cables would 
transmit physical and biological data-200 times faster than coaxial cables 
can-from the Atlantic and the Pacific to shore laboratories.

 But plans to wire the deep go beyond old telephone cables. In September, a 
California observatory received federal funding to lay the first long run of 
high-bandwidth, fiber-optic cable from land to deep seafloor. The 60 km of 
cable will connect sensors resting 1,200 m below the Pacific's surface to the 
shore facility of the Monterey Accelerated Research System (MARS) ocean 
observatory.

 Canada announced this year that it plans to build the Victoria Experimental 
Network Under the Sea (VENUS). This cable-linked array of sensors will rest in 
the waters off Victoria and Vancouver, British Columbia.

 Both MARS and VENUS will test instruments for future projects.

 The most ambitious project planned so far is the North East Pacific 
Time-series Undersea Networked Experiments (NEPTUNE). It will monitor the 
largest volume of ocean and seafloor of any observatory. A 3,000-km network of 
fiber-optic cables will connect myriad sensors across the Juan de Fuca tectonic 
plate off the coast of Washington State and British Colombia.

 While Canada recently committed $30 million to NEPTUNE, scientists in the 
United Sates anxiously await a decision by Congress next year about whether it 
will fund a 5-year, $200 million budget for building NEPTUNE and other new 
ocean observatories. This initiative is the biggest in oceanography since the 
ocean-drilling program was established in the 1980s.

 At the recent Washington, D.C., meeting to discuss the initiative, Robert S. 
Detrick of Woods Hole reminded his colleagues, "We are at a very important 
point . . . as we switch from expeditionary work to a continual presence in the 
ocean."

 Deep Biosphere

 A hidden, watery world exists beneath the oceans' floors

 Beyond the limits of most of the latest ocean observatories lies yet another 
frontier: a watery realm below the seafloor. Earlier this year, researchers 
made the first expedition to study life in this deep biosphere. They found 
microbes in cores drilled 420 meters into the seafloor off Peru at depths 
between 150 and 5,300 meters. These microbes might represent as much as 
two-thirds of Earth's entire bacterial biomass. Scientists propose that similar 
life might exist below oceans on other planets and some moons.

 Before discovering life in the deep biosphere, marine geologists knew from 
seismic and drilling observations that the seafloor is porous and filled with 
seawater. Geologists also knew that this buried seawater, or subseafloor 
groundwater, moves heat from beneath the seafloor to the oceans. They wanted to 
learn how fast this groundwater moves, so they installed meterwide 
observatories on top of boreholes drilled into the subseafloor. The boreholes 
are about 25 centimeters in diameter and 100 to 1,000 m deep. Sensors dangling 
into the holes continuously record the groundwater pressure and temperature.

 The observatories are called circulation obviation retrofit kits, or CORKs. 
Soon after their 1991 debut, the observatories revealed that cooling seawater 
can move quickly through several kilometers of subseafloor. The scientists 
reached this conclusion when they measured similar temperatures in rock 
formations that they had expected to hold different amounts of heat.

"Fluids are whistling around down in this subseafloor ocean," says Earl E. 
Davis, a geophysicist at the Geological Survey of Canada in Sidney, British 
Columbia.

 Researchers were surprised to find that their instruments also recorded far 
more subtle and transient events, such as the tides above them. "Those [events] 
actually propagate into the subseafloor, and we can watch those," says Davis. 
As sea levels or even atmospheric pressures rise and fall, the subseafloor 
changes shape, he says.

 Scientists are also using CORKs to watch what happens to the subseafloor 
during earthquakes and movements of tectonic plates in the seafloor. Because 
this environment is completely saturated with water, CORK measurements are free 
from water table fluctuations and precipitation effects that distort borehole 
measurements on land.

"We're able to look at some of the processes-like earthquake rupture processes 
or strain buildup before, during, and immediately after an earthquake-that 
can't be [observed] otherwise," explains Davis. He and his colleagues reported 
these findings in the October 2001 Journal of Geophysical Research.

 Last month, the ship JOIDES Resolution installed two more CORKS in a 
seismically active area off Costa Rica-bringing the worldwide total to 19. 
According to Keir Becker, a geophysicist at the University of Miami, scientists 
aboard the ship also retrieved data from the deepest borehole ever 
instrumented. The hole penetrates 2,111 m into the seafloor beneath 3,500 m of 
ocean.

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .

 To subscribe to Science News (print), go to .

 To sign up for the free weekly e-LETTER from Science News, go to .


