His-and-Her Hunger Pangs: Gender affects the brain's response to food: Science 
News Online, July 6, 2002

> His-and-Her Hunger Pangs: Gender affects the brain's response to food

 Kristin Cobb

 Women have higher rates of obesity and eating disorders than men do, but 
scientists don't know why. New findings offer clues to the root of sex 
differences in eating behaviors. The study showed that men's and women's brains 
react differently to hunger, as well as to satiation.

 This is the first research to document sex-specific brain activity related to 
eating, says study author Angelo Del Parigi of the Phoenix branch of the 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). The 
report appears in the June American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

 Using positron emission tomography (PET), Del Parigi and his colleagues at 
NIDDK monitored the brains of 22 men and 22 women. A PET scan identifies areas 
where there are surges in blood flow that reflect activity. The scientists 
performed the scans after the participants endured a 36-hour fast and again 
after they drank a liquid meal to quench their hunger.

 The scans revealed many similarities between the men's and women's brains 
during hunger and satiation. But they also found significant differences.

 For example, when hungry, men had more activity than women did in the 
paralimbic region of the brain, an area involved in processing emotion. When 
sated, women had more activity than men did in the occipital cortex, the seat 
of vision, and men had more activity than women did in an area of the 
prefrontal cortex associated with feelings of satisfaction.

 These and other results of the study hint at several specific ways that men 
and women may process hunger and satiation differently and how these 
differences could influence their food intake. For example, men may derive a 
more rewarding feeling from eating than women do, the researchers speculate.

"It will take many more experiments to find the neurophysiological explanations 
of sex differences in eating behavior," Del Parigi emphasizes. But he hopes his 
group's research will spur further studies.

"The area is under intense investigation right now," says neuroscientist Yijun 
Liu of the University of Florida in Gainesville. Liu notes that the NIDDK team 
turned up no gender differences in the hypothalamus, the brain area responsible 
for basic physiological responses to hunger and satiation. The researchers also 
found no gender differences in blood-chemical signals controlled by the 
hypothalamus.

 Rather, he says, the newly observed brain patterns suggest that men and women 
differ in how they think and feel about what they eat rather than in the way 
they process food compounds.

"This is a very important finding for the future study of obesity," Liu 
concludes. He says the work should encourage scientists to recognize that 
gender is central to obesity and eating disorders and to develop 
sex-appropriate treatments.


