Hot Spuds: Golden path to acrylamide in food: Science News Online, Oct. 5, 2002

> Hot Spuds: Golden path to acrylamide in food

 Janet Raloff

 The process that imparts a golden hue to french fries and bread crusts also 
laces such foods with acrylamide, new studies indicate. That chemical causes 
cancer in laboratory animals.

 Though acrylamide's human toxicity remains unknown, the Food and Drug 
Administration this week announced plans to study ways to limit its formation 
in foods.

 The first report of acrylamide in food occurred last April in Sweden. Since 
then, researchers in Europe have found it in a broad variety of baked, roasted, 
and fried fare, especially potatoes (SN: 8/24/02, p. 120: Available to 
subscribers at .). The big puzzle has been how this substance, a building block 
of some plastics, forms during cooking.

 One clue, four studies now show, is the so-called Maillard reaction, a 
flavor-enhancing browning that occurs when amino acids and sugars meet at high 
temperatures.

 When scientists began searching for a source of food's acrylamide, Maillard 
chemistry immediately came to mind, says Donald S. Mottram of the University of 
Reading in England. The reaction requires high temperatures and an amino acid. 
This amino acid could supply nitrogen, an ingredient of acrylamide, Mottram 
says. Indeed, he notes, the structure of the amino acid asparagine resembles 
acrylamide, and asparagine is potatoes' primary unbound amino acid.

 In the Oct. 3 Nature, Mottram's team and another from the Nestle Research 
Center in Lausanne, Switzerland, independently report cooking up acrylamide 
from asparagine heated with glucose, a simple sugar found in most foods. 
Addition of a little water tripled the acrylamide produced by heating just 
asparagine and glucose and yielded more than 1,700 times as much acrylamide as 
does heating asparagine by itself, the Nestle group reports.

 A week earlier, at an analytical chemistry symposium in Los Angeles sponsored 
by the professional group AOAC, two other laboratories also reported creating 
acrylamide from asparagine and glucose. One lab is at a Canadian government 
food-research agency in Ottawa, Ont., and the other is at Procter & Gamble in 
Cincinnati.

 The Canadian team mixed pure asparagine with glucose in a ratio matching 
what's typical in potatoes, then added water and cooked the soup for 10 
minutes. No acrylamide appeared until cooking temperatures exceeded 120@C and 
the sugar started browning, says James F. Lawrence, the agency's director.

 Acrylamide formation peaked at 175@C. Even then, he notes, "the yield was 
low-a little under 1 percent" of the final mix. The scientists report a similar 
result in heated potatoes. Mottram says his July experiments revealed the same 
trend.

 Since the unbound-asparagine content of potatoes can vary 10-fold, depending 
on variety, Lawrence posits that restaurants might someday select potatoes with 
low asparagine values for making french fries.

 However, the Nestle data reveal a more complicated picture. Richard H. Stadler 
and his colleagues tinkered with their acrylamide recipe by substituting three 
other common amino acids for the asparagine and swapping other sugars, 
including sucrose, for the glucose. Baked at 180@C for 30 minutes, these 
alternative formulas also yielded significant amounts of acrylamide.

 Nestle's findings challenge the notion of any "quick fix" for acrylamide in 
foods, says Michael Pariza of the University of Wisconsin^-Madison, "because 
we're not going to get rid of amino acids or sugars." He adds, however, that 
his group is pursuing "some pretty good leads" toward short-circuiting 
acrylamide's formation from those ingredients.

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .


