Cooking Up a Carcinogen: Science News Online, Aug. 24, 2002

> Cooking Up a Carcinogen

 Should we worry about all that acrylamide in our diet?

 Janet Raloff

 Turns out that hamburgers have it. So do french fries, crackers, breakfast 
cereals, pizza, fried fish, cauliflower au gratin, minced chicken, cooked 
beets, potato pancakes, powdered chocolate, and coffee. It's acrylamide. Though 
best known as a carcinogenic and neurotoxic building block of many plastics, 
scientists are now discovering it in more and more foods. Oddly enough, it 
seems to be getting there not as a chemical contaminant but as the product of 
common cooking practices. The toxic compound forms during chemical reactions 
between ingredients in a wide variety of foods as they fry, bake, or undergo 
other forms of heating.

 Four months ago, scientists at the Swedish National Food Administration in 
Stockholm and Stockholm University announced the first detection of acrylamide 
in a host of fried and baked goods, especially potato chips and french fries 
(SN: 5/4/02, p. 277: ). Since then, researchers elsewhere have launched a 
feverish campaign to identify what other foods carry the chemical.

 Already, labs in several other countries have confirmed the Swedish findings. 
To date, of the 100 or so foods tested, several dozen appear to routinely cook 
up the carcinogen.

 Scientists don't know why acrylamide forms in food or how it's escaped notice 
for so long. Nevertheless, as a moderately potent carcinogen in rodents, its 
apparent prevalence in the food supply suggests that it could pose a threat. 
Then again, junk-food addicts who down mountains of chips don't appear to be 
succumbing in droves to cancer nor suffering tingling fingers and toes-the 
classic symptoms of acrylamide neuropathy.

 This has led some toxicologists to question whether body processes disarm the 
poison. After all, Homo sapiens may have been eating acrylamide since people 
first tamed fire.

 But, prompted in part by a June directive from the World Health Organization 
in Geneva, food scientists aren't taking any chances. They're developing an 
international research network to investigate the new concern and determine 
whether it's much ado about nothing or a serious public health problem.

 Crippled cows

 Cooking's creation of acrylamide might never have been revealed were it not 
for construction of the Hallandsas railway tunnel in southern Sweden. Blasted 
through a rocky ridge, the tunnel developed water leaks in 1997. Crews 
attempted to repair the fractures by pumping in an acrylamide-based liquid that 
hardens into a waterproof plastic.

 Much of the liquid failed to harden, however, and instead seeped with the 
leaking water into an adjacent river. The acrylamide killed fish there and 
paralyzed cows drinking tainted water.

 Concerned about the tunnel crewmembers who had been exposed to the flowing 
acrylamide for 2 months, Margareta Tornqvist and her colleagues at Stockholm 
University surveyed the workers' blood for telltale markers of the poison. And 
they found them: fragments of acrylamide bound to hemoglobin in the workers' 
red blood cells.

 To the scientists' amazement, they found the same acrylamide fragments on 
hemoglobin from people with no known exposure to the chemical. Though 
concentrations of altered hemoglobin in these volunteers were only a few 
percent of those in the workers, Tornqvist worried that they might reflect 
exposure in the general population.

 Bound chemical fragments, so-called adducts, pose no apparent hazard on 
hemoglobin, Tornqvist emphasizes. But as markers of exposure to a chemical, 
they signal that a person's DNA has probably acquired the same adducts. Unless 
repaired, DNA adducts can cause genetic damage and cancer. Indeed, by damaging 
DNA, acrylamide causes cancer in animals.

 Acrylamide forms when tobacco burns, but that observation didn't explain the 
acrylamide adducts in the nonsmoking volunteers. So, the Stockholm scientists 
decided to explore other high-temperature processes, such as cooking, as 
possible sources of the adducts.

 Eden Tareke, for example, fed some rats fried food. She added water to dry, 
protein-rich rat chow that contained no acrylamide and shaped the doughy 
material into thin pancakes. She let some air dry at room temperature and fried 
the rest for 2 to 5 minutes. Tareke then provided each preparation to a group 
of rats for 2 months.

 In June 2000, Tareke, Tornqvist, and their colleagues reported that the fried 
pancakes contained 100 to 200 micrograms of acrylamide per kilogram of chow and 
that the rats eating them developed acrylamide adducts on hemoglobin. Rodents 
eating unfried pancakes had only one-tenth that concentration of acrylamide 
adducts.

 Test recipes

 To investigate whether acrylamide taints people's diets, the Stockholm group 
then looked at hamburger, which before cooking showed none of the chemical. "At 
that point," Tornqvist explains, "we thought [acrylamide] formed from protein" 
when it's cooked, as does another class of carcinogens, heterocyclic amines 
(SN: 4/24/99, p. 264: ). Sure enough, the researchers found that frying 
introduced 14 to 23 Mg of acrylamide per kilogram of burger.

 For a test of low-protein food, Tareke turned to potatoes. To her surprise, 
the undetectable amount of acrylamide in the raw vegetable rose to as much as 
200 Mg/kg in mashed potatoes, 660 Mg/kg in french fries, 780 Mg/kg in hash 
browns, and 3,800 Mg/kg in chips.

 Tornqvist's group also tested fish, poultry, and pork. Again, all cooked up 
acrylamide-but typically only some 10 to 50 Mg/kg. In April, the Swedish 
National Food Administration announced some of these results and its own data 
on potatoes, breads, cereals, and various fried foods.

 The university scientists next tested other starchy foods and more cooking 
methods. They found that baking creates acrylamide in breads and crackers. 
Microwaving left potatoes with plenty of acrylamide, though boiling appeared to 
generate none. A full report of the provocative findings appears in the Aug. 14 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.

 One of the biggest impacts of the April announcement was that it jump-started 
research by others, such as chemist Michael W. Pariza of the Food Research 
Institute at the University of Wisconsin^-Madison.

 For the past 4 months, he's been looking for acrylamide in cooked foods, too. 
"And indeed, as have others, we found that it's there," he says. "What we now 
need to know is: Does it pose a risk, and is there anything we can do to limit 
it?"

 Does it matter?

 Robert G. Tardiff knows acrylamide well. Water-treatment plants add the 
chemical to drinking water because it precipitates out contaminants. Tardiff 
was the senior toxicologist in the Environmental Protection Agency's Office of 
Drinking Water during the 1970s, when it established a safe concentration of 
the chemical, 1 part per trillion in water leaving plants.

 Most of the toxicity data on which his group had based its regulation came 
from animals that had inhaled acrylamide, as a plastics worker might. However, 
those data probably produced a conservative limit. Tardiff explains that for 
most compounds, "you get more chemical per unit bodyweight into the bloodstream 
from inhalation than from ingestion or [skin] contact."

 Tardiff is now a consultant under contract to the Snack Foods Association of 
Alexandria, Va. Suggesting that acrylamide in food may be harmless, he says 
that other compounds in the diet might bind acrylamide, neutralize its 
toxicity, or reverse any adverse effects.

 What's more, he says, the hemoglobin adducts that researchers such as 
Tornqvist have found could be a good thing. Blood adducts "might well be a 
previously overlooked means by which the body keeps acrylamide away from 
sensitive tissues," he says. Hemoglobin circulates in the body for only 120 
days before it-and any adducts on it-would disappear, Tardiff explains.

 Overall, substances that cause cancer in rodent tests frequently haven't been 
linked to cancer in people, notes Lois S. Gold, director of the Carcinogenic 
Potency Project at the University of California, Berkeley. In many cases, she 
suspects, rodent cancers may be triggered only by high experimental doses, 
which people never encounter.

 Over the past 2 decades, she's analyzed roughly 6,000 animal studies to 
compile a database on some 1,500 chemicals. More than half of the compounds 
caused cancer in rodents.

 Gold says that against the enormous background of chemicals that people 
encounter, any single rodent carcinogen is not likely to be an important source 
of human cancer. Why? Perhaps typical doses of chemicals that people take in 
are too small to cause cancer or the mechanisms that trigger cancer in rodents 
don't operate in people. Nevertheless, she maintains, data on the potency of 
rodent carcinogens could set priorities for which compounds most warrant 
investigation into their mechanisms of action.

 Toward that end, her group has developed a carcinogen potency index, the HERP 
index, which represents human exposure divided by rodent potency.

 Prompted by the new Swedish estimate that people consume perhaps 40 Mg of 
acrylamide per day, Gold has calculated a HERP score indicating that such a 
human intake is 0.015 percent of the body-weight-adjusted dose that gave cancer 
to 50 percent of exposed rats. She notes comparable HERP scores for average 
U.S. intake of several known rodent carcinogens: catechol and furfural from 
coffee, hydrazine from mushrooms, and caffeic acid from lettuce. Those figures 
are well below the HERP score for exposures to formaldehyde and ethanol, Gold 
emphasizes.

 That's not to say that people should dismiss acrylamide, Gold says. The 
chemical's HERP score, in fact, is somewhat higher than average for all the 
rodent carcinogens analyzed so far. So, she too welcomes more research into 
acrylamide's biological actions.

 What's a diner to do?

 Until acrylamide's human risks are sorted out, Food and Drug Administration 
Deputy Commissioner Lester M. Crawford says there's no reason people should 
change their diets, as long as they're following FDA's current recommendation 
to "eat a healthy, balanced diet consisting of a wide variety of foods from a 
variety of sources."

 Indeed, the Washington, D.C.^-based American Institute for Cancer Research 
notes that the foods with the highest acrylamide concentrations-potato chips 
and fries-"are high-fat, high-calorie, nutritionally poor options" that "have 
been convincingly linked to greater cancer risk."

 Michael F. Jacobson, executive director of the Center for Science in the 
Public Interest, a public-advocacy group also based in Washington, D.C., agrees 
that acrylamide gives people yet another reason for "cutting back on their 
french fry consumption." When his center sent samples of fast foods and grocery 
items to Swedish researchers, the tests confirmed that acrylamide is present in 
U.S. foods.

 Rather than attempt to cull from the diet every food linked to acrylamide, "we 
should aim to eat less of the most contaminated, least nutritious foods," says 
Jacobson. "For instance, I wouldn't give up eating something like Cheerios, 
even though our data show there's a little [acrylamide] in there," he says. 
"It's still basically a healthful, whole-grain, low-sugar food."

 Jacobson's assessment echoes many others: Acrylamide in food "isn't something 
that people should panic about."


