Script Delivery: New World writing takes disputed turn: Science News Online, 
Dec. 7, 2002

> Script Delivery: New World writing takes disputed turn

 Bruce Bower

 Archaeologists have applauded recent excavations at an ancient settlement in 
southeastern Mexico that have yielded an array of artifacts from the Olmec 
civilization. However, controversy has flared with the claim that a few of 
these artifacts display remnants of the first written language in the New 
World, dating to around 650 B. C.

 A cylindrical ceramic seal and four pieces of a jade plaque were unearthed at 
the San Andres site in 1997 and 1998. Symbols carved on those finds belong to a 
writing system based on the spoken Olmec tongue, contend Mary E.D. Pohl of 
Florida State University in Tallahassee and her colleagues. Olmec writing 
provided a foundation for scripts developed by other regional civilizations, 
including the Maya, beginning at least 250 years later, Pohl's team proposes in 
the Dec. 6 Science.

"These [San Andres] artifacts, which predate others containing writing, reveal 
that key aspects of [ancient New World] scripts were present in Olmec writing," 
the scientists conclude.

 Critics of the report, such as Harvard University's David Stuart, say that 
it's hard to discern grammatical writing in a handful of suggestive symbols. 
These symbols could simply have been drawings of objects, people, or gods, 
according to Stuart, who specializes in ancient Maya writing. Previous finds 
have established that the Olmec people used pictorial writing.

 Pohl's group discovered the seal and plaque shards in a deposit of refuse from 
festival and feasting activities at the Olmec site. They dated the finds using 
radiocarbon analyses of charcoal in the deposit.

 Inscriptions on the seal and plaque display important elements of later 
scripts employed by civilizations in Mexico and Central America, the 
researchers say. These include a mix of language-related symbols and drawings, 
as well as references to a sacred calendar and specific kings.

 According to the scientists, the seal carries two sets of symbols emanating 
from the beak of a bird to show that the signs represent spoken words. Pohl and 
her coworkers interpret these hieroglyphics as representing the name "King 3 
Ajaw." The Olmec used "3 Ajaw" to refer to both the name of a day in a 260-day 
calendar and a king born on that day, just as nearby cultures did in their 
ensuing scripts, the researchers add.

 Pohl suspects that the cylindrical seal was used to imprint clothing with the 
King 3 Ajaw symbol.

 The researchers couldn't translate the two complete hieroglyphic signs and two 
possible partial ones on the plaque fragments. Nonetheless, these signs show 
similarities to the writing of groups such as the Maya, they argue.

 Pohl's position receives partial support from John Justeson of the State 
University of New York at Albany and Terrence Kaufman of the University of 
Pittsburgh. At least one of the San Andres plaques-but not the seal-bears 
symbols that were part of a writing system, Justeson and Kaufman assert in a 
joint e-mail to Science News. This finding reinforces earlier suggestions that 
a stone monument at another Olmec site contains writing that dates to about 500 
B. C., they hold.

 Olmec researcher Michael D. Coe of Yale University regards the new finds as 
"an early kind of writing." However, it will take more discoveries to confirm 
that the symbols represented speech, he says.

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .

 To subscribe to Science News (print), go to .

 To sign up for the free weekly e-LETTER from Science News, go to .


