Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 10/12/96 October 12, 1996

 Smokers risk vision loss in twilight years

 S. Sternberg

"Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" used to be just an old nightclub lament. Now, with 
the publication of two reports that strongly link cigarette smoking to vision 
loss, the phrase seems prophetic.

 The studies show that long-term, heavy smokers have more than twice the normal 
risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a disorder in which the region 
of the retina that captures images in the center of the visual field breaks 
down. The leading cause of vision loss and newly diagnosed blindness in people 
age 65 and older, AMD afflicts 1.7 million people in the United States.

"It can make it very difficult to perform the activities of daily living -- 
including driving, reading, and watching TV," says William G. Christen of 
Harvard Medical School in Boston. Christen is coauthor of a report on AMD and 
smoking in 21,157 men in the Physicians' Health Study. That article, along with 
a comparable report on AMD among women in the Nurses' Health Study, appears in 
the Oct. 9 Journal of the American Medical Association.

 Doctors have yet to determine why AMD occurs. Previous research has implicated 
low concentrations of zinc, vitamin E, and beta carotene in the blood; these 
antioxidants sop up harmful molecules called free radicals. Poor blood flow to 
the retina may also be a cause. Smoking ranks as a risk factor because it 
reduces concentrations of these antioxidants and impairs circulation, Christen 
says.

 Once AMD begins, the pinhead-size macula develops yellow spots and lumps 
called drusen. Drusen apparently accumulate because garbage disposal cells, 
called phagocytes, fail to clear away cellular debris. In the worst cases, 
leaky blood vessels worm their way into the retina and flood the macula. The 
eye's efforts to repair itself lead to scarring, which only makes matters worse.

 Doctors lack an effective means of halting this process. Although laser 
surgery can seal off wayward blood vessels, it only delays the inevitable, 
studies have shown. Peripheral vision may survive, but faces blur into 
featureless ovals. The central words in any sentence disappear.

 In such a situation, prevention becomes a person's best defense--hence the 
rising interest in the link between AMD and smoking.

 Christen and his coworkers probed for such a link in the huge study of male 
physicians, age 40 to 84 when the study began in 1982. Relying on medical 
records and questionnaires with detailed questions on smoking, they identified 
268 cases of AMD. The study found that two-pack-a-day smokers had 2.5 times the 
disease risk of men who had never smoked -- and the longer the men smoked, the 
higher their risk.

 Johanna M. Seddon, also of Harvard Medical School, and her coauthors focused 
on the 31,843 women in the Nurses' Health Study, who were 50 to 59 at the 
outset in 1980. Their results were virtually identical. Women who smoked two 
packs a day had a 2.4 times greater risk of AMD than women who never smoked. 
The study also found that much of the excess risk persisted, even in women who 
had quit smoking 15 years ago. "Women who choose not to smoke can reduce their 
risk of developing this disease by more than half," Seddon asserts.

 Saying no to cigarettes "may reduce the loss of vision and may ensure a 
brighter view of the world for years to come," conclude Ronald Klein and 
Barbara E. K. Klein of the University of Wisconsin Medical School in Madison in 
an accompanying editorial aptly titled, "Smoke gets in your eyes, too."


