Male Pill on the Horizon: Drug disables mouse sperm but wears off quickly: 
Science News Online, Dec. 14, 2002

> Male Pill on the Horizon: Drug disables mouse sperm but wears off quickly

 Carol Marzuola

 A practical birth control pill for men has long been on medicine's wish list. 
Now, researchers have discovered that a new oral drug created to ease a genetic 
disorder could have contraceptive benefits.

 To date, the only government-approved male birth control methods are condom 
use and vasectomy (SN: 9/30/00, p. 222: ). Experimental hormone-based 
contraceptives, such as testosterone-progestin injections, block men's sperm 
production. But these can take up to 10 weeks to become effective and don't 
wear off for months after they're discontinued.

 The promising drug, known as N-butyldeoxynojirimycin or N B-DNJ, might offer 
another choice, say researchers at the University of Oxford in England. They 
report that in low doses, the drug prevents sperm cells from developing 
normally in mice. Moreover, N B-DNJ has relatively few other side effects, and 
its contraceptive action is readily reversed.

 The Oxford researchers stumbled upon N B-DNJ's potential birth control effects 
while exploring its potential use in treating diseases of the nervous system. 
During that research, male mice exposed to the drug became temporarily 
infertile. "So, we started a study to look at what this drug was doing to 
male-mouse fertility," says Frances M. Platt.

 She and her colleagues spiked mouse feed with varying doses of N B-DNJ and 
gave it to male mice for 5 weeks. A control group received unspiked 
nourishment. In mating tests that followed, those females coupling with the 
control males produced normal litters. Treated males-even those administered 
low doses of the drug-didn't impregnate females.

 The researchers found that N B-DNJ damages sperm nuclei and mitochondria, 
impairing the cells' swimming. The drug also thwarts the formation of the 
acrosome-a cap on the sperm's head that normally enables the gamete to 
penetrate an egg.

 These effects are reversible. Sperm of the mice treated with any dose of N 
B-DNJ returned to normal by 3 weeks after the researchers stopped administering 
the drug. "The males have to go through one round of making new sperm cells, 
and then they acquire fertility again," says Platt. The pups sired by these 
mice grew to adulthood with no obvious abnormalities, report Platt and her 
colleagues in an upcoming Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 In another test, male mice regained fertility even after taking N B-DNJ for 6 
months. "For a laboratory mouse, that is a substantial portion of its 
lifetime," which normally lasts 2 years, says research-team leader Aarnoud C. 
van der Spoel.

 Last month, the European Union approved a version of N B-DNJ called miglustat 
for Gaucher's disease, a debilitating genetic disorder. But any researchers who 
aspire to turn N B-DNJ into a contraceptive will have to jump other hurdles, 
says Diana Blithe of the National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development in Bethesda, Md. For example, use of N B-DNJ by healthy men for 
birth control will require further scrutiny of the known toxic effects, such as 
damage to sperm internal parts.

"Whether or not this compound will lead to contraception depends on its safety 
profile," says Blithe.

 N B-DNJ appears less risky than some other promising drugs that lack its good 
features, says Ronald Swerdloff of the Harbor-UCLA Research and Education 
Institute in Torrance, Calif. He adds, N B-DNJ "is a long way from a final, 
tested product, but it seems to be an exciting lead."

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .

 To subscribe to Science News (print), go to .

 To sign up for the free weekly e-LETTER from Science News, go to .


