Identity Check: Elusive neutrinos morph on Earth, as in space: Science News 
Online, Dec. 14, 2002

> Identity Check: Elusive neutrinos morph on Earth, as in space

 Peter Weiss

 For nearly half a century, physicists have scanned nuclear reactors' radiation 
for evidence that the wispy fundamental particles of antimatter known as 
antineutrinos undergo bizarre identity transformations. Now, an international 
team working at an antineutrino detector in Japan reports that it has observed 
a particle shortfall that it attributes to this subatomic morphing act.

 By indicating a type of particle behavior not included in conventional 
particle physics, the new findings challenge the prevailing theory, or standard 
model, of that field. The results also build upon recent observations of 
similar transformations of neutrinos-the normal-matter counterparts of 
antineutrinos-emitted by the sun. Given those earlier findings, the new 
measurements indicate that unstable identities are characteristic of all 
neutrino types, many scientists say.

"We are now closing in on the detailed properties of neutrinos," comments 
solar-neutrino researcher Arthur B. McDonald of Queen's University in Kingston, 
Ontario. "This is a major result."

 Neutrinos come in three types, or flavors-electron neutrinos, muon neutrinos, 
and tau neutrinos-and each of those has both matter and antimatter forms. Since 
the late 1950s, some theorists have predicted that as neutrinos travel long 
distances, they change from one flavor into another. "It's like a lion running 
along, morphing into a tiger, then into a leopard, and then back into a lion," 
says experimental team member John G. Learned of the University of Hawaii in 
Honolulu.

 In 1998, researchers reported the first solid evidence of such neutrino 
transfigurations, which are called oscillations. The scientists were tracking 
neutrinos created in Earth's atmosphere by cosmic rays hitting atoms (SN: 
6/13/98, p. 374). The more recent solar-neutrino observations appeared to 
clinch the case for oscillations but couldn't completely dismiss concerns that 
poorly understood properties of the sun itself might explain the data (SN: 
5/11/02, p. 301: Available to subscribers at ).

 Because antineutrinos can switch identities, just as neutrinos do, physicists 
also see the results as evidence of the consistency of physical laws in the 
universe, comments neutrino theorist S. Peter Rosen of the Department of 
Energy, in Germantown, Md., which partially funds the new experiment.

 The team, which includes Learned and 91 other physicists, is performing its 
experiment at a huge, underground detector known as the Kamioka Liquid 
Scintillator Antineutrino Detector, or KamLAND. It's located near the city of 
Toyama. The team looks for light flashes caused by electron antineutrinos 
emitted by 69 distant nuclear power reactors in Japan and Korea.

 Suspended about a kilometer belowground in a mine, the heart of the detector 
is a weather balloon big enough to hold a school bus. The balloon is filled 
with some 1,000 tons of liquid, radiation-activated organic chemicals. These 
compounds emit light, or scintillate, when struck by fast-moving electrons such 
as those generated during complex reactions triggered when electron 
antineutrinos strike protons in the detector fluid.

 After 145 days of observations at KamLAND, the experimenters report detecting 
only 63 percent of the electron antineutrinos that they had expected from 
calculations based on the reactors' output. Their tally indicates that the 
missing antineutrinos morphed into muon or tau antineutrinos en route. The team 
announced its results in Japan on Dec. 6.

 The new antineutrino findings parallel what's been seen with solar neutrinos, 
notes Giorgio Gratta of Stanford University, a KamLAND co-spokesman. The data 
indicate that oscillations are "a property of neutrinos and not of the sun," he 
says.

**************** If you have a comment on this article that you would like 
considered for publication in Science News, please send it to .

 To subscribe to Science News (print), go to .

 To sign up for the free weekly e-LETTER from Science News, go to .


