Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 10/19/96 October 19, 1996

 New Analysis Links Abortion, Cancer

by Steve Sternberg

 Abortion is not only the most controversial elective surgery in the United 
States, it is also the most common. Each year, U.S. doctors terminate 1.6 
million unwanted, abnormal, or risky pregnancies. One reason for the 
procedure's medical acceptance is its relative safety. Legal induced abortion 
is 12 times safer than childbirth itself.

 Now, a new study indicates that induced abortion may ultimately harm some 
women.

 Four scientists -- three of whom say that they have long opposed abortion and 
a fourth who favors a woman's right to choose -- say they have "overwhelming" 
evidence that women who have had an abortion raise their risk of breast cancer 
by one-third.

 Other researchers rushed to dispute the study's conclusions.

 Joel Brind of Baruch College of the City University of New York and his 
colleagues at Pennsylvania State University in Hershey base their breast cancer 
assertion on a combined analysis of 23 previously reported studies involving 
over 60,000 women. Most of the studies showed a weak association between 
abortion and breast cancer, but viewed individually each study raised more 
questions than it answered (SN: 11/5/94, p. 245).

 By combining data from all available studies regardless of their quality -- a 
method called metanalysis -- the researchers sought to derive maximum 
statistical information without distorting the results. "We really wanted to 
know whether there was an increased risk associated with abortion," asserts 
researcher Joan Summy-Long.

 The detailed analysis was reported in the October British Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health. Although the researchers found a heightened 
risk of breast cancer among women who have had an abortion, the increase was 
slight compared to the doubled lifetime risk faced by women who have a strong 
family history of cancer, those who have never had a child, and those who 
waited until age 30 to have their first child, says epidemiologist Clark Heath 
of the American Cancer Society.

 Nevertheless, the researchers predict that the 800,000 first abortions now 
performed each year in the United States will lead to a "public health tragedy" 
-- an epidemic of breast cancer that, by the year 2040, could add 24,500 cases 
to the 184,300 now diagnosed annually.

 The authors also contend that the apparent link between abortion and breast 
cancer emerging from prior studies has not been adequately acknowledged. "The 
potential of induced abortion as a breast cancer risk continues largely to be 
minimized," they state.

"We are very concerned about women who are contemplating having an induced 
abortion," Summy-Long says. "We are hoping [the findings] will be part of the 
information they get when they are making their decision."

 Other researchers reject the results of the metanalysis. Among other things, 
they challenge the validity of using studies that hinge on a breast cancer 
patient's willingness to admit that she has had an abortion. In February, the 
National Cancer Institute published its own assessment of more than 30 studies 
on the issue, concluding that "there is no evidence of a direct relationship 
between breast cancer and abortion."

 John Bailar, a University of Chicago biostatistician and adviser to the New 
England Journal of Medicine, objects to metanalysis itself, saying it is 
impossible to draw a precise measure of risk from trials that vary in design 
and focus on different groups of individuals.

"My feeling is that there is very little here that isn't already known, but 
it's been misinterpreted," Bailar says. "Even if the effect is very well 
established, I would expect it to be quite small, just a few percent."

 He says the dire warning about an epidemic of breast cancer is based on a 
potentially misleading statistic -- that a woman's lifetime risk of breast 
cancer is about 12 percent.

"It's a figure thrown around by people who want to scare women," Bailar 
asserts. "It is based on the assumption that every woman is going to live to an 
old age. But a woman who dies at 60 isn't going to get breast cancer at 70. 
Hearing that figure makes me wonder what kind of snake oil these people are 
trying to sell."


