Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 10/26/96 October 26, 1996

 Genetic discrimination: A prejudice is born

 S. Sternberg

 She is unusually tall, with an expansive reach and long, reed-thin fingers and 
toes--traits marking a condition so distinctive that ancient physicians named 
it arachnodactyly, after the Greek word for spider. But it was her honesty, not 
her skeletal disorder, that nearly cost the woman her job.

 She was fired the day after she told her employer, a law firm, that she had 
the genetic anomaly now known as Marfan syndrome. She got her job back only 
after she threatened to haul her employer into court.

 This story is true. And although the woman's name has been withheld to protect 
her from further discrimination, she is not alone. A study in the Oct. 25 
Science indicates that nearly one-fourth of members of support groups for a 
variety of genetic disorders report that they have experienced discrimination.

"I'm inclined to believe that although the numbers may vary in other studies, 
this is a problem our society needs to deal with," says E. Virginia Lapham of 
Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., an author of the report.

 The study, funded by the government's Human Genome Project in Bethesda, Md., 
is the most extensive attempt so far to document genetic discrimination. 
Although just 3 percent of children are born with rare genetic anomalies like 
Marfan syndrome, researchers say the pool of potential victims of 
discrimination will expand each time science pinpoints a gene, or group of 
genes, that raises a person's risk of developing such illnesses as heart 
disease or breast cancer.

 Measuring the true extent of the problem may prove challenging, however, 
because of widespread fears about the misuse of genetic information should it 
fall into the hands of insurers or employers.

 To locate people who might be willing to cooperate in such a study, Lapham and 
her colleagues contacted more than 100 support groups, with a combined total of 
585,000 members, and asked for volunteers. Ultimately, only 332 people from 44 
states and the District of Columbia agreed to participate. Each person was 
asked, among other things, whether he or she or a family member had had 
problems with health insurance, life insurance, or employment.

 The researchers found that 25 percent of the volunteers believed that genetic 
information had been used to deny them or members of their families life 
insurance; 22 percent believed the information had been similarly misused by 
health insurers; and 13 percent believed the information had led to job 
discrimination.

 The study confirms what many researchers have long suspected, says Kathy L. 
Hudson, policy coordinator for the Human Genome Project. "People believe 
genetic information has been used to discriminate against them." This concern 
already presents an obstacle to genetic research, she adds. "One of the 
principal reasons people give for not participating in studies is the fear that 
this information will get out and be used against them."

 Richard Coorsh of the Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA) in 
Washington, D.C., notes that the study reflects perceived--not necessarily 
actual--discrimination. "Perceptions are difficult to quantify," he says. "It's 
difficult to know any more about this without checking the particulars of each 
case." He says that as far as he knows, no member of HIAA plans to require that 
applicants take genetic tests.

 Martha Volner of the Alliance of Genetic Support Groups in Chevy Chase, Md., 
which collaborated on the study, says insurers don't need genetic test results 
in order to discriminate. "They can require you to submit 5 years of medical 
records, they can ask what your family members have died of--there are many 
ways to get that information without directly posing the question of genetic 
disorders."


