Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 11/16/96 November 16, 1996

 Undesirable Sex Partners Bacteria manipulate reproduction of insects and other 
species

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 It took a while before the medical community paid attention. The first known 
cases of what the tabloids gleefully called virgin births 
appeared, amusingly enough, in Las Vegas. Then physicians across the United 
States began documenting similar events. In each case, an 
unfertilized egg in a woman had spontaneously begun to develop, ultimately 
producing a healthy female baby.

 One young researcher, who had analyzed the timing and locales of the virgin 
births, suggested a spreading infection might be causing the 
incidents. The Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta 
quickly dismissed the idea, calling it "ridiculous."

 Several months later came a well-publicized report in the Journal of the 
American Medical Association concluding that the number of infertile 
couples was rising rapidly worldwide. The international uproar intensified when 
physicians began to observe another reproductive curiosity: 
Some newborns that were genetically male appeared to be female. One week, the 
New England Journal of Medicine and the National Enquirer ran 
articles with the headline, "Is this the end of mankind, or just men?"

 Science fiction? Definitely. For many insect species and other arthropods, 
however, the truth can be as strange as fiction when bacteria 
known as Wolbachia are around.

 These microorganisms populate cells in the testes and ovaries of arthropods, 
often profoundly altering the reproduction of their hosts. In 
some species, infected males can generate offspring only if they mate with 
infected females. In others, infected females give birth without 
the need for the opposite sex. In one arthropod species, Wolbachia even 
transform embryos that would normally be males into females.

"These traits have all evolved because they increase the transmission of the 
microorganisms," says John H. Werren of the University of 
Rochester (N.Y.), who has documented the diversity of animals infected by 
Wolbachia.

 There's no evidence that Wolbachia infects mammals, let alone humans, but that 
hasn't dulled biologists' fascination with them. "It's a very 
special group of bacteria," says Werren.

 Scientists first identified the bacteria in the reproductive tissues of a 
mosquito species in 1924.

 Yet it took a mystery and several decades before Wolbachia truly entered the 
limelight. The mystery emerged in the 1950s, when insect 
geneticists encountered problems while trying to cross different strains of 
mosquitoes.

"They started to find all these crossing abnormalities," says Scott L. O'Neill 
of Yale University Medical School. The most obvious one, dubbed 
cytoplasmic incompatibility, centered on the failure of certain strains to 
produce offspring when mating with other strains of the same 
mosquito species.

 Scientists argued for 20 years over what caused cytoplasmic incompatibility, 
says O'Neill. Then, in 1971, Janice Yen and Ralph Barr, 
biologists at the University of California, Los Angeles, tabbed Wolbachia as 
the culprit.

 Cytoplasmic incompatibility, the researchers found, occurs when males infected 
with Wolbachia mate with uninfected females. In such unions, 
no offspring, or just a few in some host species, result. This reproductive 
barrier can be eliminated with antibiotics that rid the mosquitoes 
of the bacteria.

 Why does Wolbachia generate cytoplasmic incompatibility? To favor reproduction 
by infected females, says O'Neill. That helps the bacteria, 
which dwell in the cytoplasm of egg cells, pass on to future generations.

 In species affected by cytoplasmic incompatibility, infected females have no 
trouble reproducing with infected males. Infected females also 
breed easily with uninfected males. Both kinds of unions transfer Wolbachia to 
offspring. Consequently, cytoplasmic incompatibility can spread 
Wolbachia rapidly through an uninfected population, says O'Neill, who organized 
a session on Wolbachia at the recent Symbiosis 96! Meeting in 
Bar Harbor, Maine.

 Researchers are finding that Wolbachia infects a surprisingly large variety of 
species. Werren and Donald Windsor of the Smithsonian Tropical 
Research Institute in Panama reported last year that 16 percent of Panamanian 
insect species, including some in all of the major insect 
orders, harbor Wolbachia. Since the estimated number of insect species ranges 
from 10 million to 30 million, that means roughly 2 million to 5 
million insect species play host to the bacteria.

"That's very much an underestimate," adds Werren, noting that researchers have 
time to test only a limited number of insects from each species.

 Scientists have also found that Wolbachia infects a variety of isopods (a 
subgroup of crustaceans that includes wood lice), at least one 
species of mites, and perhaps even a worm species.

 Wasps are among the favored hosts of Wolbachia. Take the jewel wasp, Werren's 
favorite research subject. Wolbachia infections in these 
insects produce an odd variation on cytoplasmic incompatibility: Uninfected 
female wasps mating with infected males can produce offspring, but 
their progeny are all male.

 An explanation rests in the fact that wasps, like bees and ants, have an 
unusual mechanism for determining sex. In wasps, eggs fertilized by 
sperm contain a maternal and a paternal set of chromosomes and develop into 
females. Unfertilized eggs, with only a maternal chromosome set, 
develop into males.

 When an infected male jewel wasp mates with an uninfected female, the paternal 
chromosomes from the sperm seem to fragment and fail to join 
the maternal set, says Werren. Consequently, only males result from such a 
mating. This indirectly aids the spread of Wolbachia by reducing 
the number of uninfected daughters produced by uninfected females, explains 
Werren.

 Wolbachia sometimes takes a more feminist approach. In many parasitic wasps, 
which lay their eggs in developing insects that they have 
killed, Wolbachia infections eliminate the need for males. An infected female 
reproduces via an asexual process known as parthenogenesis. The 
unfertilized eggs simply duplicate their one set of chromosomes and develop 
into females.

 These parthenogenetic wasps had long been a biological curiosity until a few 
years ago, when Richard Stouthamer, working with Werren, showed 
that the phenomenon stemmed from Wolbachia infection. With antibiotics, "you 
can cure a line of its parthenogenesis and make it sexual," says 
Stouthamer, now at the Wageningen Agricultural University in the Netherlands.

 The clear preference for females isn't limited to Wolbachia strains that 
infect wasps. At the Bar Harbor meeting, Thierry Rigaud of the 
University of Poitiers in France, reported finding the bacteria in the wood 
louse Armadillidium vulgare.

 In these lice, Wolbachia frequently overrides genetic inheritance. The 
bacteria, says Rigaud, "feminize" an embryonic wood louse that is 
genetically male by disrupting the production or effects of masculinizing 
hormones during its development. The increased number of daughters 
allows Wolbachia to spread quickly.

 While scientists continue to tally the animals that Wolbachia infects, as well 
as the outcomes of those infections, they are also trying to 
unravel the mechanisms by which Wolbachia distorts its host's reproduction. Are 
cytoplasmic incompatibility, parthenogenesis, and feminization 
distinct strategies pursued by Wolbachia, or are they merely reflections of 
different ways in which host species react to the bacteria?

 As the best-known phenomenon, cytoplasmic incompatibility has received the 
most attention. An initial hypothesis to explain it was that 
proteins made by Wolbachia in the testes bind to the chromosomes inside sperm 
and disrupt their later union with maternal chromosomes.

 That simple idea has a major flaw, however. Researchers haven't found any

 Wolbachia molecule incorporated into sperm. Nor are whole bacteria present in 
the sperm. As sperm mature, they lose most of their cytoplasm 
and squeeze out any Wolbachia.

 The latest theory about cytoplasmic incompatibility comes from Timothy L. Karr 
of the University of Chicago. He argues that Wolbachia's 
influence during the maturation of sperm somehow disturbs the carefully 
choreographed maneuvering that later brings together the sperm's 
chromosomes with the egg's. "It looks like the paternal and maternal 
chromosomes are out of sync," says Karr.

 While comparing infected and uninfected eggs of a fruit fly species, Karr's 
group discovered that Wolbachia binds to specific egg proteins. 
One of those proteins normally resides in the nucleus of the fruit fly's egg 
cell. In an infected egg cell, however, the protein concentrates 
in sites throughout the cytoplasm.

 The same phenomenon appears to occur in the testes, but it is complicated by 
the eventual eviction of Wolbachia from mature sperm, says Karr. 
"During spermatogenesis, Wolbachia binds proteins that should be in that sperm 
when it finally matures." But because Wolbachia gets kicked out 
of sperm, it takes that protein away, he says.

 Though not necessary for early stages of fertilization, this sperm protein is 
crucial to coordinating the union of the two chromosome sets, 
proposes Karr. That would explain why infected males, whose sperm are stripped 
of the protein by Wolbachia, have trouble generating progeny in 
uninfected females, says Karr.

 As for the pairings of infected females and infected males, which do produce 
offspring, Karr contends that the proteins stripped from sperm 
by Wolbachia are the same ones concentrated by the bacteria in the cytoplasm of 
the egg cell. The Wolbachia in the egg cells, along with the 
host proteins they are bound to, thus "rescues" the defective sperm from 
infected males, he says.

 O'Neill has discovered a Wolbachia protein that may be relevant to Karr's 
theory. This protein varies in size among Wolbachia strains, and 
O'Neill suggests it may explain why some strains induce cytoplasmic 
incompatibility and others do not. Furthermore, the protein, seemingly 
from Wolbachia's outer surface, binds to the same host cellular proteins 
identified by Karr. "It looks like our stories are coming together," 
says O'Neill.

 There is a practical side to all this Wolbachia research. Both Werren and 
Stouthamer, for example, are leading efforts to transfer 
parthenogenesis-inducing Wolbachia into commercially useful parasitic wasps.

"A lot of parasitic wasps are reared for the control of pest insects," notes 
Werren. "It would be highly desirable for these mass-rearing 
programs to use [parthenogenesis-inducing Wolbachia] because they could 
generate all females, and it's the females that go out and kill the 
insects."

 O'Neill's ambitions center on eliminating insect-borne diseases, such as 
malaria and Lyme disease, by making use of Wolbachia's ability to 
disperse through a population.

 In one scenario, researchers would genetically engineer Wolbachia to make 
antibodies or other compounds that kill the malaria-causing 
parasite carried by mosquitoes in the wild. They would then infect mosquitoes 
with these Wolbachia and seed the countryside with the insects. 
Since the bacteria induce cytoplasmic incompatibility, the natural mosquito 
population would quickly give way to a population almost entirely 
infected with Wolbachia and presumably free of the malaria parasite.

 The main obstacle to this idea, notes O'Neill, is that Wolbachia normally 
lives in the mosquito's reproductive tissues, whereas the malaria 
parasite inhabits its gut and salivary glands. Consequently, any compounds made 
by Wolbachia might not reach and kill the parasites.

 O'Neill is searching for the Wolbachia gene that brings about cytoplasmic 
incompatibility. He intends to link that gene to a gene engineered 
to produce an antiparasitic compound in the tissues where the malaria parasite 
dwells. Once added to the mosquito's complement of genes, the 
two genes would be inherited by future mosquito generations and, with the aid 
of cytoplasmic incompatibility, would spread quickly within a 
mosquito population, says O'Neill.

 The most provocative question surrounding Wolbachia may be whether the 
bacteria have played a role in the development of new species.

 A central concept in many theories of speciation is reproductive isolation. 
This idea holds that if two populations of a species cannot breed 
together, then the genes of each population will evolve independently and 
diverge (SN: 11/2/96, p. 284). "Reproductive isolation is a key 
component of speciation because without it, genomes would mix and you can't get 
divergence," says Werren.

 Eventually, he explains, the genes of two populations would diverge so much 
that they become genetically incompatible for reproduction. At 
that point, most evolutionary biologists would argue, the single original 
species has given way to two species.

 Wolbachia may serve as an excellent mechanism to engender reproductive 
isolation, argues Werren. He and other researchers have found that 
such isolation can arise in an insect species infected by different Wolbachia 
strains. Members of the species infected by one strain cannot 
reproduce with members infected by the other strain.

 While theories about evolution are notoriously difficult to prove, Werren 
suggests that mapping the diversity of insect species infected and 
not infected by Wolbachia may bolster his theory. Species infected with 
Wolbachia should have many more closely related species than 
uninfected species do.

 Could some Wolbachia species infect vertebrates, or even humans, and play a 
role in their speciation? Decades ago, researchers tried 
unsuccessfully to infect mice with strains of the bacteria. Moreover, O'Neill 
notes that all the Wolbachia found so far are 
temperature-sensitive and could not survive inside warm-blooded animals.

 Still, Werren says it's too early to dismiss the possibility completely. "We 
don't have any idea whether these bacteria occur in vertebrates, 
either cold- or warm-blooded. We haven't really looked," he says.



