Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 10/5/96 October 5, 1996

 Firm Evidence of Milky Way Black Hole

 By Ron Cowen

 Astronomers have speculated for 25 years that a monster lurks at the center of 
the Milky Way. Now they appear to have proof.

 The beast in our cosmic backyard is a black hole -- a dark, dense object as 
massive as 2.5 million suns crammed into a space the size of 
the solar system.

 Over the years, two pieces of evidence have provided the strongest support for 
the idea of a black hole at the center of our galaxy. In 1974, 
researchers discovered a compact, powerful radio source, called Sagittarius A*. 
Scientists suggested that the emissions represent the last 
gasps of gas falling into this candidate black hole.

 Other astronomers, including Reinhard Genzel of the Max Planck Institute for 
Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, found hints of a 
black hole in measurements of the velocity of stars close to the center of the 
Milky Way. Stars within 1.5 light-years of that core whip 
around at a furious rate, they discovered. Researchers surmised that the 
rapidly orbiting stars are caught in the stranglehold of an unseen 
resident -- an extremely massive, compact object too dense and too dark to be 
an ordinary grouping of stars.

 That line of reasoning has an admitted shortcoming. Of the three components of 
the stars' velocity, astronomers had measured only one -- the 
back-and-forth motion along the line of sight to Earth. Such motion is 
relatively easy to detect: Light emitted by an object moving toward 
Earth is shifted to bluer, or shorter, wavelengths; light emitted by an object 
moving away is shifted to redder, or longer, wavelengths.

 Measuring the other two components, which represent the motion of stars across 
the sky, presented a more formidable task. Most scientists 
assumed that the unmeasured components would be comparable to the line-of-sight 
velocity. In the unlikely event that the stars move much more 
slowly across the sky than they do along the line of sight to Earth, the unseen 
heavyweight need not be as massive or compact as a black hole.

 Using the European Southern Observatory's New Technology Telescope in La 
Silla, Chile, Genzel and his Max Planck colleague Andreas Eckart 
homed in on 40 stars -- most lying within 0.3 light-year of the galactic core 
-- and tracked their motion across the sky for 4 years. They now 
report that the velocities of the 20 stars whose motion they could reliably 
measure are indeed similar to the component along the line of 
sight. In addition, velocity falls off significantly at distances farther from 
the center.

 Taken together, the new and previous velocity measurements provide strong 
evidence that a massive, dark object lies within 0.05 light-year of 
Sagittarius A*, Genzel and Eckart report in the Oct. 3 Nature.

"It's clear that they have closed a major loophole," says Mark Morris of the 
University of California, Los Angeles. "Astronomers will now have 
to face the fact that there's a large concentration of dark matter right at the 
nucleus."

 The researchers note that their study still allows the possibility of a 
cluster of star-sized black holes at the galaxy's center, but they 
believe a single, massive black hole is more likely. Higher-resolution 
observations are likely to disprove the cluster model, Morris notes. A 
team led by UCLA's Andrea M. Ghez plans such a study with the W.M. Keck 
Telescope atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea.

 In another study, Susan R. Stolovy of Cornell University and her colleagues 
have produced the first mid-infrared image of an object that 
seems to coincide with Sagittarius A*. The infrared emission they detect is 
greater than that predicted by some models of the suspected black 
hole. The emission might come from dust associated with material falling onto 
the black hole, the team reports in the Oct. 10 Astrophysical 
Journal Letters.



