Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 10/26/96 October 26, 1996

 Hints of a Downy Dinosaur in China

 R. Monastersky

 Chinese paleontologists have unearthed the fossilized skeleton of a small 
dinosaur cloaked in what appears to be a layer of short feathers. Found only 2 
months ago, the fossil has yet to undergo in-depth analysis by Chinese or 
Western scientists. Nevertheless, word of the find has electrified 
paleontologists worldwide because it appears to provide the most dramatic 
evidence to date that birds evolved from small feathered dinosaurs.

"This is going to be a benchmark for understanding the origins of birds," says 
Luis M. Chiappe, a paleontologist who studies bird evolution at the American 
Museum of Natural History in New York.

"When I first saw the photographs of it, I was skeptical. But when I was shown 
the specimen, it just blew me away," says Philip J. Currie, a dinosaur 
specialist at the Tyrrell Museum of Paleontology in Drumheller, Alberta.

 Despite the find's apparent importance, no authority on dinosaurs has yet had 
an opportunity to analyze the fossil fully, so any conclusions remain 
unsupported.

 Currie is one of the few Western paleontologists to have examined the 
specimen, which he viewed for just 1 hour while visiting Beijing earlier this 
month with Canadian artist Michael Skrepnick. Last week, at the annual meeting 
of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology in New York, researchers milled 
around Currie as he showed them a single 3-by-5-inch photograph of the fossil 
and the artist's reconstruction of the dinosaur.

 The 1-meter-long fossil hails from a site in Liaoning province in northeastern 
China, where paleontologists have recently discovered exquisitely preserved 
fossils of ancient birds, complete with the impressions left by their feathers 
(SN: 10/28/95, p. 277). Dated at somewhere between 140 million and 120 million 
years ago, the new dinosaur fossil exists in two pieces, a slab and a 
mirror-image counterslab. One half currently resides in Beijing at a museum of 
the Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources. The other half lies in a museum 
at the Nanjing Institute of Geology and Palaeontology.

 The Chinese scientists in possession of each half are invertebrate 
paleontologists, so they must solicit help from dinosaur and bird specialists 
to assess the fossil. Chen Pei-ji of the Nanjing Institute, who is working with 
the specimen there, says he has not yet examined the fossil under a microscope 
because he left China soon after the discovery to visit colleagues in the 
United States. He showed pictures of the Nanjing specimen to paleontologists at 
last week's meeting in New York, but he did not make a formal presentation.

 Although Currie did not have an opportunity to study the fossil under a 
microscope, he inspected the Beijing specimen with a hand-held magnifying lens 
as Chinese researchers fired questions at him. The feathery impressions are 
only a few millimeters long and resemble down more than the extended feathers 
seen on avian wings, he says. They run along the perimeter of the fossil, from 
the top of the head down to the tip of the tail and then around the underside 
of the tail.

"They look so much like the feather impressions seen in the bird fossils at the 
same site that you can't come to any conclusion other than the fact that you're 
dealing with feathers," says Currie. "Now, they may not be feathers. They may 
be featherlike scales, they may be hair, they may be something else. Until the 
detailed work is done on it, you can't really tell. But the bottom line is 
that, now, I don't think there is any question that these dinosaurs had 
insulation of some kind, and in all probability it was feathers."

 The idea that dinosaurs gave rise to birds has circulated since the 1860s, but 
it remained unpopular until it was revived in the 1970s by John Ostrom of Yale 
University. From his studies of the earliest known bird, Archaeopteryx, Ostrom 
recognized various anatomical similarities between the ancient bird and a group 
of bipedal dinosaurs called coelurosaurs.

 Although many paleontologists at the time viewed dinosaurs as clumsy and 
cold-blooded, Ostrom theorized that coelurosaurs and other theropod dinosaurs 
were agile, warm-blooded predators. According to his theory, birds evolved from 
a specialized kind of theropod that ran along the ground and jumped in the air 
after insects.

 While few paleontologists defend this exact scenario, the idea that birds are 
a type of dinosaur has gained credence from detailed phylogenetic analyses, and 
it now enjoys the support of most--though not all--paleontologists. Yet no one 
had ever discovered the most compelling evidence--a feathered dinosaur.

 Ostrom never expected to see such direct proof: Feathers are extremely fragile 
and usually disappear without leaving any fossilized trace. When he saw the 
photographs last week, Ostrom was flabbergasted. "I was really in a state of 
shock. I did not think my legs would hold me up."

 The Chinese fossil seems closely related to the coelurosaur Compsagnathus, one 
of the smallest dinosaurs. The Liaoning animal cannot be considered a direct 
bird ancestor because it came well after the time of Archaeopteryx, which lived 
150 million years ago. If the bird-dinosaur theory is correct, true birds must 
have split off the theropod line before Archaeopteryx.

 For now, critics of the theory remain undaunted by the new find. Larry D. 
Martin of the University of Kansas in Lawrence says that the structures on the 
back of the Chinese dinosaur may be the frayed remnants of dermal scales, 
similar to the frill running down the back of an iguana. In that case, the find 
would say little about the origin of birds.

 Martin acknowledges that the discovery of a feathered dinosaur would force him 
to reconsider the bird-dinosaur theory. "If these are clearly feathers, then 
you could make a really serious argument that birds are dinosaurs."

 Like most paleontologists, however, Martin awaits a detailed report on the new 
find. "The possibility for having egg on the face is tremendous at this point," 
he says. "We generally get more hard evidence with alien abductions than we 
have here."


