Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 10/5/96 October 5, 1996

 Average cholesterol counts: Not low enough

 By Steve Sternberg

 For decades, doctors have been hammering home the warning that excess 
cholesterol raises a person's risk of heart disease. Yet epidemiological 
studies have shown that two-thirds of the people with heart disease in North 
America have no more than average amounts of cholesterol in their blood.

 These studies suggest that the average cholesterol concentration -- 2 10 
milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dl ) -- is, in fact, too high.

 Now a new study, the Cholesterol and Recurrent Events (CARE) trial, powerfully 
buttresses this view. The study found that heart attack survivors who reduce 
the cholesterol in their blood below the norm can lower their risk of a repeat 
heart attack.

"These results demonstrate that for patients with coronary disease in North 
America, the average cholesterol level is too high and can contribute to the 
recurrence of cardiovascular events," assert Frank M. Sacks of Harvard Medical 
School in Boston and his colleagues in the Oct. 3 New England Journal of 
Medicine.

 The 5-year study followed 4,159 heart attack survivors age 21 to 75 at 80 
medical centers in the United States and Canada. All of the participants began 
the trial with near-average concentrations of total cholesterol and of 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL). LDL is known as bad cholesterol for its deadly 
propensity to form artery-clogging plaque.

 A total of 2,081 participants took 40 milligrams of the cholesterol-lowering 
drug pravastatin each day. The remainder took a placebo.

 Sacks and his colleagues regularly tested the cholesterol in participants' 
blood. The researchers relied primarily on measurements of LDL to gauge the 
effectiveness of pravastatin in lowering cholesterol and to assess relative 
heart disease risk.

 They found that pravastatin lowered mean LDL concentrations by 32 percent -- 
from 139 mg/dl to 98 mg/dl. This effect lasted for the full 5 years of the 
study, and it held the treatment group's average LDL to a concentration 28 
percent below that of the placebo group.

 This sharp drop paid off in vital ways for people in the treatment group. 
Compared with the placebo group, those taking the drug reduced their risk of 
heart attack by 24 percent, the researchers say.

 The rate of fatal heart attacks was 37 percent lower in the treatment group 
than in the placebo group, the study found. Those who took the drug were also 
26 percent less likely to undergo coronary bypass surgery and 23 percent less 
likely to have artery-clearing balloon angioplasty. Moreover, people taking the 
drug had 31 percent fewer strokes, according to the report.

 Although the benefits of lowering cholesterol were most pronounced in people 
who began the study with the highest concentrations of LDL in their blood, the 
benefits also extended to those who had lower LDL concentrations at the outset.

 For instance, participants whose initial LDL measurements placed them in the 
bottom one-third of the group still cut their heart attack rate by 15 percent 
after they began taking pravastatin. "I think this study should give physicians 
a lot of impetus to treat their coronary patients with cholesterol-lowering 
drugs and in general to pay more attention to cholesterol," Sacks says.

 Basil Rifkind of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in Bethesda, 
Md., concurs. "Most people who have had heart disease should be on cholesterol 
treatment."

 The study does not suggest that people who have not had heart attacks should 
take cholesterol-lowering drugs. "Whether half the population should be taking 
pravastatin is another question," Sacks says.

 Rifkind agrees with that concern about the drug's long-term safety. "This is 
not a 10-day course of penicillin. When you prescribe these drugs, you're 
putting patients on them for 10 or 20 years."


