Science News Online - Past Issues - Feature Article - 10/5/96 October 5, 1996

 Visions on the Rocks Rock and cave art may offer insights into shamans' trance 
states and spiritual sightings

 By BRUCE BOWER

 In the shadowy recesses of French and Spanish caves, the weathered confines of 
South African and North American rock shelters, and the dank innards of massive 
Irish stone tombs, ancient shamans and their otherworldly visions are coming 
back to life. This is no tale of literal resurrection, nor is it a development 
likely to inspire an episode of television's X-Files.

 Instead, the case of the revived shamans is the latest chapter in scientists' 
efforts to wring meaning from painted and etched images rendered by people who 
lived as many as 33,000 years ago.

 Growing numbers of researchers now theorize that the art adorning caves, rock 
shelters, and even burial sites frequently depicts the trance-induced, 
supernatural journeys of shamans. Historical accounts of many hunter-gatherer 
and foraging groups include descriptions of shamans who periodically conduct 
rituals that they believe allow them to travel to parallel worlds set out in 
local belief systems. In these realms, dead ancestors, deities, and various 
fearsome creatures await the shaman, who deals with them in ways intended to 
make rain, heal the sick, and meet other vital community needs.

 In preparation for their otherworldly commutes, shamans typically take steps 
to induce trances. These techniques include dancing, isolation in dark places, 
rapid breathing, or the ingestion of hallucinogenic plants.

 In the first stage of a trance, the shaman perceives any of a handful of basic 
geometric forms. These shapes are brought to mind automatically by brain 
processes that facilitate altered states of consciousness and form the basis of 
shamans' supernatural visions, according to proponents of the 
neuropsychological model of rock art. After coming out of the trance, shamans 
artistically recreate their visions, both as memory aids for later ritual 
travels and as portals through which they pass into the spirit world, these 
scientists propose.

"Rock art in South Africa, as well as art in a number of other parts of the 
world, has been, in large measure, closely associated with the trance 
experiences of shamans," contends archaeologist David Lewis-Williams of the 
University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South Africa. "These paintings 
were powerful ritual objects, not just pictures."

 This view -- which first attracted international attention when Lewis-Williams 
and Thomas A. Dowson of the University of Southampton in England presented it 
in the April 1988 Current Anthropology -- sparks plenty of controversy, 
particularly among archaeologists who doubt that anyone can decipher the 
original meanings of prehistoric artworks. But Lewis-Williams considers it a 
crucial theoretical advance.

 Support for Lewis-Williams' view now comes from influential quarters. For 
instance, archaeologist Jean Clottes, scientific adviser for prehistoric art at 
the French Ministry of Culture in Foix, has joined the South African researcher 
in an investigation of a dozen prehistoric caves in France and Spain. They plan 
to document the presence of images linked with altered states of consciousness 
and shamans' rituals.

"We'll probably get a lot of flak, especially from French prehistorians," 
Clottes asserts. "But it looks to me like people produced many works of art in 
these caves as a means of traveling to a supernatural world."

 Those who study ancient art readily acknowledge that the field has embraced 
shifting analytical fashions. About 100 years ago, influential archaeologists 
propounded the view that European cave art represented attempts by Stone Age 
groups to harness "hunting magic." This interpretation leaned heavily on 
descriptions of modern Australian aborigines' hunting rituals.

 Another school of thought, known as structuralism, has reigned in the latter 
half of the 20th century. While documenting various types of images and their 
locations, this approach treats the behavior of living hunter-gatherers as 
largely irrelevant to how prehistoric folk lived. A prominent structuralist 
theory posits that Western European art from 30,000 to 10,000 years ago 
contained masculine and feminine images that became increasingly complex over 
time.

 The discovery last year of a huge French cave containing exquisitely wrought 
paintings (SN: 1/28/95, p. 52) dating to 33,000 years ago, the earliest known 
in Western Europe, has challenged the widespread assumption that prehistoric 
art gradually became more elaborate, Clottes contends. The new find also 
highlights the need for testable theories of why people bothered to create 
these haunting scenes at all, he adds.

 The neuropsychological model attempts to fill that need. Its first line of 
argument--based on laboratory studies of altered states of consciousness 
induced by hallucinogenic drugs, migraine headaches, prolonged exposure to 
flickering lights, and other means -- proposes that six geometric forms 
commonly appear as mental images in the first phase of a trance state: grids or 
lattices, parallel lines, dots, zigzags, concentric circles or U-shaped lines, 
and meandering lines.

 The model also outlines ways in which these forms can be perceived during 
altered states. For instance, a shape can be seen in various quantities (a 
cluster of dots, for example), broken into fragments, combined with another 
shape, or rotated at an angle.

 Finally, the model divides altered states of consciousness into three stages: 
the perception of geometric shapes (which often shimmer or undulate next to an 
arc-shaped blind spot in the visual field), an interpretation of the shapes as 
representative of actual objects or organisms, and -- in the deepest stage of 
trance - -a full-blown hallucination of an apparently real experience. Vortex 
or tunnel shapes often appear as individuals enter the deepest stage of a 
trance, Lewis-Williams maintains. The shapes foster a sensation of traveling 
through a passageway, he says.

 Lewis-Williams notes that 19th and 20th century descriptions, or 
ethnographies, of the cultural practices of South Africa's San people (also 
known as Bushmen) include detailed accounts of shamans' trance rituals. These 
accounts, when combined with neuropsychological evidence of altered states of 
consciousness, open a new avenue to understanding San rock paintings, he holds.

 In the April 1995 Cambridge Archaeological Journal, Lewis-Williams used these 
sources to argue that a group of eight San pictures dating to several hundred 
years ago depicts shamans' trance-induced journeys to the spirit world. 
Historical accounts note that San shamans used dancing and hyperventilation 
rather than hallucinogenic substances to enter trance states.

 Several features indicative of trances characterize the San paintings, 
Lewis-Williams says. Dots, zigzags, and other shapes linked to altered states 
of consciousness appear in all these works.

 Some images show half humanDhalf antelope figures entering or emerging from 
arc-shaped spaces or from smears of paint applied to folds in the rock surface. 
Lewis-Williams asserts that the paintings depict shamans inducing trances, 
entering the spirit world (either through arc-shaped representations of the 
blind spot that mars the visual field during the first stage of a trance or 
through the streaks of paint along the rock face), and becoming man-beasts, 
considered by the San to be capable of wielding supernatural power.

 The pictures also portray fish, bees, and oar-shaped implements known as fly 
whisks. The buzzing or humming sound that frequently accompanies the initial 
stage of a trance apparently spurred visions of bees swarming over honeycombs, 
judging from depictions of such scenes in some San paintings, Lewis-Williams 
says. Depictions of fish correspond to historical accounts of San shamans 
diving into water holes and traveling underground as they entered trances. In 
addition, he holds, shamans danced with fly whisks and used them to deflect 
mystical arrows of sickness that malevolent spirits were said to shoot into 
people.

 Although the eight pictures studied are relatively recent, San rock paintings 
with similar elements date to about 27,000 years ago, and Lewis-Williams sees 
the shamanistic influence on art and religion extending back at least that far. 
"Shamanism structured the belief systems of ancient societies in general," he 
contends.

 That argument strikes a chord in some North American rock art investigators.

 Native American rock art includes many scenes of shamans' journeys to spirit 
worlds, according to David S. Whitley of the University of California, Los 
Angeles. Artistic metaphors for successful arrival in the supernatural sphere 
include the death and rebirth of an animal or person, mystical flights taken by 
winged shamans, and the submerging or drowning of shaman figures, the UCLA 
researcher holds.

 Whitley has also noted the presence of geometric shapes associated with 
altered states of consciousness in Native American rock paintings in south 
central California. The same shapes were incorporated into depictions of 
animals and shamans by various California Indian groups, Whitley asserts. He 
describes his research in Shamanism and Rock Art in North America (S. Turpin, 
ed., San Antonio: Rock Art Foundation, 1994).

 Ethnographic accounts of south central California shamans' visions state that 
the experience involves passage through a tunnel, Whitley notes. Painted images 
of spirals and concentric circles in the art of that region apparently 
represent "tunnel visions," he says.

 Whitley has dated one California rock art site to about 20,000 years ago, 
based on analysis of the varnish covering the painted stone. This has provoked 
controversy among archaeologists who take the view that the first North 
American settlers arrived no more than 12,000 years ago.

 However this debate pans out, geometric forms and animal figures in this and 
other early pieces of California rock art recur in later examples from the same 
region, including pieces dating to a few hundred years ago, Whitley argues. 
This supports the theory that religious beliefs and practices prove far more 
durable than other aspects of culture, such as styles of tool making. It also 
boosts Whitley's confidence that ethnographic descriptions of culture offer 
valuable insights into ancient artworks that were inspired by belief systems.

 Whitley's spiritual scenario for California's early denizens is reflected in 
shamanistic images in rock art located along the Texas-Mexico border and dating 
to at least 4,000 years ago (SN: 7/20/96, p. 41). Those paintings, says Carolyn 
E. Boyd of Texas A&M University in College Station, show shamans surrounded by 
jimson weed and peyote, two consciousness-altering substances. She interprets 
other images as representing hallucinogenic visions of shamans transformed into 
animals that are considered by local Native American groups to have 
supernatural powers.

 At other rock shelters in this region, painted images consist of geometric 
forms linked by Lewis-Williams to altered states of consciousness, as well as 
animal figures that incorporate those forms, Boyd says.

"Since far back in prehistory," she asserts, "there have been people who tried 
to make sense of human existence and control the environment by using altered 
states of consciousness to go to spirit worlds."

 Images painted on passage tombs in Ireland also reflect ancient shamanistic 
rituals, asserts Jeremy Dronfield of the University of Cambridge in England. 
Each of these approximately 5,000-year-old stone structures consists of an 
inner chamber (which usually contains human bones) and a passageway, both 
topped by a mound of earth and surrounded by large stones.

 Dronfield documented the types and locations of painted images in three large 
passage tombs and in 20 smaller, nearby tombs from approximately the same 
period.

 Lattice shapes along the walls of the inner chambers of all of these tombs may 
have been used by shamans to contact the spirit world on behalf of the recently 
deceased, Dronfield reports in the April Cambridge Archaeological Journal. In 
addition, niches within the passages and chambers contain clusters of engraved 
concentric circles, which may have marked access points to otherworldly realms.

 Other shapes associated with altered states, such as arcs and dots, occur 
mainly on stones placed outside the tombs. Shamans may have conducted group 
ceremonies and rituals at these spots, he proposes.

 Whatever specific activities took place at the Irish structures, Dronfield 
says that they were places where people used myths, rituals, and altered states 
of consciousness to contact ancestors and other spiritual beings.

 Such conclusions elicit heated criticism from some scientists. Paul G. Bahn, 
an independent archaeologist in Hull, England, refers to the expanding number 
of researchers aligned with the neuropsychological model as "shamaniacs" who 
tout a monolithic explanation of rock art that neglects its diverse forms and 
functions.

 Investigators must document the full range of images and markings at a site 
before speculating about altered states of consciousness and shamanistic 
rituals, adds Randall K. White of New York University.

 Although the neuropsychological model cannot illuminate every piece of rock 
art, it offers the only available means of trying to make sense of these 
images, responds Lewis-Williams.

 Adds Clottes, "The shamanistic theory can't explain everything about this art, 
but it explains more than any other theory we have right now."


