Glimpses inside a tiny, flashing bubble: Science News Online, October 5, 1996

 Glimpses inside a tiny, flashing bubble

 By I. Peterson

 Bombarded with an intense sound wave, a small gas bubble suspended in water 
can emit a string of extremely short, bright pulses of light. Known as 
sonoluminescence, this conversion of sound into light occurs during the rapid 
and violent contraction of the bubble as it oscillates in step with the sound 
wave.

 How the collapse of a bubble during contraction generates a flash of light, 
however, remains largely a mystery. Now researchers have obtained new 
experimental evidence that may illuminate key characteristics of the light 
source.

 One group has discovered that the bubble wall separating the gas from the 
surrounding liquid may not always be perfectly spherical during collapse, as 
theorists had generally supposed. Another team has found that putting the 
bubble into a strong magnetic field can drastically decrease light emission.

 Physicists Keith Weninger, Seth J. Putterman, and Bradley P. Barber of the 
University of California, Los Angeles used several photodetectors surrounding a 
flask of water to determine the uniformity of light emission from a 
sound-driven oscillating bubble. In some cases, they detected variations in 
light intensity in different directions, suggesting that the bubble wall was 
nonspherical-possibly squashed into a slightly ellipsoidal shape-during 
collapse. In other cases, the bubbles stayed spherical.

 Their measurements, reported in the September Physical Review E, also 
indicated that ellipsoidal deformations could persist for up to 100 successive 
contractions and light flashes.

"This work is interesting because it establishes a new diagnostic [tool] that 
can be used to study a lot of different aspects of sonoluminescence," says 
Michael J. Moran of the Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory.

 The pattern of light emission indicates that the nonspherical bubble wall 
refracts radiation coming from a small, spherical region of hot gas deep inside 
a bubble, Putterman and his colleagues conclude.

 The observation that a collapsing bubble can actually appear perfectly 
spherical, at least sometimes, is surprising, Putterman says. "You've got a 
supersonic implosion, with the bubble wall collapsing at over four times the 
speed of sound. Yet, at the moment when the bubble hits its minimum radius and 
the light comes, we get a highly spherical state a large percentage of the 
time."

 Though Putterman and his coworkers can now determine whether bubble collapse 
is spherical, they can't yet predict or control the shape in any given 
situation. "The system seems to hop between a spherical state and another 
state," Putterman notes. However, "we don't know what to do to force it from 
one state to the other."

 Because electric charges accelerate during the generation of light flashes, 
studying the effect of an external magnetic field on the system could also lead 
to insights into sonoluminescence.

 Woowon Kang and his coworkers at the University of Chicago have investigated 
bubble oscillations in uniform magnetic fields as strong as 20 teslas, more 
than 400,000 times Earth's magnetic field. Preliminary results indicate that a 
sufficiently strong magnetic field can suppress sonoluminescence, Kang says.

"This is an exciting result," Putterman comments.

 Kang is now interested in checking whether a weaker magnetic field that has a 
definite direction affects the distribution of light emitted by an oscillating 
bubble.


