Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/23/96 November 23, 1996

 Rough math: Focusing on rogue waves at sea

by I. Peterson

 In late 1942, carrying 15,000 U.S. soldiers bound for England, the Queen Mary 
hit a storm about 700 miles off the coast of Scotland. Without warning amid the 
tumult, a single, mountainous wave struck the ocean liner, rolling it over and 
washing water across its upper decks. Luckily, the ship managed to right itself 
and continue on its voyage.

 Gargantuan waves, which appear unexpectedly even under calm conditions in the 
open ocean, have damaged and sunk numerous ships over the years. Now, 
researchers have identified a plausible mechanism that may account for the 
occurrence of these rogue waves. Using a mathematical model, they demonstrate 
that ocean currents or large fields of random eddies and vortices can 
sporadically concentrate a steady ocean swell to create unusually large waves.

 The current or eddy field acts like an optical lens to focus the wave action, 
says applied mathematician Bengt Fornberg of the University of Colorado at 
Boulder.

 Fornberg and Benjamin S. White of Exxon Research and Engineering Co. in 
Annandale, N.J., describe their model in a report submitted to the Journal of 
Fluid Mechanics.

 Rogue waves can arise in all oceans. However, their frequency and size are 
particularly notable off the southeastern coast of South Africa. Every year, a 
few supertankers and other major vessels suffer severe structural damage while 
traveling southward along a standard route from the Middle East to the United 
States or Europe.

 The vessels boost their speed by taking advantage of the strong, south-flowing 
Agulhas Current, which skirts the South African continental shelf. Depending on 
the prevailing winds, this current often meets a steady incoming wave swell 
nearly head-on. The interaction of wave and current reduces the spacing between 
the waves and changes their direction.

 Applied mathematician Marius Gerber of Stellenbosch University in South Africa 
recently showed that changes in wave direction forced by a narrow, fast current 
can raise wave heights considerably in certain areas of the current. His 
calculations also suggest that such waves would have a distinctive shape, 
displaying a steep forward face preceded by a deep trough. Mariners who have 
experienced rogue waves have described such troughs as "holes in the sea."

 This focusing mechanism is very likely responsible for the freak, isolated 
waves encountered in the Agulhas Current, Gerber argues. Such focusing could 
also occur within or near the Gulf Stream in the North Atlantic.

 Fornberg and White have now shown, in principle, that similar focusing can 
take place when an ocean swell of regularly spaced waves traverses an area of 
random current fluctuations. They can compute the probability of particularly 
intense wave action and the formation of rogue waves in different regions of 
the field. These probabilities depend on how far the waves of the ocean swell 
have traveled through the eddies rather than on the detailed structure of the 
eddies themselves.

 Exploratory work on the formation of rogue waves at sea and in currents has 
been largely theoretical so far. The chief problem is the extreme shortage of 
reliable, complete oceanographic data on this phenomenon to test the 
mathematical models.

 The waves arise rarely, although they're very notable when encountered, 
Fornberg notes.

 The ultimate goal of the researchers is to develop models to predict the 
location of danger areas and to forecast the occurrence of rogue waves, which 
would allow ships to proceed safely yet take advantage of ocean currents.

 The Agulhas Current is a prime target for such an effort. The latest incident 
in the area occurred earlier this month, when a cargo ship with 29 people 
aboard sank after being hit by a wave, presumably a freak giant.


