Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/2/96 November 2, 1996

 Mother's Blood Shows Baby's Future

 S. Sternberg

 In his masterwork "Auguries of Innocence," poet William Blake hailed the power 
of imaginative vision that beholds "a World in a Grain of Sand." Now 
researchers, in a tour de force of their own, have found a way to decipher the 
chromosomal makeup of a 10-week-old fetus by peering into a drop of its 
mother's blood.

 The study was a small one, involving just two pregnant women -- one who feared 
that her baby might be born with sickle-cell anemia and another who worried 
that her baby might inherit a hemoglobin deficiency called thalassemia. Both 
fetuses were normal.

 Despite the study's limitations, the implications for prenatal diagnosis of 
genetic disease are profound, asserts Yuet Wai Kan of the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute at the University of California, San Francisco.

"The method could be applied to any genetic disease in which the mutation is 
known," he says. Kan and his colleagues report their findings in the November 
Nature Genetics.

 David L. Rimoin of the University of California, Los Angeles, School of 
Medicine says that such a test, if it lives up to expectations, could usher in 
a new era of prenatal diagnosis.

"One can theorize, at least, that you could develop microchips with hundreds of 
mutations on them and screen for all of the mutations," he says.

 Just 30 years ago, prenatal diagnosis did not exist. Now, amniocentesis and 
chorionic villus sampling can tell expectant parents whether their child will 
be born with sickle-cell anemia, thalassemia, or certain other genetic 
diseases. Parents can then decide whether to continue the pregnancy.

 These diagnostic procedures carry slight risks because they require doctors to 
invade the uterus with a slender needle to obtain fetal cells. Amniocentesis 
provokes miscarriage in a fraction of 1 percent of cases. Chorionic villus 
sampling causes miscarriage about 1 percent of the time.

 Using maternal blood would eliminate those risks, Rimoin says.

 The Kan study was inspired, in part, by research showing that fetal cells 
circulate in a mother's blood. Indeed, scientists showed recently that 
lymphocytes descended from a fetus' white blood cells may flourish in the 
mother's blood for decades (SN: 2/10/96, p. 85).

 Although the presence of fetal cells in a woman's bloodstream makes the new 
technique possible, the ability of the cells to replicate long after a baby's 
birth also means that doctors might recover cells stemming from an earlier 
pregnancy.

 To eliminate this possibility, the researchers zeroed in on a red blood cell, 
called an erythroblast, that has a brief life span.

 First, they sorted out maternal and fetal red cells from all others by mixing 
them with iron-bearing beads that had been coated with antibodies. These 
antibodies attached themselves to the red cells. The group then used a magnet 
to pull the beads laden with red cells from the maternal blood.

 Next, the researchers washed the red cells off the beads and mixed them with 
antibodies to fetal hemoglobin. These antibodies, which had been tagged with an 
intense red dye, latched onto the fetal cells and stained them a brilliant 
scarlet.

 Then came the painstaking task of picking out each dyed fetal cell from the 
thousands of other cells under a microscope. Once this task was complete, the 
researchers analyzed the fetal cells' DNA to determine whether the threatening 
mutations were present.

 Kan says he and his coworkers will test the technique in more patients to 
assess its reliability. Then, he predicts, other researchers will computerize 
the process to hasten it along. Finally, perhaps, a new era of prenatal 
diagnosis will be born.


