Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/2/96 November 2, 1996

 Demise of the ice age sparked great quakes

 R. Monastersky

 In geology, as in international relations, Scandinavia has a reputation for 
keeping a low profile. By the rules of plate tectonics, the extremely old crust 
in this region should not suffer the vicissitudes that rattle younger parts of 
the globe. New seismic studies, however, are threatening Scandinavia's image of 
stability.

 Evidence from northern Sweden suggests that this area may have unleashed 
monster earthquakes when the ice age ended, only a short geologic span ago, 
says Ronald Arvidsson, a seismologist at Uppsala University in Sweden. The 
uncharacteristic quakes within a tectonic plate occurred because the land 
sprang up after the heavy European ice sheet melted away, he reports in the 
Nov. 1 Science.

 Arvidsson studied a series of northern Scandinavian faults that formed 9,000 
years ago, just after the disappearance of the ice sheet there. Geologists 
began discovering these postglacial faults 20 years ago, but the remoteness of 
the faults has hindered investigations.

 When Arvidsson determined the locations of minor, unmapped earthquakes that 
occurred between 1963 and 1993, he found signs that the faults remain active. 
To determine the depth of the faults, he studied seismic data taken close to 
one of the smaller ones. Recordings of tiny shocks revealed that the fault 
extends unusually deep, all the way to the base of Earth's crust, some 40 
kilometers down.

 Knowing the scale of the faults, Arvidsson could calculate the size of the 
earthquakes that ripped the crust long ago. The largest postglacial fault, the 
160-km-long Parvie fault, formed during a magnitude 8.2 earthquake, he 
estimates. The 50-km-long Lansjarv fault came to life in a shock with a 
magnitude of 7.8.

"They would have been considerable earthquakes. The Parvie earthquake would 
have been as large as or larger than the New Madrid earthquakes," he says, 
referring to a trio of giant shocks that struck the U.S. Midwest in 1811-1812 
(SN: 6/8/96, p. 362). The New Madrid earthquakes are the largest continental 
shocks ever witnessed in the interior of a tectonic plate. Most quakes strike 
the edges of plates, where they collide and grind against each other.

 The news that large earthquakes once broke the Scandinavian crust raises a 
geologic paradox, says Arch C. Johnston, a seismologist at the University of 
Memphis. Old sections of plates tend to produce few earthquakes, but when they 
do, the quakes may be large because the fractures can reach great depths in 
this cold crust. In geologically younger regions, faults don't extend into the 
lower crust because the warm rock there bends rather than breaks.

 The postglacial faults of Scandinavia should have cousins in North America 
that formed when the Canadian crust rebounded at the end of the ice age, says 
Johnston. Thus far, however, only one small section of fault in northern 
Manitoba has turned up. Johnston suspects that other, larger faults remain 
hidden in the wilds of Canada.


