Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 11/2/96 November 2, 1996

 Bridging the Brain Gap A scientist explores the biology of isolated minds and 
mutual trust

 By BRUCE BOWER

 When a rabbit whiffs an onion, glimpses another rabbit, hears a loud sound, 
feels itself enveloped by a pair of hands, or otherwise encounters the world 
through its senses, electrical activity crackles through the creature's brain 
in a curious way. Within a fraction of a second, groups of neurons that greet 
incoming sensations generate a distinctive electrical burst that materializes 
again in the brain's outer layer, or cortex. There, the activity vanishes, 
poof, "just like the rabbit down the rabbit hole in Alice in Wonderland," 
remarks neurophysiologist Walter J. Freeman of the University of California, 
Berkeley.

 Freeman, who has described this electrical disappearing act in rabbit brains 
since 1982, now suspects that the analogy to Lewis Carroll's classic children's 
tale runs even deeper. Much as the white rabbit's hasty departure turned 
Alice's world upside down, transient electrical responses to sensation may 
preface life-altering changes in the brain, he proposes.

 More precisely, new patterns of brief cortical activity scurry forth one after 
another following a short-lived sensory outburst. They produce no less than a 
perception of what a particular sensation means, constructed in accordance with 
past experiences and other relevant knowledge. Mammals -- including the 
two-legged, talkative ones -- learn about the world through constant sensory 
and perceptual updates, Freeman theorizes.

 But learning does not always proceed in an orderly, cumulative fashion, he 
argues. Mammalian brains contain a mechanism that can loosen the grip of 
previously acquired perspectives on the world and lay the neural groundwork for 
securing crucial new knowledge.

 Having such a delete mechanism in the brain pays reproductive dividends, in 
Freeman's view. At appropriate ages, male and female mammals must jettison many 
habitual behaviors of their youth and forge the mutual trust necessary for 
mating and developing expertise at raising offspring. Humans have exploited the 
biology of pair bonding to form larger groups, from bands of foragers to modern 
civilizations, the Berkeley scientist maintains.

 Freeman's theory, which he elaborates in Societies of Brains (1995, Hillsdale, 
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum), contains plenty of speculation. For that matter, it's 
not even clear yet how best to measure and interpret the brain's electrical 
landscape. Nonetheless, Freeman hopes to nudge neuroscientists toward a 
consideration of what brains do in groups, not just inside individual skulls.

"Despite notable successes in recent years, brain science is in crisis because 
our models neglect the most important function of human brains, which is to 
interact with each other to form families and societies," Freeman contends. 
"The importance of this function is shown by the need for education and 
cultural learning in bringing young people to maturity."

 Freeman's perspective clashes with materialist theories, which conceive of the 
mind as a by-product of biological happenings in the brain -- the interplay of 
billions of neurons for most neurobiologists, a cerebral stew of chemical and 
hormonal interactions for geneticists and pharmacologists, and the commingling 
of quantum forces for physicists.

 The Berkeley researcher also rejects the view, widespread in cognitive 
psychology, that the mind contains representations of the world in the form of 
thoughts, ideas, images, and symbols that are processed according to sets of 
rules. This assumption has spurred attempts to simulate various facets of 
language, vision, and other mental functions in computers.

 Both materialist and cognitive approaches assume that the brain, in an 
as-yet-unspecified way, binds together parallel strands of neural activity or 
related representations to compose the perception of, say, a fragrant bouquet 
of flowers in a vase.

 In contrast, Freeman regards the mind as the product of an unfolding sequence 
of goal-directed behaviors that provides the individual with constant feedback, 
thus shaping perceptions and future actions. He endorses the view of 
existentialist philosophers such as Jean-Paul Sartre, who argued that each of 
us constructs a self through his or her own actions and that we know that self 
as it is revealed in our actions.

 This perspective harks back at least to the 13th century Italian philosopher 
Thomas Aquinas, who wrote that achieving one's objectives requires a 
"stretching forth" and shaping of the self to the world.

 Psychologist James J. Gibson, who died in 1980, pursued the perceptual 
implications of that theme. He asserted that through their actions, humans and 
other animals perceive meanings in sights, sounds, and other stimuli that 
contain essential information about particular environments. His ideas now 
influence psychologists who study how people gauge their physical movements 
through space (SN: 8/12/95, p. 104) and discern the personality traits of 
themselves and others (SN: 10/29/94, p. 280).

 If the mind indeed emerges at the crossroads of action, perception, and 
learning, researchers who want to locate its biological roots face a stiff 
challenge. Electroencephalograms (EEGs) of brain waves in rabbits, whose 
nervous system can be treated as a rudimentary model of the human variety, 
offer some intriguing clues, Freeman maintains.

 Foremost among the implications of the EEG data is that each brain constructs 
a sense of self and frames of knowledge about the world in isolation from all 
other brains. "Brains are self-organizing systems that are closed with respect 
to meaning," says Freeman.

 At the heart of this process pulses the brain's background noise, a chaotic 
activity in the mathematical sense of the word (SN: 1/23/88, p. 58), Freeman 
posits. Cooperative clusters of brain cells generate what amounts to a flexible 
"I don't know" energy state, from which massive numbers of neurons can 
instantly generate coordinated responses to sensations.

 Freeman and his coworkers have developed computer models of such activity from 
the resting brain waves of rabbits.

 Chaotic activity in the brain's olfactory bulb--the entry point for sensations 
of smell--switches on and off in the course of each breath taken by a rabbit, 
according to Freeman. With each inhalation, the animal has immediate access to 
every electrical waveform pattern linked to specific smells that it has 
previously encountered; thus, its brain does not need to retrieve smell 
memories from a specific storage area or through some sort of file system.

 As a rabbit undergoes training to recognize different odors, each sniff causes 
electrical activity in its olfactory bulb to shift abruptly from a state of 
manageable commotion to a systematic waveform pattern.

 Bulb-generated electrical bursts trigger comparable waveforms in the cortex; 
these quickly disappear "down the rabbit hole," Freeman holds. The cortex then 
reformulates these sensory responses into fields of electrical activity that, 
he says, reflect a complex perception of the smell and its meanings (which may 
include, for a laboratory rabbit, whether or not licking in response to the 
odor has resulted in the availability of water).

 In recent EEG studies, Freeman's group found that mathematically coherent, 
apparently cooperative activity by groups of neurons during the perception of a 
sensory stimulus lasts for only about one-tenth of a second and occupies 
cortical regions no more than three-quarters of an inch in diameter.

 Cooperative processes must involve many more neurons and larger patches of 
tissue, Freeman notes, but scientists lack a widely accepted method of 
exploring this possibility.

 Still, he considers the EEG data supportive of the notion that each brain 
creates its own meanings and perspectives for understanding the world. We are 
literally alone with our thoughts.

 If each person operates in his or her own private cerebral universe, it seems 
unlikely that individuals could muster enough trust to form lasting friendships 
or abiding romantic partnerships, much less cohesive tribes and societies. 
Fortunately, evolution equipped mammals with a biological mechanism for 
bridging the gap between isolated brains so that pairs of animals in a species 
can reproduce and raise their offspring, Freeman argues.

 Studies of prairie voles, for instance, indicate that when these mammals mate 
and give birth, certain chemicals are released into their brains that stimulate 
maternal or paternal behavior (SN: 11/27/93, p. 360; 10/19/96, p. 246).

 Substances such as these may wipe away connections formed among neurons by 
experiences early in life and usher in a temporary period of cerebral 
malleability, Freeman proposes. Sexually intimate voles can then nurture mutual 
bonds and acquire the radically different types of knowledge required for 
maintaining a family and ensuring that their youngsters reach adulthood.

 Men and women who manage to set off this brain mechanism fall in love, first 
with each other, then with their kids, he suggests. But the meltdown of 
long-standing neuronal connections and their attendant attitudes and beliefs is 
frequently experienced as a frightening loss of identity and self-control, 
especially for those smitten by a first love, Freeman adds.

 Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov tapped into this mechanism in his classic 
studies of brainwashing more than 70 years ago, the Berkeley scientist 
suggests. Pavlov found that dogs put through the stress of sensory overload, 
sleep deprivation, and physical exhaustion became demoralized and completely 
forgot what they had learned in previous experimental trials. When sources of 
stress were removed, the grateful dogs quickly learned new behaviors in 
training sessions.

 Soviet officials seized on Pavlov's findings and used them as the basis of 
their "reeducation" efforts with political dissidents. A shrewd mix of 
isolation, deprivation, and small, calculated acts of kindness instilled 
startling changes of heart in formerly outspoken critics of the Soviet regime.

 Stressful manipulations such as these fall at the extreme end of widespread 
efforts to induce brain states that are conducive to incorporating collective 
values, says Freeman. In fact, he speculates, human ancestors may have tapped 
into this biological conversion process to form group identities, using such 
means as group dancing, rhythmic clapping and chanting, music making, and 
initiation rites.

 These activities still foster trust and group cohesion. Consider the trappings 
of evangelical conversions, political rallies, rock concerts, and sporting 
events, Freeman notes. Shared, stressful activity can promote unity, as on 
sports teams, in combat units, and in work groups embroiled in competitive 
projects. Some calculated exposures to stressful situations veer closer to 
Pavlovian reeducation, as in military boot camps, cults, and even some 
fraternity and sorority initiations, Freeman asserts.

 Scientists who study electrical activity in the brain generally take a dim or 
a highly cautious view of theories such as Freeman's. Some researchers who 
focus on the electrical output of individual neurons look askance at efforts to 
measure broad fields of electrical activity with sensors on the scalp or on the 
surface of the brain. For them, both Freeman's research techniques and his 
proposals lie beyond the pale.

 Others employ so-called global measures of the brain's electrical activity, as 
Freeman does, but remain skeptical of his theoretical forays.

"I greatly respect Freeman's experimental work, but he's willing to interpret 
much more from the available data than I would," remarks neurobiologist 
Theodore H. Bullock of the University of California, San Diego.

 However, scientists interested in group selection -- the theory that natural 
selection preserves genetic traits that aid group functioning and survival (SN: 
11/18/95, p. 328) -- find Freeman's argument intriguing.

 Freeman described his work at a symposium on group selection held at the Human 
Behavior and Evolution Society's annual meeting last June in Evanston, Ill.

"In my opinion, the most exciting paper [at the symposium] was by Freeman," 
says evolutionary biologist David S. Wilson of the State University of New York 
at Binghamton, who chaired the session. "I was blown away by the 
neurobiological basis of group-level organization that he was suggesting."

 It remains to be seen, though, whether Freeman's theory will light up the 
brave new world of neuroscience or, like the rabbit that led Alice astray, head 
for some darker place.

 Illustration by Dan Skripkar.


