Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/30/96 November 30, 1996

 Low-dose X rays can sharpen fine details

by C. Wu

 Inspecting a fuzzy X-ray picture for signs of a lung or breast tumor can 
challenge even the most skilled physician. Now, a high-resolution X-ray 
technology previously used only in special settings could make diagnosis 
easier, a new study shows.

 The technique, called phase-contrast X-ray imaging, reveals details that get 
lost in conventional X rays, especially subtle distinctions between tissues 
that absorb radiation weakly. Scientists at CSIRO's Division of Materials 
Science and Technology in Victoria, Australia, describe the method in the Nov. 
28 Nature.

 In addition to discerning finer details than current methods, this technique 
could require a lower overall X-ray dose to produce an image. "We have done 
some simple model calculations and simulations which indicate that the 
reduction could be quite significant," says study coauthor Stephen W. Wilkins. 
"Reduction in absorbed dose by 50 percent or more in mammography seems 
plausible."

 A conventional X ray relies on differences in the amount of radiation that 
various tissues absorb. Dense tissues, such as bones, absorb more radiation and 
cast sharp shadows that show up on a piece of film, while soft tissues block 
the beam less effectively.

 A phase-contrast X ray, on the other hand, records information from the beams 
themselves after they have passed through different tissues. All tissues cause 
the X rays to slow down, resulting in what's known as a phase shift. The size 
of the shift depends on the type of tissue.

 For conventional X rays, "when you detect the intensity, the phase information 
is gone," says Werner Meyer-Ilse of the Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) Laboratory, 
"unless you have an experimental setup which converts the phase shift into 
intensity shift so that it can be recorded."

 In the experimental setup that Wilkins' group used, the X-ray beam had a spot 
size of 20 micrometers or less, which makes the wave crests well matched, 
although not as completely correlated as in a laser. Also, the distances 
between object and image are larger than those used in X-ray imaging, Wilkins 
says.

 Scientists currently use phase-contrast X rays to examine industrial materials 
and biological samples, says Meyer-Ilse, whose own work includes X-ray 
microscopy of cells. Those experiments typically require X rays of a single 
wavelength, so samples must be taken to the nearest high-energy synchrotron. 
For medical diagnosis, "that's not practical."

 The CSIRO group's technique, on the other hand, makes use of typical clinical 
X-ray sources, which emit a range of wavelengths. A commercial phase-contrast 
system, Wilkins says, "may even be cheaper than existing systems, since it 
involves a lower-power--but more focused--X-ray source."


