Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 11/23/96 November 23, 1996

 The Gods of Sugarscape Digital sex, migration, trade, and war on the social 
science frontier

 By IVARS PETERSON

 In the ritualized warfare of the game of chess, the board is a miniature 
battlefield on which opposing commanders-in-chief marshal their forces.

 Each playing piece has a particular pattern of allowed movements, and the 
game's rules shape the battle. The combatants can try out different strategies, 
directing bold attacks, mounting stubborn defenses, or waging wars of attrition 
across the grid.

 At the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C., social scientist Joshua M. 
Epstein and computer modeler Robert Axtell also have a playing field on which 
to audition their ideas. They play their game on a 50 by 50 square lattice on a 
computer screen, and the playing pieces, or agents, are colored dots occupying 
some fraction of the squares.

 Epstein and Axtell are actually more like gods than commanders. They define 
the landscape, set the rules, and characterize the agents. Instead of 
participating in the action, they step back to observe what happens as the 
swarming agents, left on their own in these simulations, move about, gather 
sustenance, reproduce, and die off according to their programmed predilections.

 From the patterns that emerge, the re-searchers can glean insights into human 
social and economic behavior. "We grow social structures--artificial 
societies--in the computer," Epstein says. "We can examine population growth 
and migration, famine, epidemics, economic development, trade, conflict, and 
other social issues."

"It's intellectually provocative work," comments economist Sidney G. Winter of 
the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. The 
resulting simulations "provide challenges to existing treatments of social and 
economic matters."

 Epstein and Axtell describe their project in the newly published book Growing 
Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up (Washington, D.C.: 
Brookings Institution/MIT Press).

"It's a magnificent achievement," says John L. Casti of the Santa Fe Institute 
in New Mexico. "What they've done in building a world inside a computer is a 
glimpse of how ...science will be done in the 21st century."

 The cyberworld in which Epstein and Axtell's agents dwell is known as 
Sugarscape. It's a two-dimensional landscape, represented as a square grid, 
containing two regions rich in a renewable resource arbitrarily called sugar. 
Every agent is born into this world with a metabolism demanding sugar, and each 
has a number of other attributes, such as visual range for food detection, that 
vary across the population.

 They move from square to square according to a simple rule: Look around as far 
as your vision permits, find the unoccupied spot with the most sugar, go there, 
and eat the sugar. As it is consumed, the sugar grows back at a predetermined 
rate.

 An agent's range is set by how far it can see. Every time an agent moves, it 
burns an amount of sugar determined by its given metabolic rate. Agents die 
when they fail to gather enough sugar to fuel their activities.

 With hundreds of agents roaming the landscape, "interesting things begin to 
happen," Axtell says.

 Initially distributed at random across the landscape, the agents quickly 
gravitate toward the two sugar mountains. A few individuals end up accumulating 
large stocks of sugar, building up a great deal of personal wealth. These 
happen to be agents that have superior vision and a low metabolic rate and have 
lived a long time.

 A few others, combining short vision with a low metabolic rate, manage to 
subsist at the fringes, gathering just enough to survive in the sugar badlands 
but not looking far enough to see the much larger sugar stocks available just 
beyond the horizon.

 At its simplest level, the Sugarscape model represents a kind of 
hunter-gatherer society, Axtell explains.

 Yet even this rudimentary model reproduces the kind of strongly skewed 
distribution of wealth generally observed in human societies--where a few 
individuals hold most of the wealth and the bulk of the population lives in 
relative poverty.

 Introducing sex and reproduction to Sugarscape is as simple as adding to the 
agent's string of numbers a few bits specifying gender.

 A rule specifies the allowed behavior: An agent must select a neighboring 
agent at random. If the neighbor is of the opposite sex and of reproductive 
age, and if one of the two agents has an empty neighboring site (to hold 
offspring), a child is born. The child inherits a mixture of its parents' 
genetic attributes.

 This new dimension enables the researchers to investigate the effect of 
cultural forces on biological evolution and vice versa. For example, in the 
absence of any cultural factor, agents with relatively low metabolism and high 
vision enjoy a selective advantage in Sugarscape.

 Now, suppose that when an agent dies, it can pass on its accumulated holdings 
of sugar to its offspring. How does this cultural convention influence 
evolution?

 The Sugarscape model suggests that agents who might otherwise have been 
"weeded out" are given an extra advantage through inheritance, Epstein says. 
The average vision of the population doesn't increase to the same high level 
eventually reached in a population where no wealth is passed on.

 The researchers can also modify their model to observe the emergence of tribes 
(identified by numerical tags) and the process of assimilation (changing 
affiliation to join the local majority). Inevitably, there arises a primitive 
kind of combat, in which agents of two different tribes may plunder each other 
for sugar.

 Various combat rules lead to patterns of movement that differ from those 
produced by the standard "eat all you can find" rule. For example, some combat 
rules lead quickly to strictly segregated colonies, each clinging to its own 
sugar peak. In other cases, one side wipes the other out.

 The Sugarscape model also offers insights into other phenomena, such as the 
introduction of trade. In this case, the landscape contains heaps of two 
resources: sugar and spice. The agents are programmed with different metabolic 
rates, or preferences, for each of the two commodities. They die if either 
their sugar or their spice store falls to zero.

 A mathematical formula called a welfare function allows each agent to compute 
how close it is to sugar or spice starvation. The agent then strives to gather 
more of the commodity it needs.

 An additional system of rules specifies how agents bargain for and exchange 
sugar and spice according to their needs. These rules enable the researchers to 
document how much trade transpires and at what price exchanges occur.

 When agents are allowed to live forever, so long as they never run out of 
food, the sugar-spice model shows that the average trade price converges to a 
stable level. Economic equilibrium emerges, Epstein says, just as textbook 
market economics predicts.

 However, when Epstein and Axtell make the agents "more human" by giving them 
finite lives and permitting their preferences to evolve, the price no longer 
stabilizes and the market never reaches equilibrium.

"The assumption that we can let markets produce efficient allocations [of 
capital or resources] on their own is deeply challenged by our work," Epstein 
claims. "We see how brittle traditional economic theory really is."

 Epstein and Axtell's Sugarscape simulation is just one example of a wide 
variety of computer models now being developed on the basis of interactions 
between agents governed by given rules rather than on equations defining global 
behavior. The idea is to model from the bottom up--seeing behavior emerge out 
of interactions among individuals--instead of from the top down--deriving the 
behavior of individuals from overarching laws.

 Researchers at the Santa Fe Institute, Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory, 
and elsewhere have worked out agent-based models of urban transportation 
systems, insect colonies, business organizations, financial markets, and other 
situations. Such approaches are also useful in studies of artificial 
life--forms that exist only in the computer yet mimic certain aspects of the 
behavior of living organisms (SN: 8/10/91, p. 88).

 What distinguishes the Sugarscape project is its emphasis on seeing what sorts 
of socially relevant behavior can emerge from the collective interaction of 
individuals following the simplest possible rules. "The surprise is that we can 
grow [complex, recognizable behavior] with incredibly simple rules and simple 
agents," Epstein says.

 Such agent-based modeling shows that social norms can arise out of very 
primitive behavior, though it doesn't necessarily demonstrate how the norms 
actually came about, notes economist Thomas Schelling of the University of 
Maryland in College Park.

 Epstein insists that although these bare-bones models can't really be used to 
make specific predictions, they can suggest explanations of some widely 
observed macroscopic phenomena, from distributions of wealth in typical 
societies to erratic price fluctuations in markets.

"We think of our model as a laboratory for social science," Epstein says. 
Researchers from a wide variety of disciplines, including economics, biology, 
demographics, and environmental studies, can use this approach as a research 
tool to tackle oft-neglected, cross-disciplinary issues like the effects of 
inheritance on the genetic evolution of a system.

"One can readily imagine hypotheses or mechanisms that no one has thought of 
before arising out of this kind of model," Winter adds.

 Like others working with agent-based models, Epstein and Axtell must interpret 
the patterns they observe on the computer screen. After all, their agents are 
no more than strings of digits and the observed behaviors no more than patterns 
in a computer's memory.

"It is the act of interpretation . . . that allows these electronic worlds to 
make contact with their real-world counterparts," Casti notes.

 In the case of Sugarscape, the model is more a metaphor than a realistic 
depiction of society. No one literally spends a working day accumulating sugar. 
The landscape and agent characteristics are simple stand-ins for the more 
complicated things that occur in the real world.

 In one application of their method, Epstein and Axtell are now working with 
archaeologist George J. Gumerman of Southern Illinois University in Carbondale 
and his colleagues to "grow" the Anasazi society, a Native American culture 
that flourished in the U.S. Southwest for hundreds of years, then suddenly 
disappeared. The archaeologists have data on weather patterns, crop yields, and 
other environmental conditions during that period, along with information about 
the Anasazi culture.

"This gives our modeling an empirical target," Epstein says. The researchers 
hope that agent-based simulations may shed light on whether environmental or 
cultural factors were primarily responsible for the society's abrupt decline.

 Epstein and Axtell are also working with H. Peyton Young of Johns Hopkins 
University in Baltimore to study how caste systems, in which a small elite 
demands more than its fair share, arise in societies (, SN: 5/4/96, p. 284). 
"We want to know whether or not equity comes about naturally in social 
systems," Young says.

 The Sugarscape laboratory is still very much in the development stage. 
Re-searchers are just starting to examine ways of tailoring this approach to 
address specific needs and issues in the social sciences, economics, and 
elsewhere.

 One key issue in the Sugarscape approach involves how to tweak the model to 
obtain such phenomena as the emergence of governments. "There may be some kind 
of threshold beyond which you can't take a step up in understanding . . . human 
organization without making the agents smarter," Winter says. "The problem is 
how to make the agents smarter in a way that remains true to the basic 
approach."

 Sugarscape is already an immensely attractive playing field because the 
limited repertoire of the agents makes it easy to understand, measure, and 
depict what's going on and why the agents behave as they do. Moreover, typical 
Sugarscape experiments take only a few minutes on an ordinary personal computer.

"There are lots of opportunities to try things out," Epstein says. "Our 
artificial societies let you get your teeth into things that conventional 
theory can't handle."

 The Sugarscape effort is part of Project 2050, a cooperative venture of the 
Santa Fe Institute, the Brookings Institution, and the World Resources 
Institute in Washington, D.C., to identify conditions for sustainable 
development on a global scale.

 By providing insights into population growth, resource use, migration, 
economic development, conflict, and other global social processes, games played 
on the Sugarscape grid may help shape the policies needed to direct the future 
course of society.


