Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 11/30/96 November 30, 1996

 Protecting Predators Tracking the Rocky Mountain carnivores

 By TINA ADLER

 Little Red Riding Hood must be turning over in her grave. Many residents of 
the United States and Canada now go out of their way to protect wolves, those 
evil tricksters, even importing them into national parks where hunters had 
wiped them out.

 Recent studies show that many North Americans--particularly people who don't 
live near the animals' habitats -- support measures designed to encourage the 
long-term survival of wolves and other large predators, Stephen R. Kellert of 
Yale University and his colleagues assert. Although grizzly bears still strike 
fear in the hearts of most people, the woods are full of hikers and campers who 
hope to catch a distant glimpse of the huge beasts. Their tourism dollars 
generate goodwill toward the animals among people in rural communities.

 Although mountain lions pose a greater threat to humans than wolves do and 
require more room to roam and hunt than grizzlies, the general population has 
little awareness of them, Kellert's group finds.

 Over the last century, the number of large carnivores has declined sharply in 
North America. Although many people now want to protect these animals, their 
populations are not rebounding. Development and roads have encroached on their 
habitat and put hunters closer to their prey. In much of the Rocky Mountains, 
most deaths of adult wolves, grizzly bears, and mountain lions result from 
cars, trains, and hunters (even though hunting is illegal in many cases).

 With current land-use and conservation practices, the numbers of Rocky 
Mountain carnivores will continue to decline, scientists warn in a series of 
reports in the August Conservation Biology. Studies examining the animals' 
viability and resiliency provide clues to guarding their long-term survival. 
Investigations into their influence on other species demonstrate the importance 
of preserving them.

 The Rocky Mountains, which stretch from Canada into the western United States, 
harbor the largest and most diverse population of large carnivores in North 
America, outside of Alaska. Increasingly, however, the animals in the Rockies 
are confined to fragments of suitable habitat, particularly in the southern 
ranges.

 Wolverines and lynx have become rare. In the United States, wolves have made 
it onto the federal list of endangered species and the grizzly is considered 
threatened.

 Canada has nothing comparable to the U.S. Endangered Species Act. The 
continued existence of the wolf and grizzly "in the southern Canadian Rockies 
remains uncertain," note Paul C. Paquet and Arlin Hackman of the World Wildlife 
Fund Canada in Toronto in a May 1995 report. Paquet is also a researcher at the 
University of Calgary in Alberta.

 The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) has instigated a plan to boost the 
wolf population. The agency has imported 31 wolves into Yellowstone National 
Park in Montana and Wyoming and 35 into parks in Idaho since 1995.

 Throughout Canada and the United States, research and conservation efforts to 
study and guard the Rockies' large carnivores generally lack coordination and 
legal backing, some ecologists assert. "In most cases, there aren't widespread 
plans for dealing with different carnivores," says Olin Bray of FWS in Denver.

 The four-footed residents come under different laws depending on where they 
live and wander. The Endangered Species Act protects only animals deemed 
already at risk. For the most part, a host of state laws determines the other 
creatures' fates within U.S. borders. In Canada, since both the federal and 
provincial governments have jurisdiction over carnivores, the laws also vary 
widely.

 Wolves moving from Banff National Park in Alberta to northeastern Idaho may 
cross more than 30 jurisdictions, each with its own wolf policy, Paquet and 
Hackman note. A hunter or frightened landowner in British Columbia or Alberta 
could legally shoot a wolf, whereas doing so in the United States is illegal.

 Many people regard the Rockies not as a haven for wildlife but as valuable 
real estate for development, mining, and logging. The extent of such activities 
varies throughout the region, however. For example, more tourist and resort 
development occurred in Banff in the last 4 years than in the history of 
Yellowstone.

 Overall, the Rockies remain lightly populated, and the range provides the 
existing carnivores with enough habitat to live, raise their young, and find 
prey, says Paquet.

 Carnivores generally need at least 2,000 adults, including 500 breeding 
members, to maintain a genetically healthy population over many years (SN: 
8/24/96, p. 125), Reed F. Noss of Oregon State University in Corvallis and his 
colleagues note. A group that large requires an area of roughly 100,000 square 
kilometers -- more or less depending on the species and the availability of 
food and suitable habitat. For example, wolves appear to require 4 to 10 times 
that much.

"Even large herbivores such as moose and elk require much less space than large 
carnivores," the researchers report.

 On their extensive travels and even while residing in parks popular with 
tourists, the animals often face deadly encounters with humans. To provide 
adequate space safe from people, many conservation biologists are recommending 
the creation of broad, protected corridors linking up wilderness areas. These 
paths will need to wander through varied landscapes to meet the animals' 
different route requirements, Noss' team observes.

 Carnivores' future well-being depends not only on management plans and legal 
protections, but also on their own long-term viability. Scientists determine a 
species' viability in part by calculating its reproductive rate and the 
population size needed to prevent its members from inbreeding.

"The large carnivore species in the Rocky Mountains are of concern to 
conservationists precisely because their values for these characteristics . . . 
are generally low," assert Noss and his colleagues.

 A species' prognosis also depends on its resiliency -- how well it survives 
human and natural disturbances to its environment. The ability to alter 
foraging behavior when food supplies change, to increase reproduction to make 
up for a temporarily high death rate, and to travel widely in search of new 
mates makes a species more resilient, report John L. Weaver of the Northern 
Rockies Conservation Cooperative in Missoula, Mont., Paquet, and Leonard F. 
Ruggiero of the U.S. Forest Service in Missoula.

 The longevity of adult females appears particularly critical to the well-being 
of most carnivore populations, the team concludes. In landscapes fragmented by 
human disturbances, young animals benefit a great deal if they can establish a 
new home turf and reproduce far from their parents. Among large carnivores, 
only wolves do this regularly, Weaver says.

 Although often unable to escape slaughter by humans, wolves deserve their wily 
reputation when it comes to eking out a living. Because they produce many 
offspring and disperse widely, they are resilient to the disruptions that 
people are creating in the Rockies, says Weaver. Moreover, they are not picky 
about what prey they dine on or where they live. A female gives birth to 
approximately six female pups in a lifetime.

 Mountain lions "appear to have slightly less resiliency," as they can't hunt 
in as wide a range of habitats and have fewer young, Weaver's group reports. 
However, they do travel widely and eat a variety of prey. They produce three to 
four female young during a lifetime.

 Grizzly bears are even less resilient than mountain lions and "extremely 
vulnerable to anthropogenic disturbance," the scientists note. They demand 
quality forage, and the young females set up housekeeping close to or in their 
maternal home ranges. They have three to four female cubs.

 The scant data available on wolverines suggest that they rank as even more 
sensitive than grizzlies to fluctuations in scavenging opportunities, and they 
produce only about two female offspring.

"By accelerating the rate and expanding the scope of disturbance, humans have 
undermined the resiliency mechanisms of large carnivores and have caused 
widespread declines," conclude Weaver and his colleagues.

 Scientists have argued that large carnivores are so-called umbrella species: 
Protecting their habitat will help the Rockies' other imperiled plants and 
animals because carnivores occupy such a diverse range of environments. Few 
studies have been done to support this theory. However, Paquet and his 
colleagues recently found that preserving the remaining optimal habitats of 
grizzlies, lynx, and wolves would conserve the stomping grounds of 372 of the 
381 additional terrestrial vertebrates living in the southern and central 
Canadian Rockies. These results were published in early October by the federal 
Department of Canadian Heritage in Ottawa.

 While agreeing that carnivores are umbrella species, Weaver argues that they 
may not provide as big an umbrella as Paquet's group calculates. A management 
plan for large carnivores would benefit only about 60 percent of the area's 
terrestrial species, he believes. Birds, for example, depend on dead trees for 
nesting sites, but carnivores can live without them.

 Recent studies suggest that preserving wildlife may help--or at least not 
harm--even local human residents, assert Hackman and Raymond Rasker of the 
Wilderness Society in Bozeman, Mont.

 The researchers examined the economic well-being of northwest Montana counties 
from the early 1970s to the early 1990s. They compared counties with 25 percent 
of their land designated as wilderness or national parks and having little 
timber harvesting and mining with counties whose economies depend more heavily 
on natural resource extraction.

 Economically, the logging and mining counties "lag far behind" the others, 
which had more rapidly growing income levels, better economic diversification, 
and lower unemployment. The more preserved areas attracted newcomers "seeking a 
pleasant environment in which to live and do business," the team reports.

 So people and wildlife alike may lose out if carnivores aren't given more 
protection, conservation biologists warn. "There is no assurance that 
conventional management will be successful" at saving the animals, conclude Tim 
W. Clark, a biologist at Yale University and the Northern Rockies Conservation 
Cooperative in Jackson, Wyo., and his colleagues.

 The populations will sputter along in the short to mid term but will 
eventually die out without further protection, Clark argues.

"I'm concerned about carnivores that aren't yet listed [as threatened or 
endangered]," says Bray. "They need to be managed," but state and federal 
agencies have little funding to beef up their current efforts, he laments.


