Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/23/96 November 23, 1996

 Butterfly Wings It with a Few Genes

by D. Vergano

 While folklore claims that leopards can't change their spots, butterflies can 
shed theirs with surprising ease. An international team of biologists has found 
that butterflies can alter their wing patterns in just a few generations using 
existing genes that served another purpose earlier in embryonic development.

 Evolutionary biologists have tracked butterfly markings and coloration for 
decades because of the insect's ability to adjust to predators and 
environmental stress. "Butterflies are an obvious choice [to study] -- they're 
visually dramatic creatures," says Sean Carroll of the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, a coauthor of the new report in the Nov. 21 Nature.

 The researchers focused on the East African butterfly Bicyclus anynana. This 
extraordinary insect is born looking so dramatically different from wet to dry 
season that entomologists had long considered it two distinct species.

 In the wet season, when temperatures are higher and food is plentiful, B. 
anynana sports distinctive bull's-eyes, or eyespots, on its wings. Enticed by 
this ornamentation, predators attack the wings of the insect instead of its 
body. As the dry season dawns, the wings lose their eyespots, and the insects 
soon resemble the brown leaves littering the forest floor. B. anynana breeds 
year-round, producing either spotted or plain offspring according to the season.

"The fundamental question is, What generates patterning?" says Carroll.

 The team from Wisconsin, the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, and the 
University of Edinburgh in Scotland first tracked Distal-less, a gene that 
regulates development in the arthropod embryo, to determine when patterns begin 
to form in the butterfly's wings. From earlier work, they knew that the gene 
turns on at the sites of future wing markings (SN: 7/9/94, p. 23). Only one 
cell thick, the wing acquires its color and markings in response to simple 
chemical messages sent from cell to cell.

 By tracking the activity of Distal-less, the team learned that eyespots bloom 
late in the final stages of growth, just before butterflies emerge from their 
cocoons. "Which is what you expect, since the butterflies are getting ready for 
whatever season they'll emerge into," says Carroll.

 Next, the researchers mimicked permanent wet and dry seasons in the lab, 
breeding groups of butterflies at constant high or low temperatures. Within 20 
generations, two distinct new species had evolved. The warm weather line 
developed eyespots regardless of the temperature it emerged into, while the 
cold weather variety never developed eyespots.

 Carroll notes that only five or six genes changed between the two species. In 
evolution's fierce contest between camouflaged butterflies and sharp-eyed 
predators, species that adapt quickly and efficiently, like B. anynana, have an 
advantage. "This butterfly evolves rapidly through small genetic changes," 
Carroll says.

"This paper is one of the very few really tight collaborations between good 
people in molecular genetics, developmental biology, and evolutionary biology," 
notes H. Frederik Nijhout of Duke University in Durham, N.C. In his view, the 
study gives the emerging field of developmental evolution its first set of 
genetic tools for understanding the evolution of butterfly color patterns.

"Ultimately, the more interesting story may be Distal-less," says Nijhout. In 
arthropod embryos, the gene controls where appendages grow. By demonstrating 
that the same gene orchestrates where eyespots appear in butterfly wings, the 
researchers have shown that what a gene does depends on the animal's stage of 
development, he says.

"It means you can manage development with far fewer genes than you might have 
thought," he says.


