Science News Online (11/9/96): The Mother Lode of Natural Gas

 November 9, 1996 

 The Mother Lode of Natural Gas Methane hydrates stir tales of hope and hazard

 By RICH MONASTERSKY

 For kicks, oceanographer William P. Dillon likes to surprise visitors to his 
lab by taking ordinary-looking ice balls and setting them on fire.

"They're easy to light. You just put a match to them and they will go," says 
Dillon, a researcher with the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in Woods Hole, Mass.

 If the truth be told, this is not typical ice. The prop in Dillon's show is a 
curious and poorly known structure called methane hydrate. Unlike ordinary 
water ice, methane hydrate consists of single molecules of natural gas trapped 
within crystalline cages formed by frozen water molecules. Although chemists 
first discovered gas hydrates in the early part of the 19th century, 
geoscientists have only recently started documenting their existence in 
underground deposits and exploring their importance as a potential fuel.

 Late last year, a team of oceanographers conducted the most in-depth 
investigation of methane hydrates to date by drilling into an extensive 
accumulation beneath the seabed off the coast of the southeastern United 
States. The results of this research, which are now beginning to appear in the 
scientific literature, seem to bolster extremely sketchy estimates made years 
ago about the vastness of the hydrate resource.

"It turns out there is a tremendous amount of gas down there," says Charles 
Paull, a marine geologist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
and a leader of the recent drilling expedition. "It shores up the fact that 
these are large reserves and makes it increasingly important that they get 
assessed in terms of whether they are energy-producing deposits or not."

 At the same time, scientists wonder whether this resource also has a dark 
side. "There have been extremely rapid changes in climate in the past. Some 
think that these were caused by methane released from methane hydrates," says 
Dillon.

 Despite their potential importance, methane hydrates have evaded scientific 
scrutiny until now, largely because they are extremely difficult to study. They 
exist only where high pressures and low temperatures squeeze water and methane 
into a solid form.

 Most known deposits of methane hydrate lie below the seafloor in regions that 
slope from the continents to the deep ocean basins thousands of meters 
underwater. Marine geologists have tentatively identified deposits off the 
coasts of Costa Rica, New Jersey, Oregon, Japan, India, and hundreds of other 
sites around the globe. Petroleum companies have also encountered hydrates 
while drilling through Arctic permafrost in Siberia, Alaska, and Canada.

 Like vampires, hydrates disintegrate quickly if pulled from their dark lair. 
When researchers on the recent drilling expedition hauled up cores of sediment 
from the ocean floor, the drastic reduction in pressure caused much of the 
hydrate to melt before it even reached the ship. Without unusual precautions, 
any remaining hydrate fizzed away when the scientists cut open the core.

"Gas hydrates have largely escaped traditional geologic observation because gas 
hydrates and humans are sort of incompatible. The gas hydrates decompose under 
the conditions [in which] people traditionally analyze cores. Conversely, 
humans have no experience in operating in the conditions where gas hydrates are 
stable. We die under the conditions of gas hydrate stability," says Paull.

 Oceanographers first drilled through methane hydrates unintentionally, on an 
expedition in 1970. Although that encounter was uneventful, research drilling 
cruises purposely avoided suspected hydrate deposits for 2 decades afterward, 
fearing they might hit an overpressurized pocket of gas, which could blast away 
the drilling equipment. Concerns over pressurized gas gradually diminished, and 
mounting scientific curiosity emboldened researchers to try boring through more 
hydrate fields. Starting in 1992, the international Ocean Drilling Program 
(ODP) intentionally breached hydrate deposits several times without incident.

 On the recent expedition, Paull and his colleagues drilled at three sites 
along the Blake Ridge, a large, submerged promontory 330 kilometers off the 
southeast coast of the United States. Working in water depths of 2,800 meters, 
the researchers penetrated 700 meters below the seafloor with a hollow drill 
bit that cuts away a core of sediment the diameter of a soda can.

 The investigators had to take special precautions to prevent losing methane 
hydrate during the 10 minutes it took to haul fresh sections of core up from 
the ocean bottom. At various depths, they sealed small bits of core in 
pressurized barrels, thereby containing the gas until the core reached 
shipboard laboratories. These samples provided the first direct measurements of 
how much methane hydrate exists at different depths beneath the seafloor.

"The amount of hydrate down there is much higher than had previously been 
estimated," says Paull. "It was not uncommon to get from 10 liters up to 30 
liters of gas per liter of sediment."

 The researchers also measured, for the first time, large amounts of free gas 
trapped beneath the frozen hydrate deposits. The volume of gas was far more 
than expected, exceeding even the amount within the frozen layer, says Paull.

 Although the exact origin of hydrates remains unknown, Paull and others 
suspect that bacteria within the sediments consume rich organic material and 
generate methane gas. At a certain depth beneath the seafloor, the low 
temperatures and high pressures ensnare the gas within the frozen hydrate 
structure. Methane below the hydrate layer remains in gaseous form because the 
temperatures there are too high to support freezing.

 Conventional deposits of methane, or natural gas, form through a different 
process, when seafloor sediments get buried far deeper. Exposed to much higher 
temperatures, the organic material in the sediments simmers until it transforms 
into petroleum and eventually methane.

 Nearly a decade ago, several researchers independently tried to estimate how 
much methane exists in hydrate deposits. Because of the scarcity of direct 
hydrate measurements at the time, the estimates rested on indirect seismic 
studies, which probe the ocean bottom sediments with blasts of sound that 
reflect off hidden layers.

 These studies suggested that global hydrate deposits contain approximately 
10,000 gigatons, or 1013 tons, of carbon. That number represents double the 
combined amount in all reserves of coal, oil, and conventional natural gas.

 The newly emerging evidence supports these rough approximations, says Gordon 
J. MacDonald, one of the scientists who made the calculations in the 1980s. 
"All these estimates are quite uncertain. But it remains abundantly clear that 
methane hydrates contain the largest store of carbon that we know about that is 
underground," says MacDonald, who now directs the International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis in Laxenburg, Austria.

 In fact, hydrates may be more widespread than previously thought. The recent 
ODP expedition found hydrates in regions that lack the seismically reflective 
layers usually used to identify potential deposits, the team reports in the 
Sept. 27 Science.

"Given their worldwide distribution and their very large quantities, they make 
a very attractive energy source, provided that one can bring the gas up at 
somewhere near market price," MacDonald says. The cost of accessing hydrates 
has served as a barrier in the past, but some energy-hungry nations lacking 
conventional fossil fuels are extremely interested in future use of hydrates.

 Japan plans to drill exploratory wells in the next few years, first on land in 
Alaska and then in Japanese waters. The Japanese National Oil Company is 
currently negotiating with the U.S. and Canadian governments to conduct 
experimental drilling of hydrate deposits near Prudhoe Bay, Alaska, in early 
1998. They hope to have more success than the nations and commercial companies 
that tried to extract frozen methane in Canada, Alaska, and Siberia during the 
1970s and 1980s.

 In nature, methane hydrates are fickle molecules, liable to melt whenever the 
pressure drops slightly or the temperature creeps upward. Evidence of this 
instability pockmarks the ocean floor along the Blake Ridge. Marine geologists 
have identified numerous craters there that apparently formed when hydrates 
melted, releasing methane gas.

"The Blake Ridge is a pressure cooker, over geological time. The gas and fluids 
come up and blow through the sediments. We can see depressions 500 to 700 
meters wide and 20 to 30 meters deep," says Dillon.

 In other cases, melting at the base of the hydrate layer has destabilized 
seafloor slopes, leading to massive submarine landslides. Researchers have 
suggested hydrate weakness as a factor behind landslides off Alaska, the U.S. 
Atlantic coast, British Columbia, Norway, and Africa, says Keith A. Kvenvolden 
of the USGS in Menlo Park, Calif.

 Such inherent instability could spell problems for future drilling platforms 
resting on top of hydrate-rich deposits. If the collapses are large enough, 
they could also produce the destructive waves called tsunamis that race across 
ocean basins.

 Hydrates may exert their greatest impact through their indirect links to 
climate. Because methane is a powerful greenhouse gas--about 10 times as strong 
as carbon dioxide--massive melting of hydrates and the ensuing release of 
methane gas could raise Earth's surface temperature.

 James P. Kennett of the University of California, Santa Barbara has recently 
discovered intriguing evidence implicating methane hydrates as an instigator of 
climate change. Sediments off the California coast show signs that carbon 
isotopic ratios in the ocean shifted quite dramatically and quickly at several 
times during the last 70,000 years. Because methane has a distinctive isotopic 
fingerprint that matches the shifts, Kennett suggests that large volumes of 
methane must have poured into the ocean at these times.

 In his theory, the methane came from hydrates that melted when ocean waters 
warmed slightly. The liberation of so much methane over a few decades would 
have caused widespread warming that affected the entire globe. As supporting 
evidence, Kennett notes that the ocean's isotopic shifts indeed coincide with 
well-known Dansgaard-Oeschger episodes when Earth's ice age climate went 
suddenly warm.

"Until now, [hydrates] haven't really entered into discussions of climate 
change. They have been almost completely ignored. Until the beginning of this 
year, I had not even considered them. But I'm now convinced that they are of 
great importance to the global environment and have been for billions of 
years," says Kennett. He presented his findings in September at a gas hydrate 
conference in Ghent, Belgium.

 Kvenvolden has proposed a different mechanism that might have released 
hydrates at the end of the last ice age. As the great blanket of continental 
ice melted at that time, global sea levels swelled by more than 90 meters, 
submerging many Arctic regions where hydrate layers exist. The relatively warm 
ocean water would have melted the hydrates, unleashing tremendous amounts of 
methane into the atmosphere, Kvenvolden believes.

 The same rationale could apply to the modern world. Sea levels are currently 
rising slowly, at a rate of a few centimeters per decade. Projections suggest 
that they will rise even faster in the future because of the climatic warming 
caused by greenhouse gas pollution. At the same time, ocean temperatures are 
expected to creep upward.

"If you reason that hydrates were important in climate change in the past, 
there is no reason they wouldn't be important in the future," says Kvenvolden. 
Indeed, some scientists speculate that melting methane hydrates could greatly 
exacerbate global warming.

 For now, though, Kvenvolden and others remain unsure exactly what role 
hydrates have played in past climate changes. Lacking this knowledge, they say 
it is impossible to predict how hydrates will behave in the future.

 A greater understanding of hydrates and their importance will come as 
oceanographers tap deposits in other areas of the world, testing whether the 
lessons learned on the Blake Ridge apply elsewhere. Scientists are also 
creating synthetic hydrates in the laboratory (SN: 10/19/96, p. 252). By 
squeezing methane and water in a pressurized apparatus, Dillon and his 
colleagues can not only gauge how hydrates weaken seafloor sediments but also 
improve seismic methods for detecting hydrates.

 When the experiments are over, the remaining synthetic hydrates could have 
other uses. "I hadn't really thought of it before, but you could try cooking 
with them," says Dillon. "I wouldn't want to plan a major meal, but you could 
probably scramble an egg on it."


