Science News Online (12/14/96): Magnesium May Stave off Cerebral Palsy

 December 14, 1996 

 Magnesium May Stave off Cerebral Palsy

by S. Sternberg

 Cerebral palsy begins before birth with damage to an infant's brain. The 
malfunctioning brain then sends conflicting signals to the infant's muscles. In 
some cases, these signals pit one muscle against another, locking the limbs in 
place so that living in the grip of cerebral palsy is like living in rigor 
mortis. In other cases, the baby can move, but its muscles refuse to obey 
commands. About half of the infants born with the disorder are mentally 
retarded.

 Clearly, preventing cerebral palsy would be "very desirable indeed," asserts 
neurologist Karin B. Nelson of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, 
Md.

 Scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta 
have taken a step in that direction. They have shown that giving magnesium 
sulfate to pregnant women may greatly reduce the incidence of cerebral palsy in 
infants born weighing less than 3.3 pounds. These low birthweight infants are 
60 to 75 times more likely to develop cerebral palsy than babies that reach a 
normal weight before birth--and the number of children with cerebral palsy is 
growing. Medical advances enable many 1-pound infants to survive the trauma of 
prematurity.

 Magnesium sulfate is routinely given intravenously to halt preterm labor or 
prevent convulsions in women with pregnancy-induced hypertension. In 1987, 
Dutch researchers found it also prevents hemorrhaging in the brains of infants 
whose mothers have this form of hypertension.

 Last year, Nelson and Judith K. Grether of the California Birth Defects 
Monitoring Program in Emeryville studied infants in four California counties to 
see whether giving at-risk women the drug can prevent cerebral palsy in low 
birthweight babies.

 Of the low birthweight babies born to women who had been given magnesium 
sulfate, 11 percent had cerebral palsy. However, 46 percent of the premature 
babies of women who had not been receiving the drug had cerebral palsy. The 
drug might have a "protective effect," the researchers concluded. It seemed to 
protect infants of women who experienced preterm labor and those of women with 
pregnancy-induced hypertension.

 More recently, Diana E. Schendel and her coworkers at CDC set out to study low 
birthweight infants born in Georgia between 1986 and 1988. They found that less 
than 1 percent of children whose mothers were given magnesium sulfate developed 
cerebral palsy, compared to 8 percent of babies whose mothers were not given 
the drug.

 The researchers calculated that magnesium sulfate reduced the prevalence of 
cerebral palsy by about 90 percent and reduced the prevalence of mental 
retardation by about 70 percent, although the latter link was weaker. Their 
findings appear in the Dec. 11 Journal of the American Medical Association.

"One of the striking things about the CDC study is the reduction in mental 
retardation," says Nelson, author of an accompanying commentary.

 The CDC has begun large-scale studies to test these results. Meanwhile, NIH 
plans to study two groups of pregnant women -- one that will be given the drug 
and one that will not -- to determine once and for all whether magnesium 
sulfate prevents cerebral palsy and mental retardation.


