Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 12/14/96 December 14, 1996

 Searching for Life in a Martian Meteorite A seesaw of results

 By RON COWEN

 At a crowded press conference in Washington, D.C., last August, onlookers had 
to strain to catch a glimpse of the celebrity in their midst. 
Jostling each other for a better view, paparazzi fired flash after flash.

 The tiny object inside the airtight container wasn't wearing spandex or 
sporting an electric guitar. But this rock was certainly a star.

 Scientists at the NASA conference reported that the potato-shaped meteorite, 
identified as originating from Mars, may contain fossils of 
ancient, primitive bacteria from the Red Planet ().

 Five months later, the controversy surrounding that claim has only escalated. 
With new evidence on both sides of the issue appearing in 
peer-reviewed journals, hyped in press releases, and presented at subsequent 
meetings, information about the Martian meteorite ALH84001 is 
proving confusing. Some suggest that the debate over whether the meteorite 
contains fossils from Mars won't be settled anytime soon.

 If only this rock could talk.

 Although scientists argue over many properties of meteorite ALH84001, 
discovered in an Antarctic ice field a decade ago, they concur on 
several basic facts. Like the other 11 rocks classified as Martian, ALH84001 
contains oxygen whose distinctive isotopic composition points to 
an origin on Mars. This meteorite stands out from the others, however, because 
it's by far the oldest. Radioactive dating of certain isotopes 
in the rock indicates that it formed beneath the Martian crust some 4.5 billion 
years ago. Its advanced age has attracted keen interest 
because ancient Mars is thought to have been considerably warmer, wetter, and 
more hospitable to life than the modern planet's tundralike 
landscape.

 When the scientists who first studied the meteorite reported their findings in 
the Aug. 16 Science, they cited four lines of evidence that, 
together, suggest ALH84001 may contain fossil life. Microscopic globules of 
carbonates in the meteorite may have formed when a carbon-rich 
liquid, such as carbon dioxide dissolved in water, percolated through cracks, 
leaving behind the solid precipitate. The presence of water is 
generally thought to be a prerequisite for life.

 The black-and-white rims of the golden globules contain deposits of iron 
sulfide and a type of iron oxide called magnetite. Although a 
nonbiological process can form these minerals, primitive terrestrial bacteria 
also produce them.

 The rock contains a variety of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). 
Although these substances can form through chemical processes that do 
not involve life, they often arise on Earth as by-products of biological 
decomposition. It's intriguing that the PAHs lie near the carbonates, 
the team argues, because that's where these hydrocarbons would be expected to 
reside if they had a biological origin.

 Finally, electron microscopy revealed that the meteorite contains tiny 
worm-shaped and ovoid features, typically only a few hundred 
nanometers in diameter. Although they are only one-hundredth the size, these 
shapes are similar to fossils left by primitive bacteria on Earth.

 Other researchers have attacked each of these arguments. "Since August, 
everything I've seen -- other people's work and my own -- has 
weakened their proposal," says planetary scientist John F. Kerridge of the 
University of California, San Diego. "Now I think they don't have a 
shred of evidence to back it up."

 In a dramatic report to be published next week, a group of researchers refutes 
the very notion that the features in ALH84001 are microscopic 
fossils. Harry Y. McSween Jr. of the University of Tennessee in Knoxville and 
his colleagues used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to 
examine the area of the rock containing the carbonate globules. TEM probes the 
composition and structure, as well as the shape, of microscopic 
objects.

 The researchers say that the TEM confirmed the presence of the wormlike and 
ovoid features and revealed that they are composed of magnetite. 
That finding appeared to give a major boost to the proponents of life on Mars, 
because some terrestrial microfossils contain magnetite. 
However, closer inspection of the internal structure of the magnetite in 
ALH84001 revealed that it could not have been formed by a living 
organism, the team says.

 On Earth, primitive bacteria leave a residue of magnetite in one particular 
form -- a chain of crystals. In contrast, much of the magnetite 
in the Martian rock consists of single, elongated crystals.

 Even more revealing, some of the elongated crystals -- the whisker-shaped 
ones, which appear to correspond to the wormlike microscopic 
fossils -- contain a spiral defect. Such a defect is a dead giveaway that these 
crystals formed as a result of high-temperature volcanic 
activity, the team argues. The other elongated crystals in ALH84001, the 
platelets, which appear to correspond to the ovoid microscopic 
fossils, don't have this defect but are often associated with the whiskers.

"There's nothing else that looks like nanofossils [in the rock sample], and the 
things that look like nanofossils aren't," McSween asserts.

 One of McSween's collaborators, John P. Bradley of the Georgia Institute of 
Technology in Atlanta, found a report noting that magnetite 
takes on a whiskery appearance in volcanic vents at temperatures of about 
800@C. Water-based life could not have survived at this high 
temperature, the team notes.

 Bradley, Ralph P. Harvey of Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, and 
McSween will report their findings in Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta.

 Coauthors of the initial meteorite study, including David S. McKay of NASA's 
Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, discount the significance 
of the new report. "We're very puzzled by their findings, and we don't think 
they're looking in the same place," he says.

 Although McKay's team hasn't used TEM to analyze the composition or internal 
structure of the features they call microfossils, they have 
applied the technique to the magnetite crystals at the rim of the carbonate 
globules. "We're seeing hundreds and hundreds of cubic or 
equidimensional magnetite crystals," many with no defects, rather than 
elongated crystals with a spiral defect, McKay says. Most 
significantly, TEM images recently made by his team reveal that magnetite 
crystals at the rim form small chains, a finding that supports a 
biogenic origin for the mineral.

 Using different radioactive dating techniques, two independent research groups 
disagree on when ALH84001 acquired its carbonates. One team 
suggests that the carbonates were deposited some 3.6 billion years ago, when 
researchers believe Mars had an abundant supply of water. Another 
estimates that they were inserted about 1.4 billion years ago, by which time 
Mars' water supply might have dwindled.

 The time of carbonate deposition remains an open question, but McSween notes 
that the more recent age is consistent with his team's 
experiments, reported in the July 4 Nature, indicating that the material 
derived from a hot vapor rather than liquid water. That scenario 
severely weakens the case for a biological origin of the carbonates, he notes.

 Not necessarily, contends Kathie L. Thomas-Keprta of Lockheed Martin in 
Houston, a coauthor of the initial meteorite study. She says the 
composition of the carbonates varies throughout the tiny samples of ALH84001 
the team examined, with bands of calcium-rich carbonates adjacent 
to calcium-poor ones, for example. That distribution argues for low-temperature 
deposition, she contends. A high-temperature process would be 
more likely to generate a uniform globule.

 The temperature at which the carbonates formed does not dictate whether the 
rocks ever housed life, says Craig S. Schwandt of JSC. However 
they formed, he argues, the carbonates in the rock may have created a haven for 
primitive bacteria that arrived later. Carbonates regulate pH 
and could act as a buffer zone inside a rock that might otherwise be 
inhospitable to life. Schwandt proposes that the carbonates formed first, 
laying down a niche for mineral-producing bacteria that later colonized the 
margins of the globules.

 Jeffrey L. Bada of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, 
Calif., says he's all but convinced that cell walls and other 
biological artifacts, if found, come from meltwater that passed through the 
meteorite during its 13,000-year sojourn in the Antarctic. The 
meltwater, he notes, contains PAHs whose molecular weights are the same as 
those found in the Martian rock.

 Bada and his colleagues melted blocks of Antarctic ice and inserted solid 
carbonates into the solution. The next day, they found the 
carbonates heavily contaminated by PAHs from the water. It's long been known 
that carbonates scavenge PAHs, he explains, and the experiment 
demonstrates that the PAHs found in the Martian rock could have come from 
Antarctica. "This rock has been on Earth for too darn long" for 
contamination not to be a major problem, he concludes.

 Simon J. Clemett of Stanford University and his colleague are less worried 
about contamination. They examined a large supply of 
micrometeorites from the same Antarctic ice field as ALH84001. Because these 
tiny rocks have a much larger surface-to-volume area, they would 
seem to be more susceptible to contamination, yet all of the rocks had 
different distributions of PAHs. Had contamination been significant, 
the rocks should all have had the same PAH distribution, the researchers say.

 Whatever the outcome of the debate over ALH84001, the potato-shaped rock from 
Mars may become an icon for the ages, says astrophysicist 
Richard Berendzen of American University in Washington, D.C. In exploring the 
possibility of life on the Red Planet, he says, "We'll find our 
destiny. We'll find our future. We'll find ourselves."



