Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 12/14/96 December 14, 1996

 Atomic oxygen removes soot from paintings

by C. Wu

 Two rocket scientists may have solved a particularly vexing problem facing art 
conservators. Many paintings damaged by smoke sit in storage, undisplayed and 
unappreciated, because no one has found a good way to clean them. Now, 
scientists from NASA are finding that atomic oxygen, which exists in Earth's 
upper atmosphere and chews away materials on orbiting satellites, may give 
conservators the tool they need to tackle this problem.

 Dabbing organic solvents onto a painting can clean off some kinds of soil, but 
it often does more harm than good (SN: 4/28/90, p. 261). A shower of atomic 
oxygen, on the other hand, can remove layers of soot without anyone's ever 
having to touch the surface. Sharon K. Rutledge of NASA's Lewis Research Center 
in Cleveland reported the finding at the Materials Research Society meeting in 
Boston last week.

 After being approached by the Cleveland Museum of Art, Rutledge and her 
colleague Bruce A. Banks enlisted the help of the Cleveland Fire Department to 
expose samples of cotton canvas coated with acrylic gesso to smoke from a fire. 
Acrylic gesso is used to prepare surfaces for paint.

 The samples hung on a wall inside the fire department's training facility 
while several pieces of furniture burned. A section of an oil painting was 
exposed to a motor oil fire, which covered it with a layer of black soot.

 The researchers placed the samples in a vacuum chamber and bombarded them with 
atomic oxygen. They measured how well the samples reflected light before and 
after the cleaning. Black carbon from the oil fire came off in only 1 hour, 
whereas soot from the house fire took up to 23 hours, Rutledge says.

 House fire residue is a mix of many materials and is therefore very difficult 
to remove, says Marion F. Mecklenburg of the Smithsonian Institution's 
Conservation Analytical Laboratory in Suitland, Md. Fumes from melting 
synthetic materials like polyester, nylon, and rayon deposit "a coat of hot 
plastic onto the surface," he says. Atomic oxygen reacts with the carbon-based 
materials, turning them into carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and water.

 A hand-held atomic oxygen device that doesn't need a vacuum would make the 
technique practical for art conservation, says Rutledge. For now, though, the 
NASA researchers are trying to scale up their experiment by building a large 
vacuum chamber that can hold a painting measuring 5 feet by 7 feet.

 Although atomic oxygen alters the paint slightly and the vacuum may dry it 
out, Mecklenburg says he thinks "it's worth exploring." Conservators may have 
to "accept a modicum of damage. It's the lesser of two evils."


