Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/9/96 November 9, 1996

 Pursuing Life on Two Frontiers

 Charles Darwin once speculated that life arose in "some warm little pond"--a 
quiet, nurturing environment where primitive biological molecules could mingle 
and evolve in peace. Two new reports suggest that the early history of life 
held far more excitement than Darwin ever imagined.

 Rocks from Greenland harbor evidence that microorganisms populated Earth 
either during or just after a cataclysmic period when chunks of space debris 
were raining down on the planet. And new clues from a Martian meteorite add 
further hints that early life also colonized the Red Planet, a far cry from 
Darwin's earthbound backwater.

 Both reports draw their evidence for ancient life from an unusual chemical 
fingerprint detected in the isotopic ratio of carbon atoms. Yet the differences 
between the two cases may outweigh their similarities. The Greenland study has 
passed through the peer-review process and calls for a plausible extension of 
life's record on Earth. The Martian data are preliminary, statistically less 
solid, and vastly more controversial in their implications.

 If verified by future work, however, both findings suggest that life in the 
solar system is hardier, and perhaps more widespread, than we have long 
believed.

 On Earth R. Monastersky

 Talk about a baptism by fire. The first living organisms on Earth apparently 
evolved in the midst of a cosmic bombardment, when giant asteroids were 
pummeling the planet and routinely incinerating its surface.

 Improbable as it may sound, this scenario of a hellish birth is gaining 
support, thanks to a report that pushes the record of life on Earth back before 
3.85 billion years ago, some 300 million years earlier than previously thought.

 Evidence for the more ancient beginning comes in the form of minute carbon 
residues found in some of the oldest rocks on Earth, from Akilia Island near 
Greenland. These specks of carbon bear a chemical fingerprint that could only 
have come from a living organism, report Stephen J. Mojzsis of the Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., and his colleagues in the Nov. 
7 Nature.

 Other researchers hail the new discovery yet remain cautious about 
interpreting these indirect hints of life. "It's a very strong indication that 
life existed back then, but it's not proof," says Heinrich D. Holland, a 
geochemist at Harvard University.

 Mojzsis and his coworkers analyzed the ratio of two forms of carbon preserved 
within the Greenland rocks. As living organisms grow, chemical reactions in 
their cells alter the natural carbon ratio, slightly favoring the light 
isotope, carbon-12, over the heavier one, carbon-13. Isotopically light carbon 
can therefore serve as a chemofossil, or molecular remnant of life.

 In previous studies of ancient Greenland rocks, researchers had found a ratio 
of carbon-13 to carbon-12 that is only 1 to 1.5 percent lower than an 
international standard. Because inorganic rocks sometimes have values almost as 
light, scientists did not consider the ratio a fingerprint of life.

 Like all extremely old rocks, however, the Akilia rocks had endured a 
torturous history during which they had been heated and squeezed. Such 
metamorphism pushes a rock's carbon isotopic ratio toward heavier values, thus 
wiping out any signature of life.

 Mojzsis and his colleagues suspected that unaltered information might lie 
hidden within the Greenland rocks. They found tiny amounts of undisturbed 
carbon locked within grains of the mineral apatite, which had served as a sort 
of safe-deposit box over the eons.

 To gauge the carbon's isotopic ratio, the researchers used a tool called an 
ion microprobe, which can analyze minuscule samples. The technique revealed 
ratios of carbon-13 to carbon-12 that ranged from 2 to 5 percent lower than the 
standard. Because no known inorganic process can create such a skewed ratio, 
Mojzsis and his team declare it evidence of ancient microbial life.

 Other scientists have their worries, though. John M. Hayes of the Woods Hole 
(Mass.) Oceanographic Institution wonders whether early Earth may have had 
unusual inorganic reactions that produced compounds with very light carbon 
ratios. Still, he says, "it's most likely that the new results are indeed 
evidence for life 3.85 billion years ago."

 The next-oldest signs of life come from 3.5-billion-year-old rocks in 
Australia and South Africa. These deposits contain true fossils of 
microorganisms, as well as isotopically light carbon.

 By extending the biological record backward, the Greenland find moves life's 
start into an uncomfortable time in the solar system. From the age and size of 
craters on the moon, planetary scientists calculate that large asteroids 
continued hitting Earth from its origin 4.5 billion years ago until 3.85 
billion years ago.

"I think this is telling us that life somehow evolved amid an impact-ridden 
chaos," says Christopher F. Chyba of the University of Arizona in Tucson.

 Some of the impacts during this period would have been large enough to 
vaporize the upper layer of the oceans, according to estimates, but they may 
not have wiped out life. Emerging biological evidence suggests that all modern 
organisms descended from heat-loving microbes. If true, these so-called 
thermophiles may have been either the first creatures on Earth or simply the 
sole survivors of the planet's fiery childhood.

 On Mars R. Cowen

 Is the Red Planet alive with bacteria? Resurrecting findings from a 1989 
report, British researchers announced last week that primitive life may have 
existed on Mars as recently as 600,000 years ago.

"It's a very small step from detecting life that could have originated sometime 
in the last 4 percent of [Martian] history to finding evidence of life there 
now," says Ian P. Wright of the Open University in Milton Keynes, England, who 
collaborated on the study with Colin T. Pillinger of the Open University and 
Monica M. Grady of the Open University and the Natural History Museum in London.

 The reseachers base their finding on the high concentration and the carbon 
composition of organic compounds they detected in a young Martian meteorite.

 The meteorite, discovered in Antarctica in 1979 and known as EETA79001, formed 
180 million years ago and was ejected from Mars 600,000 years ago. The 
researchers argue that the organic matter in the meteorite was incorporated 
before the rock left Mars. Critics maintain that the organic compounds are 
terrestrial contaminants.

 At a meeting last week in London on life in the solar system, the British 
scientists also presented new evidence that bolsters last summer's report that 
a much older Martian meteorite, ALH84001, harbors vestiges of ancient life on 
that planet (SN: 8/10/96, p. 84). The studies suggest that if life got a 
foothold on ancient Mars, it may have survived at least until very recently.

 The researchers measured the ratio of carbon-12 and carbon-13 in the two 
meteorites. One of the carbonate-containing grains of ALH84001 has ratios of 
carbon-13 to carbon-12 that are 6 percent lower than the international 
standard. That's the same signature the team had found in terrestrial rocks 
that date from 2.8 billion years ago and contain fossil evidence of bacteria.

 Some scientists question whether Martian organisms could have increased 
carbon-12 by this amount. They note that the Martian atmosphere today has a 
higher carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratio than Earth's and could well have had a 
similar ratio in the past.

"A lot of what we're trying to puzzle out here is based on an announcement, not 
a peer-reviewed, published article," cautions David Des Marais of NASA's Ames 
Research Center in Mountain View, Calif.

 The British team reported 9 years ago that EETA79001 contains abundant organic 
material (SN: 7/22/89, p. 53). Present in a concentration of 1,000 parts per 
million, the material has a ratio of carbon-13 to carbon-12 about 2.5 percent 
lower than the standard. That is roughly the same isotopic ratio found in 
organic material on Earth today.

 That's just the point, says Jeffrey L. Bada of the Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., who contends that the material is a 
contaminant.

 While the chemical identity of most of the organic material remains unknown, 
last year Bada and Gene D. McDonald of Cornell University reported finding 
amino acids in a sample of EETA79001. However, the acids have the same 
structural characteristics and composition as modern Antarctic samples. This 
suggests that the amino acids were inserted into the meteorite by Antarctic 
meltwater percolating through the rock.

 Wright maintains that although the amino acids in the meteorite may well be 
contaminants, they account for only a tiny percentage of the organic material 
in EETA79001.

 Even if the organic material in the 180-million-year-old rock did originate on 
Mars, it may simply represent material left over from a much earlier biological 
era on the planet, says exobiologist Christopher P. McKay of Ames.

 Such debate will probably continue, says Bada, "until we catch a Martian 
meteorite as it's falling to Earth or if we go to Mars and get samples."


