Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 12/21/96 December 21, 1996

 Sounds of the Seasons Learning to pay attention to the sounds around us

 By IVARS PETERSON

 A sharp crackle, then the silky strains of violins tingle my ears. I reach 
over and click off the alarm. The bedsheets rustle.

 I lie back and listen, straining to catch the sounds of the early morning 
outside my window. At this time of year, I know not to expect the incessant 
twittering of birds, but the unusually pervasive hush puzzles me.

 A lone car grinds by, signaling its passage along the street with a curiously 
muffled sound--as if the sound itself were wearing a thick winter coat. I 
smile, and a glance between the slats of the window blinds confirms my guess. 
Fresh snow blankets the lawn, sidewalk, and street.

 People live immersed in a sea of sounds, their ears buffeted by road noise, 
elevator music, electronic beeps, and other acoustic assaults. They also seek 
sound--in the enjoyment of music, the pleasure of conversation, and the sighing 
of the wind through bare branches.

"The sense of hearing cannot be closed off at will," Canadian composer R. 
Murray Schafer once noted. "There are no earlids. When we go to sleep, our 
perception of sound is the last door to close, and it is also the first to open 
when we awaken."

 It's easy to take the acoustic environment for granted in daily life. Barry 
Truax, a communications professor and composer of electroacoustic music at 
Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, British Columbia, has been teaching 
acoustic technology to a wide variety of students for more than 20 years. "It 
doesn't take much to convince the students that they really haven't been paying 
much attention to sound," he remarks.

 People certainly react strongly to bothersome noise, whether from a 
neighborhood construction project, low-flying aircraft, or leaf blowers. Many 
pay close attention to various kinds of music and to the quality of the sounds 
that come out of stereo equipment and other audio gadgets. Speech is pervasive. 
Few people, however, fully appreciate the extent to which sounds in the 
environment influence and condition human behavior.

"Everyone hears, but very few listen," comments Gary W. Ferrington, a teacher 
of audio design at the University of Oregon in Eugene. It takes a real effort 
to open one's ears.

 About 25 years ago, Schafer, who was then at Simon Fraser and now lives in the 
relative seclusion of Indian River, Ontario, spearheaded an ambitious effort 
called the World Soundscape Project. Its aim was to document and elucidate the 
relationship between people and the acoustic environment in which they live. Of 
particular interest was what happens when those sounds change, as they have 
with the industrialization of society and, more recently, the advent of the 
information age. Schafer's concern wasn't just the cacophony of the industrial 
age and urbanization, and his focus wasn't simply on noise abatement, which he 
described as a negative approach to the issue of undesirable sound.

"Noise pollution results when man does not listen carefully," Schafer argued in 
The Tuning of the World (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1977). "We must seek a way 
to make environmental acoustics a positive study program. Which sounds do we 
want to preserve, encourage, multiply? When we know this, the boring or 
destructive sounds will be conspicuous enough, and we will know why we must 
eliminate them. Only a total appreciation of the acoustic environment can give 
us the resources for improving the orchestration of the world soundscape."

 By the late 1970s, when the World Soundscape Project wound down, it had 
compiled an archive of 300 audiotapes of audio environments throughout British 
Columbia, Canada, and Europe. Its publications included an examination of the 
Vancouver soundscape and a handbook of acoustic ecology.

 Schafer turned his attention from soundscape studies to musical composition. 
However, diverse groups of researchers scattered throughout the world continued 
the investigations, though often in isolation or only in special contexts.

 Now, electronic communication and the Internet are helping to create a 
worldwide community of musicians, scientists, engineers, and others concerned 
with environmental sounds. "There are a lot of people working in sound that 
involves the environment, and they really haven't had a place to come 
together," Truax says.

 In the nascent field of acoustic ecology, they pursue a broad range of 
interests, from mitigating the noise of vacuum cleaners to shaping the sounds 
of the environment. In these interdisciplinary studies, social culture, 
science, history, geography, technology, and the arts all play important roles.

"At a very practical level, the central ideas of acoustic ecology could benefit 
everyone in a society struggling with the impact of technology," Truax contends.

 When people do think about sound, it's usually in the form of annoyance at 
something unpleasant or loud. Indeed, noise control has been a community 
concern for centuries.

 However, it isn't always easy to define what constitutes bothersome, unwanted 
noise. A list of noise-control regulations and laws adopted by various 
governments over the years serves as a register of nuisances and phobias and 
provides clues to changing social attitudes.

 In 17th century England, for example, acts of Parliament attempted to suppress 
the shouts of hawkers and street criers and particularly the strains of street 
music in London and other urban centers. The constant outdoor uproar bothered 
an upper class that had its own chamber music to savor. The much louder din of 
church bells and massive pipe organs escaped such regulation.

 Nowadays, many communities are considering or have passed laws to ban leaf 
blowers. Yet the roars of the blowers are often less loud and intrusive than 
other neighborhood noises, including the sounds of lawn mowers and trucks.

 So noise control isn't simply a matter of loudness and a search for silence. 
Cultural factors and human perception play an important part in determining 
what may be undesirable in various situations.

"Sound quality means different things to different people," says Richard Cann 
of RH Lyon, a company in Cambridge, Mass., that specializes in analyzing and 
adjusting the sounds of commercial household products.

"Quieter isn't necessarily better," Cann notes. "People make judgments on the 
types of sounds they hear, and some [sounds] are interpreted as annoying and 
others as useful."

 Indeed, sounds provide important cues and convey crucial information. It's not 
unusual, for example, to detect an impending problem or a malfunction in an 
automobile or washing machine because the product's characteristic sound has 
suddenly changed.

 Conversely, the absence of noise can pose problems. Drivers of expensive cars 
so quiet inside that no engine noise can be heard have been known to try to 
start their cars when the engine is already running.

 When people are asked to evaluate the sounds of household appliances and other 
products, they generally say they prefer to have them silent. Yet, when Cann 
and his colleagues test people on how much they like various product sounds, 
silence rarely wins.

"We find there's an optimum quality for the sound a particular product makes," 
Cann notes. When people are unhappy with the way something sounds, they usually 
prefer a different sort of sound rather than its absence.

 Much of the evaluation of sounds by people happens unconsciously. That makes 
systematic study of the effect of the acoustic environment on human behavior a 
tricky proposition.

"Often, you get to know sounds so well that you don't pay attention to them," 
Truax says. That can be handy if you're trying to get to sleep and every creak 
and groan of your house is so familiar that you can safely ignore it. This 
familiarity gets in the way of finding out how people react to particular 
sounds.

 At the same time, the acoustic environment leaves impressions that can survive 
for years. Certain sounds, tunes, and other acoustic cues heard decades later 
can trigger vivid memories of times past.

 Truax notes that advertisers can take advantage of such strong associations to 
suggest certain product affinities and characteristics, thereby avoiding the 
need to make verbal claims that can be challenged.

 In carrying on the tradition of soundscape research initiated by Schafer, 
Truax and others have recently tried to establish a framework for studying 
sound from a human perspective. Truax uses the term "acoustic communication" to 
emphasize the study of sound not just as vibrations of the air but as an 
exchange of information.

 He also emphasizes the importance of context in understanding the messages 
delivered by sound. "A sound means something partly because of what produces it 
but mainly because of the circumstances under which it is heard," Truax 
contends. For example, the cryptic boings, bleeps, and whines of a computer 
connecting to the Internet now herald a successful contact.

 Musicians and composers are among those most likely to be sensitive to the 
nuances of sound, and they have long sculpted and molded sound for various 
purposes. In recent years, Truax, who first started composing computer-based 
music in the 1970s, has delved into the possibilities of working exclusively 
with environmental sounds.

 Modern technology has provided versatile tools that make it easy to record and 
sample vast libraries of natural sounds. A composer can then select, modify, 
and assemble these sound bites into musical compositions.

 Truax has exploited a technique, which he calls granulation, for stretching a 
sound in time without altering its pitch. "You literally expand the sound wave 
as if it were in slow motion," he says. "It changes the way you experience the 
sound. You hear more detail. It's like you're going inside it."

 Truax's music represents an alternative channel through which hearers can 
learn to become listeners. Sometimes, he uses particular soundmarks--familiar 
sounds closely associated with particular locations or events, such as a harbor 
foghorn--in his recordings.

"In a soundscape composition, we try to use the listeners' associations as part 
of the composition," he insists. In contrast to commercial sound environment 
generators and certain strains of mainstream music, he says, "We're not just 
feeding them sound effects."

 To Truax, Ferrington, and others inspired by Schafer's vision of the 
soundscape, the acoustic environment seems fragile, neglected, and endangered. 
"Because we don't understand the importance of sound, when it's either 
channeled differently or even absent, we often get effects that bewilder us," 
Truax remarks.

"Beyond fighting sound pollution, the task of sound ecologists is to design 
healthy and attractive sonic environments," Hildegard Westerkamp of Simon 
Fraser commented in a recent article describing the legacy of the World 
Soundscape Project. "Continual sensitization of the ear, creative town 
planning, legislative action (noise abatement regulations), the design of 
acoustic parks and playgrounds, and the innovative preservation of worthwhile 
sounds of the past and present may be among the means to achieve such ends."

 The idea is to turn the negative specter of a world polluted by unwanted sound 
into a positive vision in which the sonic environment becomes a place of 
renewal and creativity, she said.

 Building aural awareness and analyzing the social and cultural impact of sound 
require a comprehensive approach that involves a wide range of people, 
including musicians, psychologists, civic planners, and scientists.

 Such interaction has been slow to develop, however. At last year's Acoustical 
Society of America meeting in Washington, D.C., for example, a special session 
on acoustic ecology represented one of the very few times that the noise and 
musical acoustics divisions of the society had ever sponsored a joint gathering.

 The recent formation of the World Forum for Acoustic Ecology, based in 
Vancouver, is one sign of growing interest in the field. The forum has an 
active site on the World Wide Web.

 Ferrington, who now runs the Web site, first became fascinated by natural 
sounds as a child when his parents bought him a big, open-reel tape recorder. 
He took it out on the patio and started recording bird songs and other sounds.

"That's what began to open my ears," Ferrington says. Living in a small farming 
community in the Columbia River Gorge, he could also climb the surrounding 
hills and sit for hours listening to the wind in the grass, distant dogs 
barking, and the cries of birds wheeling in the air above.

 Many years later, when he finally made contact with Truax and the others at 
Simon Fraser, Ferrington was thrilled. "They were ear-minded people, sensitive 
to the acoustic environment," he says. "I had found a group of people who would 
understand what I'm talking about."


