Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/9/96 November 9, 1996

 Deadly Ebola virus seen to thrive in bats

 S. Sternberg

 Most pet owners know the hazards of vaccinating an irate cat or dog. But just 
imagine wielding the hypodermic to inoculate a variety of wild jungle critters, 
including snakes, lizards, and bats. Imagine also that an accidental needle 
stick could be fatal because the syringe teems with a virus that is 
spectacularly lethal to humans.

 Robert Swanepoel of South Africa's National Institute for Virology in 
Sandringham and his coworkers took such risks and have something to show for 
their efforts. They have demonstrated for the first time that healthy bats may 
harbor the fearsome Ebola virus.

 Team members caution, however, that the study does not prove bats are the sole 
reservoir of the virus. "If you did an exhaustive search, you might find other 
species as well," says Thomas G. Ksiazek of the federal Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention in Atlanta, one of Swanepoel's collaborators. Still, 
Ksiazek notes, bats could be the animal host scientists have sought since Ebola 
first emerged in Yambuku, Zaire, in 1976.

 Ebola has inflamed the public's imagination even though fewer than 5,000 
people have been infected worldwide. Sufferers go mad, they endure terrific 
pain, and 60 to 90 percent of them die of florid hemorrhages, with blood 
leaking from every orifice. Yet no one knows where the virus comes from, where 
or when it will strike next, or how to treat those who cross its path.

 Peter Jahrling of the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious 
Diseases (USAMRIID) at Ft. Detrick in Fredericksburg, Md., says the new study's 
findings are consistent with what is known about Ebola's epidemiology.

 For instance, epidemics in Nzara, Sudan, in 1976 and 1979 were traced to a 
cotton factory where thousands of bats dangle from the rafters as workers toil 
beneath them. Other outbreaks have been linked to the Kitum Cave in a mountain 
in Uganda. "Guess what you've got plenty of in that cave. Bats," Jahrling says. 
Researchers are now tracking the virus in Ivory Coast's Tai Forest, where 
chimps and humans have contracted the disease.

 Finding Ebola's natural home has proved challenging for several reasons. Ebola 
outbreaks are rare: Only eight have been recorded in humans. Epidemics occur in 
widely separated geographic locations, often in difficult-to-reach, 
jungle-choked regions of Africa.

 As a result, field expeditions are extraordinarily difficult. Scientists 
viewed the 1995 outbreak in Kikwit, Zaire--which afflicted 315 people, killing 
nearly 300 of them--as an opportunity to find out where the virus lurks.

 After the outbreak, scientists from CDC, USAMRIID, and the South African 
institute combed Kikwit to test local creatures for the virus. In total, the 
researchers trapped 2,500 mammals (mostly rodents), 36,000 insects, and 500 
other animals, including snakes. So far, the results have been negative, but 
completing the tests will take time.

 Swanepoel's team also took another tack. Under laboratory quarantine, the 
scientists tried to infect birds, bats, snakes, lizards, tortoises, rodents, 
insects, and plants. Only the bats proved capable of carrying Ebola, the team 
reports in the October-December Emerging Infectious Diseases, the CDC's online 
journal.

 The bats carried large quantities of replicating virus without becoming ill. 
Only one bat made antibodies, indicating that the virus does not usually 
provoke the animals' antiviral defenses. In the absence of any such 
counterattack, the virus remains virulent in its host. Indeed, the researchers 
found live Ebola in bat feces, which may represent a source of transmission to 
other animals.

 Although humans have gotten Ebola from infected monkeys, these primates are 
considered unlikely long-term hosts because the virus kills them. Rather, 
monkeys are a suspected link in the chain of transmission. Colobus monkeys, for 
example, can transmit the virus to chimpanzees, which hunt them. In February, 
21 people in Gabon got Ebola after eating a dead chimp.


