Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/30/96 November 30, 1996

 Clue to Lou Gehrig's Disease Emerges

by J. Travis

 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the neurodegenerative disease that killed 
baseball legend Lou Gehrig and slays about 1 in 1,000 people, has largely 
defied explanation. An inherited enzyme defect identified in 1993 accounts for 
only a few percent of the cases.

 Now, researchers have evidence suggesting that many ALS cases, perhaps the 
majority, result from abnormal genetic instructions that leave the brain and 
spinal cord unable to sponge up glutamate, a potentially destructive amino 
acid. The resulting glutamate buildup presumably causes the disease's cardinal 
feature--the death of the nerve cells, or neurons, that control the body's 
muscles.

 Neurons normally release small amounts of glutamate to signal neighboring 
cells. Yet because exposure to large quantities of this neurotransmitter can 
kill neurons, cell surface proteins known as glutamate transporters must 
quickly recycle the amino acid.

 At last week's Society for Neuroscience meeting in Washington, D.C., Jeffrey 
D. Rothstein of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and his colleagues 
described a study of one glutamate transporter, EAAT2. When the researchers 
examined tissues from 20 people who had died of ALS, they found that 10 had 
frequently harbored mutations in the genetic instructions used to construct 
that crucial transporter.

 To build proteins, cells normally use a gene's exons, its protein-coding 
regions, to create messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules. The protein-making equipment 
of cells reads these strands of mRNA to determine which amino acids to link 
together.

 In their study of brain and spinal cord tissue from people who had died of 
ALS, Rothstein's group examined the mRNAs created from the gene for EAAT2. In 
half of the patients, the researchers found abnormal mRNAs. Some lacked a copy 
of one of the gene's exons. Others contained introns, non-protein-coding 
regions of the EAAT2 gene, in place of the gene's final exon. The scientists 
found that these mRNAs do not produce functional glutamate transporters.

 To determine whether the mutant mRNAs were specific to ALS, Rothstein's group 
examined brain and spinal cord tissue from 24 people who had died of other 
neurodegenerative diseases or non-neurological causes. None of these tissues 
had the mutant mRNAs.

 The mutant mRNAs and the resulting absence of EAAT2 may explain an earlier 
finding by Rothstein's group that ALS patients have problems clearing glutamate 
(SN: 3/26/94, p. 203).

"This is very exciting. It sounds like a substantial step forward in 
understanding the loss of glutamate transport. It helps strengthen the original 
finding," says Dennis W. Choi of Washington University in St. Louis.

 The glutamate transporter EAAT2 is found only on glia, the support cells that 
surround neurons. Though nerve cells possess their own forms of glutamate 
transporters, EAAT2 appears to be the most effective glutamate sponge. 
Rothstein's group reported in the March Neuron that eliminating this glutamate 
transporter in rats triggers an ALS-like neurodegeneration that results in 
paralysis.

"These proteins are critical for the clearance of extracellular glutamate. If 
the proteins are not present, neurons die," says Rothstein.

 Why are the mRNAs produced incorrectly? The EAAT2 gene may contain mutations, 
though researchers have not identified any so far. Rothstein also speculates 
that the abnormal mRNAs may result from mutations in a second gene, whose 
protein is involved in creating the mRNAs.

 A defect in glutamate clearance might explain the rare, inherited form of ALS 
attributed to an abnormal version of an enzyme called superoxide dismutase 
(SOD). Rothstein's group has some evidence that the enzyme's actions alter 
EAAT2 proteins. "We don't know how the mutant SOD is toxic. It might injure the 
glutamate transporter," he says.

 Cautioning that the group's results are preliminary, Rothstein says he and his 
colleagues plan to seek further proof that a shortage of glutamate transporters 
underlies many ALS cases.

 Nonetheless, he remains hopeful that the identification of the mRNA mutations 
will lead to a test enabling physicians to diagnose ALS early in the disease 
process. Moreover, confirming that glutamate is the central player in neuron 
death from ALS would narrow the focus of researchers searching for potential 
therapies, says Rothstein.


