Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 11/9/96 November 9, 1996

 Gastrointestinal Blues Research finds bugs that inflame the human gut

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 A thriving colony of microscopic organisms lives in the gut of the average 
person. These bugs don't cause any trouble for most people, but they send some 
1 million U.S. residents running to the bathroom in pain from a chronic, 
debilitating inflammation of the intestines. Researchers think they have now 
identified two specific microorganisms that trigger such disease.

 Inflammatory bowel disease is a general term for ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn's disease. Ulcerative colitis is usually confined to the inner surface of 
the colon, whereas Crohn's disease can involve all layers of the entire 
gastrointestinal tract. Both can cause recurring attacks of diarrhea, severe 
abdominal pain, and weight loss. Drugs can quell the illness temporarily, but 
in severe cases, doctors must remove the diseased bowel.

 Though the new research will not provide immediate relief for people with 
ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, it may ultimately lead to a better way 
to treat the diseases.

 Joel D. Taurog, a rheumatologist at the University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center in Dallas, and his colleagues weren't thinking about colitis 
when they set out to genetically engineer a population of rats with arthritis, 
another inflammatory disease. They inserted into the animals a human gene, 
HLA-B27, that has been linked to the disease. The rats, as expected, developed 
arthritis.

 They also developed a progressive inflammation of the intestines.

 Taurog's team had serendipitously created rats with ulcerative colitis, thus 
giving scientists an animal model in which to study the human disease. They 
described their work in the Nov. 30, 1990 Cell.

 Taurog and his colleagues went on to show that when they raised HLA-B27 rats 
in a sterile environment, the animals failed to develop arthritis or colitis. 
In contrast, HLA-B27 rats living in standard laboratory cages -- and hence 
exposed to germs -- did get the disorders.

 Those results, published in the December 1994 Journal of Experimental 
Medicine, suggested a microbial link to ulcerative colitis.

 But which microbes? The gut is home sweet home to trillions of bugs. How could 
scientists find the ones that aided in the assault?

 Enter R. Balfour Sartor, a gastroenterologist at the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill. Sartor and his colleagues teamed up with Taurog's 
group to find the answers.

"The researchers again turned to the HLA-B27 rats. They decided to expose the 
rats that lived in a sterile environment to specific mixtures of bacteria.

"We carefully picked the cocktails to represent the most common bacteria in the 
normal intestine," Sartor told Science News. They also included bacteria 
associated with gastrointestinal inflammation.

 The researchers dosed one set of rats with a cocktail that represents the 
normal rat's intestinal flora. They exposed another group to certain bacteria 
taken from humans who suffered from intestinal inflammation. The third group of 
rats got that cocktail with an added ingredient -- Bacteroides. These bacteria, 
which are common residents of the human intestines, produce a colitislike 
disease in certain guinea pigs.

 The rats given the cocktail containing normal intestinal flora got diarrhea. 
So did the rats given the human and guinea pig microbes. Both cocktails 
contained Bacteroides.

 The one cocktail that did not have Bacteroides failed to produce significant 
inflammation in the rat gut. Indeed, rats that got this mixture had intestines 
that looked as healthy as the HLA-B27 rats kept in a germfree environment, 
Sartor notes.

"Our conclusion was that Bacteroides was important," Sartor says. "The 
Bacteroides had by far the most impressive ability to induce colitis." The team 
detailed its work in the August Journal of Clinical Investigation.

 Even more important, when the researchers killed the infected rats and looked 
at intestinal tissue under a microscope, they saw inflammatory cells. Such 
cells are part of the immune system's response to infection.

 This finding fit with the theory that colitis is an autoimmune disorder. 
Scientists know that people who inherit the HLA-B27 gene run the risk of 
developing inflammatory diseases. Sartor speculates that in such people, white 
cells recognize Bacteroides in the gut. Their immune response leads to the 
production of natural chemicals that inflame the intestines, he says.

 Sartor stresses that HLA-B27 is a normal gene. "This is not a mutation," he 
says, noting that about 4 percent of people carry the gene. HLA genes are known 
to regulate the immune system, but no one knows exactly how HLA-B27 may create 
a vulnerability to colitis and arthritis, Taurog adds.

 The HLA-B27 rats infected with Bacteroides in the most recent study did not 
develop arthritis. However, Sartor believes that joint swelling would have 
developed as the animals aged. Previous studies with these genetically 
engineered rats showed that they developed a gut inflammation first and then 
showed signs of arthritis.

"It's very exciting work," comments microbiologist Andrew D. Onderdonk of 
Harvard University.

 Onderdonk and his colleagues had demonstrated in 1981 that a specific type of 
Bacteroides, the one used in Sartor's third cocktail, helped trigger a 
colitislike disease in some guinea pigs. Sartor's work is "putting the pieces 
of the puzzle together in a way that may allow for some novel therapeutic 
interventions that will be of value to patients," Onderdonk says.

 Sartor and his colleagues have already started down the therapeutic pathway. 
In unpublished research, the team describes administering a Bacteroides-killing 
antibiotic to rats with inflamed intestines. They gave the rats daily doses of 
metronidazole for as long as 4 months. The treatment significantly calms the 
inflammation of the colon, Sartor told Science News.

 Whether an antibiotic treatment would work for humans with colitis remains 
unclear. A key question is whether Bacteroides would develop resistance to an 
antibiotic and thus foil any long-term attempt to quiet the disease.

 Ultimately, Sartor believes, a two-pronged approach might work for colitis 
patients. He suggests giving a short-term dose of a Bacteroides-killing 
antibiotic. Then, after the Bacteroides has died, he would add to the intestine 
a harmless bacterium that occupies the same niche. If Bacteroides tried to 
muscle in again, the competing microbe would crowd it out. His team is now 
using Lactobacillus, a beneficial bacterium found in active yogurt cultures, to 
compete with Bacteroides.

 This isn't the first time researchers have linked an inflammatory bowel 
disease to a microbe.

 Previously, researchers had linked Crohn's disease to an organism called 
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis. This microbe (not to be confused with M. 
tuberculosis, which underlies infectious tuberculosis in humans) causes a 
disorder in cattle and sheep called Johne's disease. Infected livestock develop 
an inflammation of the intestines that looks remarkably like Crohn's disease.

 In the late 1980s, doctors treated Crohn's disease patients with drugs aimed 
at mycobacterial infection, but the patients showed no improvement. After that, 
most doctors ruled out M. paratuberculosis as the cause of Crohn's disease.

 So did Robert J. Greenstein, a researcher at the Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center in New York. When Dina Mishina, a postdoctoral student, approached 
Greenstein looking for a quick project in molecular biology, he suggested that 
she use a molecular technique to confirm that M. paratuberculosis does not 
cause Crohn's disease.

 Mishina first obtained intestinal tissue from people with Crohn's disease. She 
used a technique called polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to copy a target piece 
of DNA and then searched for M. paratuberculosis.

 It should have been a quick test, but it dragged on for months. Greenstein, 
thinking Mishina was having trouble, decided to shut the project down. "I was 
going to say, look, this experiment hasn't worked."

 When Greenstein studied the results of Mishina's experiments, "it just blew my 
socks off."

 What the data showed, contrary to the researchers' expectations, was a link 
between M. paratuberculosis and Crohn's disease. Mishina had tested tissue 
samples from a dozen patients -- eight with Crohn's disease, two with colitis, 
and two with colon cancer.

 She found M. paratuberculosis in all of the Crohn's and colitis samples. The 
tissues from the colon cancer patients showed no sign of this microbe.

 The authors report the findings in the Sept. 3 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences and offer a controversial explanation of why earlier 
studies did not show a link between M. paratuberculosis and inflammation.

 Greenstein suggests that Crohn's disease comes in two forms.

 One is the less severe, or indolent, form. The patient's main complaint is 
obstruction of the bowel. When people with this form of the disease eat 
anything but mashed foods, the chunks block the intestine.

 Greenstein believes the indolent form of Crohn's disease results when the 
patient's immune system successfully fights an M. paratuberculosis infection. 
The infection starts with an inflammation but ends with a scarring of the 
intestinal tube that results in obstruction.

 The other form of Crohn's is aggressive, leading to abnormal pockets in the 
intestine or an outright hole in the intestinal wall. This variety occurs when 
the immune system can't deter an M. paratuberculosis infection, Greenstein 
speculates.

 Greenstein and his colleagues laid out the evidence for two forms of Crohn's 
disease in the Dec. 20, 1994 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
They showed that people with indolent Crohn's disease mount a stronger 
inflammatory response than people with the aggressive form. Although 
researchers believe that the immune system's response plays a key role in the 
development of Crohn's disease, they have not implicated HLA-B27.

 If the aggressive form of Crohn's is due to a raging infection with M. 
paratuberculosis, antimicrobial drugs might be effective, Greenstein suggests. 
He points out that in previous studies, which did not distinguish between the 
forms of Crohn's, drugs showed no effect. While they may have benefited people 
with severe Crohn's, they would not have affected patients with the indolent 
form, whose infection had already been cleared, he says. Those patients might 
benefit from earlier therapy with anti-inflammatory drugs, a strategy that 
would prevent scar tissue from forming, he adds.

 Reaction to this latest report linking M. paratuberculosis to Crohn's disease 
has been deeply skeptical.

"The evidence to date that Mycobacteria have anything to do with Crohn's 
disease is slim to nil," comments Lloyd Mayer, a microbiologist at Mount Sinai 
Medical Center in New York. To turn the skeptics into believers, Greenstein's 
theory needs more data, such as a large-scale study that examines the two forms 
of Crohn's disease separately.

 Greenstein points out that researchers had been dubious about the link between 
the bacterium Helicobactor pylori and peptic ulcer disease. Now that link has 
been well established. Other groups have also published evidence of a microbial 
link to Crohn's disease. For example, investigators have shown that exposure to 
the measles virus may boost the risk of Crohn's.

 Mayer has no doubt that a whole cast of microscopic organisms acts in this 
drama. It's very common, he says, to hear that both a husband and wife 
experienced diarrhea on a trip to Mexico but that only one went on to develop 
the recurrent symptoms of Crohn's disease.

"There may be multiple agents or organisms that start off the inflammatory 
process," Mayer says. "And then it's the genetics and the abnormal immune 
response that allow it to persist."

 It may take years before such scientific investigations yield a practical 
solution to inflammatory bowel disease. Is it worth the wait?

 Researchers like Sartor say it is. He points out that ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn's disease often strike people in the prime of life. Current drug 
treatment can only help temporarily. Sartor is looking for a lasting fix.


