Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/11/96

 May 11, 1996

 Policing the Peace

 How nations will monitor a nuclear test ban

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 Steven R. Bratt's belt started chirping as if on cue, precisely as he was 
boasting about a new global watchdog system for detecting nuclear tests. Bratt, 
a seismologist with the U.S. Department of Defense, retrieved the beeper from 
his hip and studied it for a few seconds.

"I've got an alert. It's from Lop Nor. Lop Nor is the Chinese test site," he 
explained.

 Two stations in a worldwide network of seismometers had just picked up 
vibrations emanating from central Asia, near China's known nuclear facility. 
The shock was small, about magnitude 3.5. In bomb equivalents, it would 
correspond to less than a half kiloton explosion.

 In this case, however, Bratt suspected the alert was just a minor earthquake. 
Timing provided an important clue: The shock had originated at 12:19 Greenwich 
Mean Time, which is not the kind of round, on-the-hour time that countries 
usually choose for performing a major weapon test.

 Seismic analysts would later confirm Bratt's hunch when they determined that 
the Chinese vibrations actually originated at an unlikely place to stage a 
test, hundreds of kilometers away from the Lop Nor site.

 The impromptu demonstration nonetheless made a good advertisement for the new 
international monitoring system--an ever-vigilant network of sensors strung 
around the globe, listening, sniffing, and waiting.

 The system, which currently includes 140 stations, is a prototype of the one 
required by the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), currently being 
negotiated in Geneva. After nearly 40 years of discussion, the world is moving 
toward adopting the treaty--if all goes well--as early as this summer, thereby 
prohibiting all nuclear testing.

 To back up a ban on nuclear testing, the treaty calls for a four-part 
monitoring system consisting of seismic, hydroacoustic, infrasound, and 
atmospheric radionuclide sensors. According to sections of the treaty already 
written, all the data collected by this system will flow into an information 
hub called the International Data Center, a prototype of which is located in 
Arlington, Va. Bratt is the Defense Department's program director overseeing 
development of the data center.

 Each element of the monitoring arsenal will patrol a different region of the 
planet, though they overlap to some degree.

 The seismic network, the backbone of the system, will draw on 50 primary and 
120 auxiliary stations to pick up vibrations from any underground tests. The 
hydroacoustic system will keep watch for ocean blasts using six underwater 
sound receivers tied in with five island-based seismometers. An infrasound 
network of 60 microbarographic pressure sensors will listen for atmospheric 
explosions. Lastly, 75 radionuclide stations will monitor the winds for the 
distinctive isotopic aroma vented into the atmosphere by atomic blasts.

 The treaty bars all nuclear detonations, but economic, political, and 
technological constraints make it impossible to catch extremely small 
explosions.

"This is a zero-yield treaty, but there is no way that this system or any 
system is going to [monitor down to] zero. You would walk across continents 
stepping from seismometer to seismometer if you tried that," says Ralph W. 
Alewine III, the deputy assistant to the secretary of defense for nuclear 
treaty programs.

 Recognizing the limitations on the numbers and locations of sensors, 
international negotiators have opted for a system that--in theory--can detect 
unmuffled explosions with yields down to roughly a kiloton, says Bratt. The 
United States has assumed responsibility for providing the prototype, with 
assistance from other countries.

 Under normal circumstances, a yield of 1 kiloton (kt) creates seismic waves 
approximately equal to a magnitude 4.0 earthquake. (A kiloton is defined as 
1012 calories of energy. The first U.S. nuclear detonation, the Trinity test, 
had a yield of 21 kt.) A country can, however, attempt to weaken the waves by 
conducting the test in a large underground chamber. Called decoupling, this 
difficult procedure could reduce the vibrations of a 1 kt test to the 
equivalent of a magnitude 2.5 quake.

 According to Bratt, the completed seismic network will detect quakes and 
blasts of magnitude 4.0 or greater with a high degree of confidence, meaning 
that 90 percent of these events will trip at least three sensors. The system 
will also have the ability to pinpoint detections to a fairly small area, 1,000 
square kilometers. This corresponds to a circle with a radius of 18 km. Though 
1 kt represents the nominal threshold, the monitoring system is designed to 
catch many smaller blasts as well. "Even at 300 tons, which is pretty small, we 
still have, say, a 50 percent probability of detecting it," says Bratt. Any 
potential evader must therefore weigh the odds of getting caught even when 
testing at low yields.

"We've had examples of detecting signals on Novaya Zemlya that we think are on 
the order of 10 to 25 tons," says Alewine, referring to events in northern 
Russia that were determined to be either earthquakes or explosions used in 
mining and other industry. "It's going to be a very capable system, but we're 
careful not to advertise too much about it," he adds.

 The new system represents a departure from Cold War tactics, in which the 
United States and the other four nuclear powers focused their monitoring 
efforts on each other's known test sites. In contrast, potential testers of the 
future could come from a dozen or more different countries and would probably 
choose remote locations rather than known test facilities.

 The trick will be distinguishing nuclear blasts from all other types of 
signals, such as earthquakes and conventional explosions. At larger energies, 
earthquakes and blasts look clearly different. To demonstrate, Bratt turns to a 
computer and pulls up seismic recordings from the second-to-last French nuclear 
test in the South Pacific on Dec. 27, 1995, which he estimates had a yield of 
about 50 kt. (For more information on this test and worldwide earthquakes, see 
the International Data Center's home page at http ://www.cdidc.org.)

 The magnitude 5.0 signal peaks immediately and then tapers off smoothly, as 
one might expect from an explosion, which releases most of its energy in less 
than a second. In contrast, earthquakes are messy. Ground on either side of a 
fault slips for many seconds, creating complex trains of seismic waves. The 
trace of a similar-size earthquake starts off much more slowly, grows in 
spurts, and then decays unevenly.

 As magnitudes get smaller, however, the details of the seismic trace start to 
get washed out--unless sensors are located nearby, something not possible with 
a global network of only 170 stations.

 At magnitudes below 3.0, conventional chemical detonations enter the picture. 
The world rings every day to hundreds of explosions from mining and other 
industrial activities. Although such blasts differ in detail from nuclear 
tests, it will be difficult in practice to tell just from the seismic, 
hydroacoustic, and infrasound data whether small explosions are nuclear or 
chemical, says Bratt.

 Given such ambiguities, the radionuclide stations represent a key element of 
treaty enforcement. "It's the only smoking gun we have in the system," says 
Bratt.

 Like giant vacuum cleaners, these stations suck in more than 500 cubic meters 
of air per day, capturing particles on filter paper. At the same time, samplers 
collect small volumes of air for gas analysis. Germanium detectors measure the 
gamma-ray emissions from these samples, which identify the types of 
radionuclides present.

 Analysts at the International Data Center sift through these recordings, 
looking for the particular combinations of isotopes produced by nuclear 
explosions. In the event of a suspicious reading, they can use sophisticated 
meteorological models to backtrack through recent weather patterns to determine 
the origin of the radionuclides.

 This information, as well as data flowing in from the other three systems, 
does not provide absolute identification of nuclear blasts. Instead, it is 
intended to arm treaty nations with enough information to decide whether to 
follow up questionable events with on-site inspections.

 If a team can arrive on the scene within a few days, it can set up portable 
seismometer systems to catch aftershocks, which help determine whether an 
earthquake or a blast has occurred. On the ground, investigators can also do a 
more thorough search for radionuclides.

 Treaty participants may face trouble getting some countries to allow intrusive 
examinations. Those arguing for an inspection can strengthen their case with 
the treaty organization if they muster as much evidence as possible pointing to 
a possible violation, says Bratt.

 Many countries have for decades maintained their own monitoring systems, which 
pull information from satellites, seismic networks, intelligence agencies, and 
other tools. The United States, for example, has a seismic network run by the 
Air Force called the Atomic Energy Detection System. This classified network 
has superior capabilities in some regions, compared to the new international 
seismic network planned for the CTBT.

 A current sticking point in the ongoing treaty negotiations is whether 
countries can use information collected by their own "national technical means" 
as part of a call for on-site inspections. "The U.S. would like to be able to 
lay any data on the table," says Alewine. "It's just like when we spotted 
missiles in Cuba in 1962. We took the U2 [spy plane] photographs to the United 
Nations," says Alewine. Some nations, however, object to the use of information 
provided by individual countries because it may be of uncertain quality and not 
open to examination.

 Even unclassified information can come into play. Many quake-prone nations 
have seismic networks that far exceed the regional sensitivity of the 
international seismic monitoring system. For example, in central Asia, 
Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan have networks that locally average 1.0 magnitude unit 
better than the prototype international seismic monitoring system, says Gregory 
van der Vink of the Arlington-based Incorporated Research Institutions for 
Seismology (IRIS), a consortium of U.S. academic institutions.

 Van der Vink compares these regional networks to neighborhood watch programs 
that could augment the international system. "While the regional networks will 
not replace the formal monitoring system, just as neighborhood watch programs 
do not replace the police, they will provide a strong additional deterrent to 
any country considering violating the CTBT below the threshold of the 
monitoring system," he says.

 In general, van der Vink gives high marks to the seismic section of the 
prototype international monitoring system, which puts out automated detections 
immediately and updates them 48 hours later with a listing of events reviewed 
by human analysts. At present, the data center team reviews on average 60 
events each day. Seismologists at IRIS have found that this reviewed bulletin 
is at least as accurate as the one produced by the U.S. Geological Survey, 
which comes out with a lag of months as opposed to 2 days.

 But van der Vink questions the advertised sensitivity of the completed 
international monitoring system. He predicts that the seismic network will have 
problems detecting events in some regions, such as central Asia, because 
political considerations in the negotiations determined the location of 
stations. "For several areas of the world, it's going to be hard for them to 
get down to magnitude 4.0 and 1,000 square kilometer error ellipse using the 
stations that are formally designated for the international seismic monitoring 
system," says van der Vink.

 Whether this level of detection proves sufficient depends on who will be 
tempted to test nuclear weapons in the future. If history holds true, countries 
developing their first nuclear weapon will probably not be able to build a bomb 
with a yield under 1 kt. All known first-time tests have had yields greater 
than 10 kt.

 Countries with advanced nuclear weapons programs can easily design devices 
well below the kiloton level. Yet they will have to gamble that neither the 
international monitoring system nor the intelligence assets of individual 
countries will pick up a small detonation, says Amy Sands of the U.S. Arms 
Control and Disarmament Agency, which is negotiating the test ban treaty in 
Geneva.

"What you're trying to do is set up a system that deters countries as much as 
detects and resolves ambiguities about these events, because countries won't 
know the capabilities of the U.S. system combined with the international 
monitoring system," says Sands.

 In that sense, success for the treaty means constructing an alliance of 
observing systems so daunting that they are never called upon to identify a 
nuclear blast. Whether nations can meet this challenge remains the ultimate 
test.


