Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 12/7/96 December 7, 1996

 Tibet Reveals Its Squishy Underbelly

by R. Monastersky

 Known as the Roof of the World, the vast Tibetan plateau soars so high above 
the steppes of Asia that for much of history it repelled many would-be 
invaders. Yet this lofty fortress rests on something quite insubstantial, 
according to new research.

 An international team of investigators has discovered a layer of partially 
molten rock hiding beneath Tibet--an arrangement that makes the plateau the 
geologic equivalent of a jelly sandwich.

 Geoscientists are seeking to understand Tibet and its flanking mountain ranges 
because these features represent the best available lesson on what happens when 
one continental plate rams into another, an event that has recurred countless 
times in Earth's past (SN: 7/14/90, p. 24).

"Continental collisions play a very big part in shaping the continental crust, 
and the collision between India and Asia is the example of this process going 
on today," says K. Douglas Nelson, a geologist at Syracuse (N.Y.) University 
and a participant in a large-scale collaboration between U.S., Chinese, German, 
and Canadian researchers.

 Members of the project, called INDEPTH, report their findings in five separate 
reports in the Dec. 6 Science.

 The multinational team spent three summers probing deep beneath the surface of 
south-central Tibet using a variety of geophysical techniques. Small explosions 
set off in boreholes sent out volleys of seismic waves that reflected off 
buried structures in the crust and underlying mantle. Measurements of magnetic 
and electric fields at the surface provided insights into the electric 
properties of buried rocks. By timing the speed of vibrations arriving from 
distant earthquakes, scientists gauged the stiffness of rock beneath the 
plateau.

 All of the geophysical data point to the existence in the crust of a 
liquid-rich zone that extends from about 15 kilometers below the surface to an 
unknown depth, says Nelson. The INDEPTH scientists surmise that the liquid is 
partially molten rock in a layer underlying much of the Tibetan plateau.

 If these conclusions are correct, they would help resolve a major debate about 
what is happening to the crust of India as it slams into Asia. Some scientists 
hold that the Indian plate, including its crust and mantle, is sliding beneath 
the Asian plate. Others have proposed that the two plates are meeting like cars 
in a head-on crash, with both getting squashed in the process. The new results 
suggest, however, that the collision is creating a melting pot where the lines 
between India and Asia blur.

"You don't have an identifiable Indian crust or Asian crust beneath Tibet. It's 
all been mixed together. This is a new paradigm for a continent-continent 
collision," says INDEPTH participant Alan G. Jones of the Geological Survey of 
Canada in Ottawa.

 The partially molten layer formed, the scientists believe, during the last 40 
million years as the viselike continental collision squeezed the Indian and 
Asian plates from the north and south. The mangled crust at the meeting point 
spread vertically into a plateau and went downward, where it grew warm enough 
to melt. This molten rock then migrated up to form a layer of liquid-rich rock 
in the upper crust.

 The INDEPTH study represents an important achievement because "it's the first 
systematic view of what the Tibetan crust looks like," says B. Clark Burchfiel 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Yet the conclusions drawn from 
the study remain controversial because INDEPTH scientists investigated only a 
small part of the southern plateau and cannot tell how far the partially molten 
layer extends.

 Nelson, Jones, and their colleagues plan to return to Tibet next summer to 
examine the crust farther north. If the mushy zone does underlie much of the 
Tibetan plateau, it would help solve a number of puzzles about the region. In 
particular, geologists have wondered why a plateau ringed by mountains is so 
flat. A soft underlying layer could not support any large mountains, thus 
explaining the lack of relief, says Nelson.

 Lessons learned from Tibet can provide insights into much earlier continental 
collisions, such as the one 300 million years ago between North America and 
Africa, which constructed the Appalachian Mountains.


