Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/11/96

 May 11, 1996

 Second protein opens cells to HIV's entry

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 Scientists have long puzzled over how HIV, the AIDS virus, gains entry into 
the human immune cells it infects. They know the virus attaches itself to a 
human cell surface molecule called CD4. Yet they also know that HIV does not 
fuse to most animal cells, even after the gene for CD4 has been added to them.

"The binding [with CD4] was not enough. Something else was required for the 
fusion process to happen," says Edward A. Berger of the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.

 That something else, at least for certain strains of HIV, is another human 
cell surface protein, Berger and his coworkers contend in the May 10 Science.

 Other researchers hail the long-awaited identification of this protein, which 
Berger's group calls fusin, as a major advance in scientists' knowledge of 
HIV's life cycle. "It really affords new opportunities to study, at the 
molecular level, how HIV infects cells," says Robert W. Doms of the University 
of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia.

 While researchers can conceivably develop therapeutic agents that block HIV's 
interaction with fusin, says Berger, a more immediate impact of fusin's 
discovery may be to help researchers understand why some people resist HIV 
infection and why some HIV-infected people do not develop AIDS. By adding the 
genes for CD4 and fusin to animals such as rabbits, investigators also hope to 
create laboratory models in which they can study HIV infection.

 Fusin arrives center stage almost 3 years after a French research group 
announced that a molecule called CD26 was the elusive HIV fusion cofactor. Many 
labs were unable to reproduce the finding, however. In contrast, the discovery 
of fusin by Berger's group has so far garnered rave reviews.

"There's no controversy about this. It's already been reproduced in several 
labs. There's no question it's correct and it's a highly significant piece of 
work," says John Moore of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York 
City.

 To identify the HIV fusion cofactor, Berger's group developed a novel means of 
testing the importance of many human proteins in the fusion process. The 
researchers added to one mouse cell line the gene for CD4 and to another, the 
gene for Env, a protein on the surface of HIV that the virus uses to bind to 
CD4.

 They also added to the mouse cells containing the CD4 gene a large library of 
genes taken from human immune cells that HIV can infect. One or more of the 
proteins encoded by these human genes endowed the CD4-bearing mouse cells with 
the ability to fuse to the mouse cells displaying Env, Berger's team found. By 
winnowing the genetic library down to fewer and fewer genes, the investigators 
finally found a single gene whose protein was required for cell-cell fusion.

 A further battery of experiments solidified the case for fusin. In one test, 
Berger's group added the genes for CD4 and fusin to mink cells, which normally 
resist HIV infection: HIV then penetrated the altered cells.

 Not all HIV strains depend upon fusin, notes Berger. Strains that 
preferentially infect immune cells called macrophages appear to use a different 
cofactor, though Berger suspects it closely resembles fusin.

"In some ways, this could be the tip of the iceberg. Different HIV strains 
might utilize different members of [a fusin] family," says Doms.

 The gene for fusin was actually identified several years ago in research 
unrelated to HIV, notes Berger. As yet, researchers haven't discovered the 
normal role of fusin or the proteins with which it naturally interacts.

 Curiously, says Berger, fusin resembles a molecule that binds to a chemokine 
called interleukin-8. Chemokines are a small family of proteins, some of which 
have recently been found to suppress HIV infection (SN: 12/9/95, p. 388).

 Fusin's similarity to a chemokine receptor raises the possibility that 
chemokines interfere with HIV's ability to use fusin or fusinlike proteins to 
infect cells, says Doms. "We're not saying fusin is a chemokine receptor, but 
the chemokines may be a good place to start looking," adds Berger.

 Berger's group plans to examine exactly how fusin's presence allows HIV to 
enter a human cell. They also hope to study whether HIV's interaction with 
fusin might explain how the virus kills immune cells, a fundamental question 
that remains a mystery.


