Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/18/96

 May 18, 1996

 Antibiotics take a bite out of bad gums

 By JANET RALOFF

 Bleeding, receding gums may signal a serious disease that affects the roots of 
teeth and, if unchecked, can lead to tooth loss. To combat it, dentists scrape 
or plane away the root-level plaque and tartar caused by bacteria. In severe 
cases, oral surgeons make cuts at the gum line to improve access to affected 
roots--a procedure that can cost as much as $3,000.

 Now, with treatments costing less than one-third of that, researchers at the 
University of Michigan School of Dentistry in Ann Arbor have successfully 
fought severe root-level bacterial infections with antibiotics, usually without 
surgery.

 They treated 90 inner-city clinic patients who had advanced gum disease; in 
every case, other experienced periodontists had recommended surgery. After 
standard nonsurgical cleaning of tooth roots, all participants received drug 
capsules to be taken for 2 or 4 weeks, depending on the severity and extent of 
gum disease. The dentists followed up recalcitrant cases with as many as three 
rounds of topical antibiotics that they administered by temporarily gluing an 
experimental, drug-impregnated cellulose film to the root surface. Some 
patients received placebos during parts of the trial.

 Using this antibiotic regimen, the researchers averted surgery or extraction 
for 690 of the 783 teeth initially deemed to need it. About 67 percent of the 
"hopeless teeth"--those identified by experienced specialists as being too far 
gone to save--no longer needed extraction or surgery, notes Walter J. Loesche, 
a leader of the study.

 Overall, 81 percent of the patients avoided surgery, his team reports in the 
May Journal of Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology, and 
Endodontics. "And ones who still needed it required a greatly reduced amount," 
Loesche says.

 He says that future studies will attempt to identify the most effective dose 
of antibiotics and work toward Food and Drug Administration approval for the 
drug-impregnated films used in the topical treatments.


