Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/4/96

 May 4, 1996

 Oceanography's New Catch: Roving Blobs

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 The latest beasts discovered in the Atlantic won't munch unwary swimmers or 
swallow luxury liners, but they may wreak havoc on French farmers and other 
landlubbers across Europe. The newfound creatures are an oceanographic 
phenomenon--giant patches of warm or cold water that drift slowly around the 
North Atlantic and may alter European weather.

 Two Florida researchers identified these climatic critters by studying sea 
surface temperature records from 1948 through 1992. During that period, 14 of 
these temperature anomalies developed and roved the ocean basin, report Donald 
V. Hansen of the University of Miami and Hugo F. Bezdek of the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration in Miami. They describe their work in the April 
15 Journal of Geophysical Research.

"I think this is a seminal paper," comments oceanographer James J. O'Brien of 
Florida State University in Tallahassee. "They have identified a very important 
mode of ocean variability."

 Hansen and Bezdek found that the large warm and cold blobs measured hundreds 
or thousands of kilometers across and typically had a lifetime of 3 to 10 
years. Although the vertical thickness of these patches remains unknown, 
measurements made by ships passing through them suggest that they may reach 
depths of 400 meters.

 As they drifted, the temperature anomalies followed the path of prevailing 
ocean currents, but they moved at only one-third to one-half the speed of the 
actual currents--an observation that scientists cannot yet explain.

 The newly described phenomenon lasts much longer than the well-known El Nino 
warmings in the tropical Pacific Ocean, which usually persist for a year or 
two. Although Hansen and Bezdek focused on the North Atlantic, they suspect 
that long-lived temperature anomalies are also drifting around other ocean 
basins.

 Previously, oceanographers believed that temperature anomalies were 
stationary. In the 1960s, the late Norwegian meteorologist Jacob Bjerknes found 
hints of traveling temperature anomalies in the Atlantic, and other researchers 
later detected similar isolated examples. But oceanographers did not pursue 
these sporadic sightings, says Yochanan Kushnir, a meteorologist at the 
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in Palisades, N.Y.

 Hansen and Bezdek identified five cold and nine warm patches moving around the 
Atlantic by making maps of January ocean temperatures that strayed furthest 
from average conditions. Their maps show blobs slinking across the ocean like 
amoebas on a microscope slide.

 In one example, a cold patch developed off the coast of Florida in 1968 and 
started drifting eastward. By 1971, the anomaly had greatly elongated and hit 
the coast of Africa. It then turned south and traveled westward across the 
tropical Atlantic until it reached the coast of South America in 1975. Over the 
next 2 years, the cold region withered and finally disappeared.

 Because sea surface temperatures strongly influence weather and climate, the 
researchers suspect that these long-lived Atlantic anomalies affect conditions 
in Europe and perhaps elsewhere. For instance, the researchers suggest that a 
warm patch in the late 1950s helped cause a prolonged Scandinavian drought. 
Oceanographers cannot explain how these anomalies form or what drives them, but 
similar features appear in some computer simulations of ocean temperatures. By 
dissecting the computer versions, researchers hope to learn more about these 
wandering weather makers of the Atlantic.


