Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/18/96

 May 18, 1996

 Fit for a King

 Computer scanners capture the body's subtle shapes

 By RICHARD LIPKIN

 In the classic comedy film Sleeper, a futuristic Woody Allen pays a visit to a 
21st century tailor, who happens to be a robot.

"You vant jackets, ve got jackets. You vant trousers, ve got trousers," says 
the heavily accented computer-clothier. "Step in here," the robot says, 
motioning Allen into an automated tailoring machine. Lights flash, the machine 
hums, a computer measures the red-haired time traveler, and out pops a suit, 
which Allen puts on.

"This is terrible," Allen balks, pointing to his baggy outfit.

"All right, all right," mumbles the robot, "Ve'll take it in a little."

 As is often the case with science fiction, life is proceeding to imitate 
art--but this time, with better-fitting results.

 Researchers are designing systems that can scan the surface of a person's body 
and produce an accurate three-dimensional image of it. These scanners offer the 
possibility of crafting quick, computerized representations that can be used to 
design a wide variety of items, from custom-fit clothing and shoes to 
automobile passenger compartments and crash helmets.

 Since the 3-D scans employ a general process that works for virtually any 
spatial object, researchers around the country are also seeking to adapt it to 
other purposes. "People are looking at ways to use this technology for 
biomedicine, anthropology, archaeology, museum inventory, and entertainment," 
says David Addleman, president of Cyberware, a computer graphics firm in 
Monterey, Calif.

 To obtain a 3-D image for fitting clothes, a customer puts on a stretchy, 
tight-fitting garment and steps onto a platform surrounded by an array of 
lights and mirrors. The system passes harmless laser beams over the person's 
body from head to toe, while cameras record the patterns they make. The system 
can then put together a detailed surface map of the individual's shape in a 
process that takes only 17 seconds.

"The system shines stripes of light across a person, then measures the 
distortions created by the body's curves," says Addleman. "With four video 
cameras and four mirrors, the machine has eight views of the person. By viewing 
the person from different angles and perspectives, we can triangulate points on 
the body surface."

 The result is a grid, looking something like a mannequin made of wire mesh, 
assembled from 300,000 to 400,000 points spaced 3 millimeters apart. Once the 
scanner has assembled a "cloud of points" covering the surface of a person's 
body, the computer then "stitches" the various views together to create a 
single, seamless 3-D likeness, Addleman explains.

 The basic concept of the technology is simple, he adds. "You're really just 
mapping a curved surface in space." The tricky part, Addleman says, "is putting 
it all together" to create a smooth, accurate, and detailed figure from which 
information can be extracted to fit clothing or make masks and helmets, for 
example.

 The idea of the scanner arose in a military project aimed at finding a way to 
produce faster, cheaper, and better-fitting uniforms for troops, says Kathleen 
M. Robinette, an anthropologist at the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. 
"Traditionally, we measure people with very basic tools, like tape measures and 
calipers," she says. "But they don't provide complete or accurate information. 
In the end, most of the information used to design clothing comes from an 
artist's imagination."

 Standard measuring tools take too much time to use, she adds. It can take as 
long as 20 minutes to measure someone properly for a garment, so military 
scientists decided to try to computerize and automate the body-measuring 
process. "We started out using scanning machines to measure people's heads and 
faces for helmets," she says. "Eventually it became feasible to use the same 
methods on the whole body."

 The Army and Air Force are already using the body data to make a smaller 
number of uniforms, boots, and flight suits fit a wider range of body types. 
"We've been approached by podiatrists and shoe companies wanting to make scans 
of people's feet" for custom-fitting shoes and orthotics, Addleman says. Scans 
of hands could serve in the design and fitting of gloves.

 In one new venture, Jeffrey Silverman, owner of the Custom Foot shoe store in 
Westport, Conn., orders footwear made to fit electronically scanned feet.

 Using a simpler scanner than Cyberware's, Silverman models his customers' 
feet, then transmits the data by modem to Italy, where manufacturers produce 
customized versions of existing models. Purchasers receive their uniquely 
fitted shoes in about 2 weeks, at an average cost of $140 per pair, Silverman 
says.

 Physicians at the Department of Veterans Affairs are looking at ways to use 
the 3-D scanner to make replicas of body parts. A person who loses an arm or 
leg, for example, can have the remaining one scanned into the system. The 
computer can then invert the model to make a mirror image of the existing 
limb--a process that could streamline the making and fitting of prostheses.

 The Army and Air Force are applying the new technology to design better 
aircraft cockpits, parachute harnesses, and other safety equipment. "These data 
are good for designing anything a body has to fit into," Robinette says. "You 
can rotate the image, look at it from different angles, even change aspects of 
the figure," she says.

 In similar fashion, scientists concerned with improving safety in the 
workplace want to use the scanning system to lessen the likelihood of 
industrial accidents. "There's very little accurate data on the body dimensions 
of certain populations, such as construction and agricultural workers," says 
Hongwei Hsiao, a biomechanist at the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) in Morgantown, W. Va. "We're hoping to use these machines to 
gather information to design better protective equipment, such as face masks, 
eyewear, harnesses, and respirators. We can also study problems like the 
compression forces that cause lower back injuries in people who have to carry 
heavy loads. The more we know about human shapes and sizes, the better we can 
do in designing safety features for vehicles and equipment to reduce deaths and 
injuries."

 Taking advantage of the system's ability to scan bones accurately, 
archaeologists are using the device to construct replicas of dinosaur skeletons 
for museums. "There's often a problem at archaeological sites of finding 
incomplete skeletons of animals," says Vance A. Deason, a physicist at the 
Idaho National Engineering Laboratory in Idaho Falls. "The original bones are 
fragile, and you only have a few of them."

 Thus, to create the mighty skeletons on view at most museums, archaeologists 
must mold and model each bone, then fit the bones together. The original 
fossils remain safely in storage, while the giant skeletal replicas--often 
assembled from copies of pieces of several incomplete skeletons--stand in view 
of awestruck patrons.

"The problem in combining the bones to make one complete skeleton is that bones 
are often taken from animals of different sizes, so they have to be scaled 
properly to fit together," says Deason. The process is extremely slow and 
expensive. "With this technology, you can scan bones into the computer, then 
scale them to make a perfect replica that's also the right size."

 The system could work equally well for other art objects preserved in museums, 
Deason says. For instance, curators must often protect rare and delicate 
objects from mass viewing and handling, lest they become damaged. As a result, 
only scholars are permitted to see and handle some of a museum's finest pieces. 
A 3-D scanning system capable of producing accurate, color replicas of art 
objects could permit more people to view and handle at least copies of rare 
works, Deason says.

 Engineers manufacturing objects such as automobile parts might use these 
modeling techniques to speed up their design and testing procedures. 
Individuals studying inaccessible architecture or ruins might benefit from 
calling up replicas of rare items or buildings for detailed study. Even home 
shoppers, perusing the inventory of a virtual department store on television or 
a computer, might want to download and inspect models of items they're 
considering buying.

"We're working on scanning large objects, like cars, sculptures, and 
buildings," says Marc Levoy of Stanford University. "This would enable someone 
to create, say, a virtual showroom for automobiles or a movie set or an urban 
landscape." With such depth and accuracy of detail, someone wearing a virtual 
reality headset could take a simulated walk or flight through a building, 
neighborhood, or even city.

"My goal is to scan a historic building and make a model that's so realistic, 
you could use computer graphics to fly through the model and it would look 
indistinguishable from a video of the original."

 As part of realizing that technological fantasy, Levoy and his colleagues at 
Stanford have assembled a "responsive workbench," on which one can see and 
manipulate virtual objects created from 3-D computer models. "If you put on 
special glasses, the objects look like holograms sitting on the table," says 
Levoy.

 Capitalizing on the scanning system's ability to describe a 3-D object in a 
digital format, Levoy and his colleagues have built a 3-D fax machine. As a 
demonstration, they scanned an image of a 6-inch-tall statue of Buddha into the 
computer, then transmitted the file to another location, where a 
stereolithography machine recreated the smiling Buddha in plastic. Start to 
finish, the process took about 18 hours.

 In an effort to integrate such technology into the manufacture and retail 
sales of clothing, scientists at the Textile Clothing Technology Corp. in Cary, 
N.C., are pursuing a project called "apparel on demand."

"The idea is to automate the designing, cutting, and fitting of garments for 
retail customers," says David A. Bruner, an engineer at the company. "The 
long-term goal is mass customization of clothing."

 In this vision, customers visiting a retail clothing outlet could, in addition 
to searching through racks of clothes, flip through pictures in books or on a 
computer screen to find the items they want. They would then step into an 
automated measuring booth, which would gather their vital statistics and put 
the data onto a computer disk or magnetic card. Once they've selected the items 
of their choice, the retail outlet would transmit the customers' measurements 
to a factory, where the garments would be cut and sewn to fit their exact body 
dimensions, then delivered directly to their homes.

"We believe that the whole process, from purchase to delivery at the customer's 
home, should take 24 to 48 hours," says Bruner.

 To make this system feasible, researchers at the company are developing a 
simpler, less expensive whole-body scanner that can take all necessary 
measurements in only 2 seconds. To achieve this goal, they're using a laser 
scanning technology similar to that of Cyberware but with more video cameras to 
make a quicker, less detailed model. To fit clothing, one doesn't need 
submillimeter accuracy, Bruner says.

 Though starting up such a system requires a large capital investment for the 
industry, says Bruner, in the long run manufacturers believe that the 
changeover will not raise the retail price of garments. "The automated process 
eliminates much of the waste in the existing system," he says.

 Currently, about one-third of all mass-produced garments sell at a discount, 
since manufacturing lags lead to mismatches between supply and demand. 
Moreover, another 30 percent of raw textiles are never fashioned into garments 
because they're considered out of style, he adds. Despite the need to add 
equipment to the present production line, in the long run such an "agile" 
manufacturing system requires less infrastructure to operate and manage than 
existing clothing factories do, Bruner says. "That's another cost advantage." 
Despite the plethora of mass-produced retail clothes available to U.S. 
consumers, the data suggest the nation is poorly garbed. According to clothing 
industry statistics, only half of U.S. consumers fit correctly into 
off-the-rack garments. Of the ill-clad customers, half alter their clothes to 
fit properly, while the other half don't even bother.

 Based on a survey by Audra Knight and Nancy Cassill, textile specialists at 
the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, consumers--especially women--are 
willing to pay up to $10 for body scans to get their clothes to fit properly. 
"Based on these estimates," says Bruner, "we believe there's a strong market 
for customers who aren't served well by the existing system."


