Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/11/96

 May 11, 1996

 Keeping mosquitoes healthy for humans' sake

 By TINA ADLER

 Efforts to stop the spread of mosquito-transmitted diseases usually focus on 
killing the insects. Although researchers are developing novel techniques for 
reducing mosquito populations (SN: 4/27/96, p. 270), the bugs and the diseases 
they carry continue to spread.

 So some scientists are taking a new approach--trying to keep mosquitoes free 
of disease. They hope eventually to genetically engineer the insects to resist 
viral infections and pass that trait on to their offspring.

 A Colorado State University team in Fort Collins took the first step toward 
this goal by using a piece of RNA to prevent the dengue virus from replicating 
in mosquito saliva. Mosquitoes treated in this way cannot then transmit the 
virus.

 The dengue virus, carried by Aedes aegypti mosquitoes, poses an increasing 
threat to people living in warm regions from Texas to Asia (SN: 4/6/96, p. 
218). Dengue fever causes flulike symptoms in humans, and dengue hemorrhagic 
fever can kill infants and young children.

 In their study, Kenneth E. Olson and his coworkers attached a small piece of 
dengue virus RNA to Sindbis, a common virus that has little effect on 
mosquitoes, they report in the May 10 Science. They then infected mosquitoes 
with the engineered Sindbis virus, as well as with normal dengue virus.

 The engineered virus replicated in almost all of the mosquitoes' tissues, 
including their salivary glands. While replicating, the dengue RNA molecules 
from the engineered virus jammed the replication machinery of the normal 
dengue, although how they did so remains unclear.

 The researchers found no dengue virus in the mosquitoes' saliva. Moreover, 
when the scientists injected the saliva into uninfected mosquitoes, no signs of 
the virus appeared.

 This is the first successful attempt to confer "intracellular immunity" on an 
important human pathogen by introducing a foreign gene into an organism, 
Anthony A. James of the University of California, Irvine asserts in a 
commentary accompanying the report.

 The method appears to have had some success with other mosquitoborne viruses 
as well. In a study in the April 30 Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, Ann M. Powers and other members of the Colorado team report that they 
halted replication of the LaCrosse virus--which causes encephalitis in 
children--in A. triseriatus mosquitoes. However, the Sindbis virus failed to 
infect the salivary glands of A. triseriatus, so the mosquitoes could still 
transmit the disease.

 The scientists hope to use dengue and LaCrosse RNA that interfere with viral 
replication to meet their larger goal of ensuring that mosquitoes can pass 
disease resistance on to their offspring.

 But "that's quite a big step," notes coauthor Barry J. Beaty. Researchers have 
created transgenic mosquitoes using marker genes, but these genes don't alter 
insects' ability to transmit diseases. They fashioned these transgenic bugs by 
inserting DNA into mosquito eggs. A new technique now being tested involves 
inserting DNA into retroviruses, RNA-containing viruses that may integrate the 
DNA directly into the mosquito genome


