Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/25/96

 May 25, 1996

 Schrodinger's cat: Two atoms in one?

 By RICHARD LIPKIN

 Underlying the peculiar world of quantum mechanics is the notion that, under 
certain circumstances, matter can exist in more than one state or position at 
the same time.

 Long held as an oddity of quantum mechanical theory, this property of matter 
has defied easy experimental realization. Even more exotic is the idea that the 
act of observation or measurement somehow determines which state exists at any 
given moment.

 To illustrate quantum mechanics' strange nature, Austrian physicist Erwin 
Schrodinger proposed in 1926 a puzzling thought experiment. If a cat is placed 
in a sealed box and its fate--to live or die--is correlated with whether or not 
an atom radioactively decays, then the presence of the atom's decayed and 
undecayed quantum states translates into a cat that is simultaneously dead and 
alive--a highly counterintuitive idea.

 Now, a team of physicists has managed to create a "Schrodinger-cat-like state 
of matter" in a single atom. By supercooling a beryllium atom with a laser, 
then prodding it with a rapid sequence of laser pulses, the physicists have 
managed to get the atom to oscillate in such a way that it exists "in the 
bizarre state of being in two well-separated positions at once."

"This situation defies our sense of reality," say Christopher Monroe, a 
physicist at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Boulder, 
Colo., and his colleagues in the May 24 Science. "Schrodinger's cat paradox is 
a classic illustration of the conflict between the existence of quantum 
superpositions and our real-world experience of observation and measurement."

 When we observe cats, they say, we don't expect our observations to influence 
whether the felines die or stay alive--or to see one cat both dead and alive.

 In the recent atomic experiment, the researchers make one cold beryllium atom 
vibrate harmonically, producing what they call a superposition of two 
"coherent-state wave packets." The atom's electrons oscillate in a way that 
creates a dual presence, as if two atoms existed in distinct locations at the 
same time.

"Imagine a marble in a bowl, rolling back and forth," says Monroe. "At one 
point, the one marble appears as two marbles rolling back and forth in opposite 
directions, passing through each other and appearing simultaneously at each 
edge of the bowl."

 The atom's two states are separated by 80 nanometers. "For a brief period, the 
atom appears to exist in two places," Monroe says.

"This is a marvelous experiment," says Wojciech H. Zurek, a physicist at Los 
Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory. "They're putting an ion into a trap and 
separating it into a very weird superposition. It's very clever."

 Although this experiment involves only a single atom rather than a visible 
object, such as a cat, Zurek says it will open the door to deeper experimental 
probes into "the boundary between classical physics and quantum mechanics."

 While this experiment ignores macroscopic effects on objects such as 
Schrodinger's cat, it may at least have demonstrated, says Zurek, "the paradox 
of Schrodinger's kitten."


