Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/25/96

 May 25, 1996

 Growing up in harm's way

 Child victimization develops into a scientific challenge

 By BRUCE BOWER

 Two young children drown after their mother straps them into a car, releases 
the emergency brake, and lets the vehicle roll into a lake. A teenage boy 
suffers a fatal bullet wound after refusing to hand over his new jacket to a 
gun-toting assailant of about the same age. A 12-year-old girl runs away from 
abusive parents, only to get abducted and raped by a man who befriends her.

 Youthful victims of abuse and crime such as these appear in the media with 
numbing regularity. Politicians and public interest groups decry the violence 
and fear that infect too many young lives. National concern focuses especially 
on sexually abused children and contested memories of childhood sexual 
violations.

 But outside the glare of the political and media spotlight lurks an even more 
disturbing reality, contends David Finkelhor, a sociologist at the University 
of New Hampshire in Durham. Scientists and mental health workers, in 
Finkelhor's view, know remarkably little about the extent, nature, and 
ramifications of child victimization.

 Overall, national survey data indicate that, compared to the general 
population, youths from 12 to 17 years of age suffer more than twice as much 
violent crime, including physical assaults and robbery. More than half of all 
sexual assault victims reported to police are under 18 years old.

 Moreover, 16- and 17-year-olds in the United States get murdered at a rate of 
15.2 per 100,000, around 50 percent higher than the overall rate. The official 
homicide rate for children under age 5 approaches that for the general 
population, but it significantly understates the true rate of such murders, 
Finkelhor argues. Many infant homicides, in particular, are probably recorded 
as cases of sudden infant death syndrome or accidents, he maintains.

 Moreover, the roughly 1 million official cases of child neglect recorded by 
law enforcement and social service agencies each year fall short of the actual 
number.

 The lack of comprehensive statistics on the scope of abuse and crime 
experienced by youngsters seriously hampers research, according to Finkelhor. 
Moreover, investigators have intensively explored only a few issues, such as 
sexual abuse and child abduction, without examining how they relate to each 
other and to other forms of victimization, he holds.

"The need for new theory and research is vast and urgent and ranges from how 
children view victimization at different ages and how it affects them to what 
can be done to minimize their risk of being victimized," the New Hampshire 
researcher argues. "Many symptoms seen in sexually abused children, for 
instance, may not be specific to sexual abuse but represent general responses 
to different types of victimization and trauma."

 This call to arms comes from a well-known investigator who since 1977 has 
studied sexual and physical abuse of children, including homicide. Finkelhor 
hopes his blunt assessment will help launch a new research field, which he 
calls "developmental victimology." Disciplines such as criminology, sociology, 
pediatrics, and psychology would join arms in this endeavor.

 Developmental victimology, as envisioned by Finkelhor, contains two major 
research branches. One addresses the developmental changes that make children 
more or less likely to encounter certain types of victimization. For instance, 
cases of physical abuse resulting in death occur largely in youngsters under 
the age of 2, the risk of sexual abuse jumps sharply between ages 6 and 10, and 
handgun homicides rise sharply for ages 15 to 17.

 The second branch concerns the impact of victimization at various points in 
development. The same brand of abuse or neglect may inflict harsher 
psychological damage on toddlers and preschoolers than on older kids, Finkelhor 
suggests, but few studies have explicitly tested this possibility. The 
behavioral fallout of victimization probably reflects a child's stage of 
development also, he adds. Consider sexual abuse, which tends to trigger 
overtly sexual behaviors in 2- to 6-year-old girls, inhibition and social 
withdrawal in older girls, and depression, running away from home, and drug 
abuse in teenagers of both sexes.

 It's too early to tell whether developmental victimology will blossom across 
disciplinary boundaries. Finkelhor faces an uphill battle, especially since 
researchers lack a comprehensive theory with which to knit together diverse 
findings on causes and consequences of child abuse, asserts John E. Richters, a 
psychologist at the National Institute of Mental Health in Rockville, Md. "I'm 
sympathetic to Finkelhor's position," Richters states. "The concentrated and 
sophisticated scientific activity that he envisions may be exactly what the 
field needs to bootstrap itself to a more solid footing on these pressing 
issues."

 In particular, Finkelhor wants to move beyond the assumption of some 
criminologists that assaults, rapes, and other serious crimes mainly befall 
youngsters who court danger through delinquent and risky behaviors. Many young 
children and teenagers fall prey to abuse, robberies, and assaults without ever 
having flouted laws or acted irresponsibly, he holds. For others, personal 
attributes render them vulnerable both to law breaking and to victimization, 
the New Hampshire researcher adds.

 Some emotionally troubled girls, for instance, may seek approval within a peer 
group by committing delinquent acts. As a result, they cross paths with 
sexually predatory males who can cajole them into situations that provide a 
cover for rape.

 To get a better handle on risk factors for child victimization, Finkelhor and 
New Hampshire colleague Nancy L. Asdigian analyzed data from a national survey 
of 1,457 youths between ages 10 and 16. Each participant completed an initial 
telephone interview and a follow-up phone interview from 8 to 24 months later. 
Victims of assaults outside the family, which were often perpetrated by peers, 
reported academic problems and psychological distress, including sleep 
difficulties, feelings of guilt and hopelessness, irritability, and an 
inability to control one's temper. Boys cited many more nonfamily assaults than 
girls did.

 A large portion of nonfamily assaults may, in fact, involve attempts by 
certain boys to enhance their reputations by beating up other boys seen as 
vulnerable to attack, Finkelhor proposes. Researchers estimate that 
approximately 9 percent of students in grades 1 through 9, or about 3 million 
U.S. students, encounter regular bullying by peers.

 Consider international data on bullying. Among Norwegian and Swedish students 
in grades 1 through 9, typical victims of bullying are anxious, insecure boys 
who generally think poorly of themselves and are physically weak compared to 
their male peers, according to studies directed by Dan Olweus of the University 
of Bergen, Norway.

 A similar pattern emerges for boys who routinely get picked on by bullies in 
the United States, finds Kenneth A. Dodge of Vanderbilt University in Nashville 
and his coworkers.

 Bullies in the U.S. and Scandinavian studies act aggressively and impulsively 
toward everyone, including parents and teachers. They show little empathy for 
their victims and strive to dominate other people, Olweus argues.

 This brand of violence exerts lasting effects. At age 23, former victims of 
regular bullying at school report depression and low self-esteem that derive 
partly from those experiences, he contends.

 While boys are more often the victims of bullying, girls are more commonly the 
targets of sexual abuse. Finkelhor and Asdigian's analysis of the national 
data, as yet unpublished, portrays a rapid rise in sexual assaults on girls 
after age 8. As girls reach late childhood, they undoubtedly become more 
tempting targets for sexual abusers, the scientists state.

 This notion coincides with evidence, gathered as part of the 1992 national 
survey, that 29 percent of all rapes involve girls age 11 years or younger.

 Certain risk factors also raise the likelihood of violence within families. 
Physical assaults by parents, according to Finkelhor and Asdigian, increase if 
a child has a physical limitation or disability, engages in risky or reckless 
behaviors that parents presumably fail to control, or lives with a step-parent.

 Some risk-taking behavior may represent a reaction to parental violence rather 
than a cause of it, Finkelhor notes. An unknown portion of physical problems, 
as well, may stem from early parental abuse or neglect.

 Crimes against children often get erroneously tagged as less violent, less 
injurious, and less criminal that those endured by adults, Finkelhor contends. 
"The younger the children involved, the harder it is to consider the violence 
an assault or the taking of property a robbery, even if the behaviors and 
motives are almost identical to those of adults," he states.

 Even child sexual abuse did not attract concerted public and scientific 
attention until the early 1980s.

 A common image of violence among young people focuses on mutual fights or 
scuffles that flare up without creating a readily apparent victim. Mutual 
fighting also occurs prior to many adult homicides and in some instances of 
spousal violence, but a victim and an aggressor usually stand out clearly. 
Finkelhor says that the research on bullying indicates that aggressive, 
domineering children pick fights continually with certain of their classmates, 
so there is often an aggressor and a victim.

 The psychological impact of violence and crime on children must be taken 
seriously, Finkelhor says. Although in robberies children tend to lose 
relatively inexpensive objects, such as sneakers or even bicycles, the event 
may still pack a psychological wallop. Finkelhor adds, "For adults to tell a 
child that the stolen sneakers are not that important and can be replaced may 
be equivalent to the police dismissing the theft of a VCR with the comment that 
insurance will take care of it," he remarks.

 Another widespread assumption holds that children, blessed with youth and 
resilience, quickly overcome a bully's punches or the theft of a valued 
possession. But a study conducted by Finkelhor and Sue Boney-McCoy of Eastern 
Connecticut State University in Willimantic indicates that children exposed 
outside the family to a "simple" physical assault--which involves neither a 
weapon nor physical injury--suffer increased trauma symptoms up to 2 years 
later, especially if they have a poor relationship with their parents.

 The national longitudinal telephone survey of 10- to 16-year-olds revealed 
that trauma symptoms and depression frequently emerge after sexual abuse, 
parental assault, or kidnapping experiences. Trauma reactions include emotional 
numbing, intrusive thoughts and memories of an event, and avoidance of any 
potential reminders of it.

 Genital assaults, in which an assailant hurts or tries to hurt a child's 
genitals by kicking or through some other means, may also cause more emotional 
distress than adults often assume. Nearly 10 percent of boys and about 2 
percent of girls in the national survey reported experiencing a genital assault 
in the previous year, Finkelhor and his New Hampshire colleague Janis Wolak 
reported in the Dec. 6, 1995 Journal of the American Medical Association.

 Boys cited the most depression and trauma symptoms after genital assaults. 
They usually declined to notify parents or adult authorities of these incidents.

 Corporal punishment, notably spanking, stands as perhaps the most glossed-over 
form of violence against children, he adds. Physical punishment by parents 
often reaches the moderate level of violence observed in fights or assaults 
among youths, according to Finkelhor. Such violence, despite parents' good 
intentions, may prove harmful to a child.

 Of course, this contention elicits a storm of controversy. During the course 
of a year, more than 90 percent of parents of toddlers resort to spanking or 
some other corporal punishment. This proportion remains high throughout 
childhood.

 However, evidence now exists that preschoolers and older children subjected to 
regular corporal punishment engage in substantially more aggressive and hostile 
behavior over time, says New Hampshire sociologist Murray A. Straus. Straus and 
his coworkers obtained corporal punishment data from a national sample of 3,780 
mothers who were interviewed by another research team in 1986 and 1988. At the 
first interview, children ranged in age from 3 to 10.

 A majority of mothers, particularly those with younger children, regularly 
used spanking or other physical punishment. They also reported significant 
increases in their children's antisocial behavior at the second interview, 
compared to other mothers.

 This effect remained after statistically controlling for each antisocial 
behavior at the start of the study, family income, the child's sex, and the 
amount of emotional support and mental stimulation available at home.

"If all spanking stopped tomorrow, we wouldn't see a massive change in kids' 
antisocial behavior," Straus contends. "But these findings suggest that there 
would be a change for the better."

 But the greatest problem may be severe, injury-causing assaults inflicted on 
children by their discipline-minded parents, contends Dodge. In a study of 585 
children, tracked from ages 5 to 14, he and his associates find that those 
regularly exposed to severe assaults--which usually occurred in the context of 
punishment for misdeeds--develop much higher rates of antisocial behavior than 
other children, including those spanked without lasting physical harm from time 
to time.

 What's more, approximately 12 percent of the children encountered severe 
physical abuse by their parents or caretakers, he says. Such incidents 
necessitated emergency room treatment or produced bruises or scars that lasted 
for more than 24 hours.

 Further research, especially if it is conducted from a developmental 
perspective, will help to clarify how children respond to various levels of 
family violence, Finkelhor holds.

"We're getting to the point where the science outweighs ideology on issues of 
child victimization," he remarks. "I feel very good about that."


