Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/18/96

 May 18, 1996

 Germ warfare: New threat from terrorists

 By STEVE STERNBERG

 Imagine a weapon so stealthy it's invisible to spy technology, a weapon that 
detonates without a sound and begins piling up casualties days before anyone 
notices something is amiss.

 No, this isn't the latest version of Star Wars--it's germ warfare. Though 
banned by federal law and international treaty, biological weapons pose a new 
threat, scientists say--this time from terrorists emboldened by the breakdown 
of international order and the rise of extremism.

"Events in the last few years have eradicated taboos against biological 
warfare. Once it was thought to be too horrific, now it's just a tool of the 
trade," says Kyle B. Olson of the Arms Control and Proliferation Analysis 
Center in Arlington, Va.

"The threat of biological warfare is growing because it is so easy, because it 
can kill so many people, and because an infectious disease can have a 
long-lasting impact," asserts Kathleen C. Bailey of the Lawrence Livermore 
(Calif.) National Laboratory.

 Building a nuclear capability would cost $1 billion or more, require 1,300 
engineers, and take years. Developing biological weapons could cost less than 
$100,000, require five biologists, and take just a few weeks, using equipment 
that is readily available almost anywhere in the world.

 Moreover, the secrets of cultivating germs are not secret at all--they are 
described in scientific literature, Bailey said at a meeting this week on the 
threat of infectious disease.

 Extremists have already obtained the tools of biological warfare. Last year, 
an Ohio militia enthusiast was arrested after he sent away for and received 
plague virus from the American Type Culture Collection in Rockville, Md. In 
Japan, Aum Shinrikyo--the cult that spewed poison gas into Tokyo subway 
stations--built a germ warfare lab and tried to get Ebola virus.

 A germ warfare lab is difficult to detect, Bailey said at the meeting, 
sponsored by the nonprofit National Consortium for Genomic Resources Management 
and Services in McLean, Va. Through 25 United Nations inspections, Iraq 
successfully hid five labs that made thousands of liters of the germs that 
cause anthrax, botulism, and gas gangrene. Finally, a defector-inspired raid on 
an Iraqi farm in 1995 unearthed incriminating documents.

 Western nations probably face the greatest risk of germ warfare because their 
populations are extremely mobile. "You don't know you've been struck until the 
blow is 2 or 3 days old," says Olson.


