Science News Online - Past Issues - 5/4/96

 May 4, 1996

 Formulas for fairness Applying the math of cake cutting to conflict resolution

 By IVARS PETERSON

 The marriage had lasted more than 30 years. The wife had given up a promising 
career as an actress and singer to raise the couple's four sons and manage the 
household. The husband's business success, in which the wife also played a 
significant part, had enabled the family to maintain a grand and gracious 
lifestyle centered in New York City and Paris.

 Then, the husband left his wife to live with another woman. In 1981, after a 
lengthy proceeding, the Supreme Court of New York State granted a divorce. But 
it took another 2 years of bitter and costly legal wrangling to determine how 
to divide the couple's joint assets.

 According to state guidelines, this case met the criteria for an equal 
division of marital property, which included a very expensive Paris apartment. 
To achieve an equitable split, the court granted the husband all the real 
estate except for the apartment and ordered him to compensate his former wife 
for her share of that property. She was obliged to sell the Paris apartment 
within 3 years of the settlement and divide the proceeds with her former 
husband.

 Stunned by the outcome, she appealed the decision. She prized the Paris 
apartment and would, at the age of 70, have to seek another home after having 
lived there for more than 25 years.

 She lost her case. However, one of the appeal panel judges did protest that 
the court-imposed settlement, so meticulously formulated and delicately 
balanced, was nonetheless unfair to the wife.

 Political scientist Steven J. Brams of New York University agrees strongly 
with the dissenting judge's view. He can also point to potentially fairer 
methods of handling contentious issues such as the division of marital property.

 Brams and mathematician Alan D. Taylor of Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., 
have worked out mathematical procedures that they claim can be used to settle 
disputes in ways that both parties see as fair and equitable.

"There are about 1.2 million divorce cases in the United States each year," 
Brams says. Seldom are both parties satisfied with the provisions of a 
settlement.

"We have specific procedures that offer very practical solutions in such 
situations," he asserts.

 Nor is divorce the only arena in which these conflict resolution schemes could 
play a role. Inheritance squabbles, international border disputes, and treaty 
and contract negotiations could benefit from strategies that promise fair 
outcomes.

 The key to these new methods is the recognition that people generally have 
different opinions about the values of the items to be shared or the importance 
of the issues to be settled. These differences make it possible to work out 
agreements in which all of the parties feel as if they've gotten the best deal. 
Researchers working on fairness term such allocations "envyfree."

 The new methods put together in a practical framework some notions of 
fairness, equity, and justice that have developed over the last 50 years in 
philosophy, theoretical economics, and mathematics.

"From the viewpoint of economics, what Brams and Taylor are doing is one case 
of a more general fair division problem," says economist Herve Moulin of Duke 
University in Durham, N.C.

 Economists interested in fair division emphasize general principles that 
underlie the fair allocation of resources, going beyond such precepts as "no 
envy." They also consider such specific issues as allocating the cost of 
constructing a shared road or a computer network among potential users, 
introducing incentives to modify undesirable human behavior, and distributing 
risk among communities faced with environmental hazards.

"The central issue is how we can get the participants in a scheme of fair 
division to behave in the right way and not manipulate the system to their own 
advantage," Moulin says.

 Brams and Taylor offer mathematical recipes for solving a particular subset of 
these problems. "For divorce settlements and things like that, their methods 
have a lot of potential," Moulin remarks.

 When mathematicians ponder fair division, they usually start with a cake. 
Suppose a thickly frosted, elaborately decorated birthday cake must be divided 
among several people. Different people may prefer different parts of the 
cake--the thickest pink icing for one, strawberry slices for another.

 Is there a step-by-step procedure for cutting the cake into pieces so that 
each participant can guarantee his or her own satisfaction?

 There's a familiar strategy for two persons: "I cut, you choose." The first 
person divides the cake into two pieces that appear equally desirable to him. 
The pieces may not seem equally desirable to the second person, so she picks 
the one she prefers. They both automatically end up with a piece that they 
think is at least as good as the piece they didn't get.

 The Convention of the Law of the Sea, which went into effect in 1994, 
incorporates such a scheme to protect the interests of developing countries 
when a highly industrialized nation wants to mine a portion of the seabed 
underlying international waters. The country seeking to mine would divide that 
area into two portions. An independent agency representing the developing 
countries would then choose one of the two tracts, reserving it for future use.

 It's somewhat trickier to find an effective divide-and-choose procedure that's 
fair for three or more people. In the 1940s, mathematicians proved that such 
allocations are possible but provided no step-by-step method for doing so. By 
1960, several such recipes had been developed for the special case of three 
people, but they didn't work for a larger number.

 In 1992, Brams and Taylor invented a cutting and trimming recipe that achieved 
this sort of cake division for any number of people (see Envyfree Cake 
Division). Brams and Taylor proved that this envyfree strategy can be carried 
out in a finite number of steps, at the end of which the cake is completely 
apportioned, although somewhat mashed. The same routine can be applied in any 
situation in which the goods are, in principle, divisible into infinitely small 
amounts.

 It isn't always possible to distribute goods by subdividing individual items. 
Divorce settlements often involve property that can't be split up easily, and 
some treaty or contract issues have no middle ground.

 In recent years, Brams and Taylor have developed procedures for these 
situations. The starting point is a list of all the disputed items. Working in 
secret, each combatant ranks these items in order of importance. A mediator can 
then use the lists to figure out who gets what according to the stated 
preferences.

 To make this allocation, the mediator can follow a procedure that Brams and 
Taylor call "adjusted winner" (see Divorce Points).

 Brams and Taylor have demonstrated mathematically that any allocation arising 
out of such a scheme is not only equitable but also envyfree. Neither player 
would be happier with what the other received. Moreover, no other allocation 
can make one party better off without making the other party worse off.

 The adjusted winner strategy is vulnerable to manipulation, however. One party 
might try to anticipate the other party's rankings and write down scores that 
deliberately skew the result. In practice, such a course rarely is worthwhile 
for the schemer unless there's a spy involved who can relay complete and 
accurate information about the other party's intentions.

"Unless you have the exact information, it's a dangerous game to play," Brams 
insists. "On the other hand, I don't want to minimize the spite that people 
have in many of these situations."

 Nonetheless, the adjusted winner procedure does a better job in terms of 
achieving fairness than anything else now available, Brams contends.

 Point allocation schemes can also be applied to political disputes and 
contract negotiations, in which the two sides define the crucial issues, then 
individually rank their importance.

 Brams and NYU colleague Jeffrey M. Togman have recently applied the adjusted 
winner procedure retrospectively to the 1978 Camp David agreement between Egypt 
and Israel. In a paper accepted for publication in Conflict Management and 
Peace Science, the researchers used political reports from the 1970s to 
estimate how Egyptian and Israeli diplomats might have ranked six key issues 
dividing the two sides. The researchers conclude that their procedure yielded 
an outcome similar to the agreement actually negotiated.

"This agreement probably could have been achieved more expeditiously, and in a 
less crisis-driven atmosphere," they argue.

 Brams and NYU's David Denoon have tried this scheme on an unresolved dispute 
between China and several countries of Southeast Asia over claims to the 
Spratly Islands, a chain of about 230 islets and reefs in the South China Sea.

 They experimented with different rankings of selected issues, such as what 
country owns each island, then proposed a methodology--working with two parties 
at a time--for reaching a fair settlement. The U.S. State Department is now 
considering use of that scheme in mediating the dispute.

 The negotiation literature already contains a great deal of material on 
identifying crucial issues, articulating them, and splitting them up properly. 
"Once you've done the hard work of defining the issues, then something like the 
adjusted winner procedure can kick in to complete the process," Taylor says.

 Brams, Taylor, and others continue to explore a variety of mathematical 
questions that have arisen concerning fair division. For example, they are 
still looking for a reasonable point allocation system for three or more 
players.

 In cake-cutting schemes, Taylor is intrigued by the fact that strategies 
involving three people are quite straightforward. But stepping up to four 
represents a tremendous increase in complexity, with higher numbers only 
slightly more complicated.

"Mathematically, it indicates there's something there that we don't fully 
understand in going from three to four," Taylor suggests.

 Brams and Taylor recognize that their methods don't offer complete, perfect 
solutions to human problems.

"The search for better procedures, which make the achievement of fairness not 
just an outcome but a process as well, will go on," Brams and Taylor write in 
Fair Division: From Cake-Cutting to Dispute Resolution (Cambridge University 
Press, 1996). "What cannot wait is applying our knowledge, primitive as it is, 
to problems of fair division that cry out for better and more durable solutions 
in realistic settings."

 This approach represents a modest step toward satisfying a plea made by 
economist Herbert A. Simon of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. "If I 
were to select a research problem without regard to scientific feasibility," 
Simon wrote in his 1991 autobiography, "it would be that of finding out how to 
persuade human beings to design and play games that all can win."

 Envyfree Cake Division

 Suppose Alice, Bob, and Carol want to divide up a cake. Alice starts by 
cutting it into three pieces that look equal to her. If Bob views one piece as 
being largest, he trims it to look equal to the piece he sees as second 
largest. This leaves one trimmed piece and two untrimmed pieces. Carol chooses 
one of the three pieces. Bob picks next and must take the trimmed piece if it's 
available. Alice gets the last piece.

 By choosing first, Carol can't lose because she picks the piece she likes 
best. Bob can't lose because he can choose one of the two pieces he made sure 
were tied for largest. Alice ends up with one of the two untrimmed pieces, both 
of which are better in her eyes than the one Bob trimmed.

 This procedure can then be repeated with the trimmings until the crumbs are so 
small that no one cares anymore.

 For four players, the cake cutting has to start with an extra piece: Alice 
must slice the cake into five pieces. The extra piece ensures that no player is 
forced into taking second best. The number of extra pieces escalates for more 
people, the researchers discovered. For example, nine pieces are needed for 
five players, 17 pieces for six, and 2n-2 + 1 for n players.

 It's interesting to note that after World War II, Great Britain, France, the 
United States, and the Soviet Union divided Germany into four zones of 
occupation, with Berlin, which fell within the Soviet zone, as a valuable 
"trimming" that was itself divided into four zones.

 Divorce points

 In the adjusted winner method of fair division, the husband and wife secretly 
prepare lists showing how much they value each of the disputed items, ranking 
them by allocating a total of 100 points among the items.

 For example, husband and wife might have come up with these allocations: 
Marital property                Husband                     Wife

Paris apartment                   35                         55
Paris studio                       6                          1
New York City coop                 8                          1
Farm                               8                          1
Cash and receivables               5                          6
Securities                        18                         17
Profit-sharing plan               15                         15
Life insurance policy              5                          4
                                 ----                       ----
Total                            100                        100

 In this example, based on an actual divorce case, the husband and wife 
initially win the items that one person rated higher than the other. This gives 
the husband 45 points to the wife's 61 points. The profit-sharing plan, valued 
equally by both (15/15), goes to the husband, but that still puts him short of 
the wife's total. The next closest item is the cash and receivables, which can 
be divided up so that each party ends up with an equal number of points (in 
this case, 60.5 points-boldface indicates which party received each asset).

 In this way, Brams argues, both husband and wife achieve a more satisfactory 
result than that actually decreed by the courts.


