Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/22/96

 June 22, 1996

 Multiple doors for HIV to enter cells

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 Just last month, scientists triumphantly announced that they had identified 
fusin, a protein on the surface of immune cells that some strains of the AIDS 
virus use to gain entry to the cells (SN: 5/11/96, p. 293). Now, in a discovery 
that offers an explanation for why some people exposed to the virus remain 
uninfected, several research groups report that the HIV most commonly found in 
people actually infects via CC-CKR-5, a different protein on the surface of 
immune cells.

 The HIV that requires CC-CKR-5 "is the kind of virus transmitted during sex. 
It's the kind of virus transmitted in 90 to 95 percent of cases and the kind of 
virus that predominates in people for many years," says John P. Moore of 
Rockefeller University in New York.

 Like fusin, CC-CKR-5 is a receptor, a protein that normally binds to 
extracellular molecules and transmits signals into the cell.

 Though investigators don't know what molecules fasten onto fusin, they do know 
that CC-CKR-5 binds chemokines, proteins secreted by immune cells to attract 
other immune cells.

 As it turns out, CC-CKR-5 is the receptor for RANTES, MIP1-alpha, and 
MIP1-beta, chemokines already attracting the attention of AIDS investigators.

 Last year, a group led by Robert C. Gallo and Paolo Lusso of the University of 
Maryland's Institute of Human Virology in Baltimore described test-tube studies 
indicating that secretion of these three chemokines by immune cells can 
suppress HIV (SN: 12/9/95, p. 388).

 More recently, investigators headed by Rockefeller's William A. Paxton 
reported in the April Nature Medicine that some homosexual men who are 
HIV-negative despite frequent sexual exposure to the virus generate greater 
than normal amounts of the three chemokines. Similar results are emerging from 
a study of hemophiliacs who remain uninfected despite having received 
HIV-contaminated blood, says Gallo.

 Taken together, these results suggest that the binding of chemokines to 
CC-CKR-5 can sometimes prevent HIV from infecting a person, investigators 
contend. To do this, the bound proteins may physically block the virus' access 
to CC-CKR-5 or they may signal a cell to remove such receptors from its surface.

 At least three different research groups have recently linked HIV's ability to 
infect immune cells to CC-CKR-5. Rockefeller's Tatjana Dragic and her 
colleagues, including Moore and Paxton, describe their results in the June 20 
Nature. That issue contains a similar report by HongKui Deng of New York 
University Medical Center in New York and his coworkers.

 The third report on CC-CKR-5, scheduled to appear in the June 28 Science, 
results from a collaboration headed by Philip M. Murphy and Edward A. Berger, 
both of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, 
Md. Berger's group reported the discovery of fusin last month.

 One line of evidence presented by all three research groups is that the 
addition of CC-CKR-5's gene to HIV-resistant cells that do not normally 
manufacture the receptor can make the cells susceptible to the virus. Small 
differences in the proteins that make up the outer surface of HIV determine 
whether a particular strain depends upon fusin or CC-CKR-5, say investigators. 
The lab-grown HIV strains used to identify fusin differ from those usually 
transmitted between people, but they resemble the viruses that emerge in some 
people after years of infection, says Moore.

 Berger speculates that HIV's evolution into fusin-dependent strains may mark 
an important transition in the progression of an infection, perhaps signifying 
that an HIV-positive person will soon start showing signs of AIDS.

 The body's production of RANTES, MIP1-alpha, and MIP1-beta may actually spur 
HIV to use proteins other than CC-CKR-5, notes Robert W. Doms of the University 
of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia.

 Doms' group has found at least one HIV strain that can infect cells using 
either fusin or CC-CKR-5. The group also has evidence that some strains can use 
other, still-unidentified proteins. "It's going to become quite complicated," 
predicts Doms.

 Both fusin and CC-CKR-5 present tantalizing targets for drugs that would deny 
HIV access to cells, researchers agree. Yet disrupting the normal role of these 
receptors-their binding of chemokines-may prove as dangerous as the AIDS virus 
itself, the investigators caution.

"Since these are normal cellular proteins, you have to worry about what side 
effects you will get by interfering with them," observes Berger.


