Science News Online (6/15/96): Hypertension's lead connection

 June 15, 1996

 Hypertension's lead connection Does low-level exposure to lead cause high 
blood pressure? By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

"Paying for the sins of the past." That's how researcher Howard Hu describes a 
proposed disease process in which lead stored for decades in the skeleton puts 
people at risk of high blood pressure.

 Previous research has linked this silvery white, poisonous metal to a host of 
ill effects in children, including learning disabilities, behavior problems, 
and brain damage. Now, Hu's study indicates that past exposures may be causing 
today's high blood pressure. If he's right, the public health impact would be 
significant.

"Tens of millions of Americans have been exposed over the years to lead," says 
Philip J. Landrigan of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York. "Adults today 
grew up at a time when we were still putting several hundred thousand tons of 
lead into gasoline each year."

 Indeed, the men who developed high blood pressure during the recent study had 
in their bones lead concentrations, or lead burdens, that came from decades of 
everyday exposures. Such exposures resulted principally from breathing in fumes 
from leaded gasoline, drinking tap water from lead pipes or pipes soldered with 
lead, and inhaling or ingesting lead-laced paint dust or chips.

 Almost 50 million people in the United States suffer from hypertension. About 
95 percent of them have what's known as essential hypertension, or 
artery-damaging high pressures of unknown origin. People with essential 
hypertension must take powerful antihypertensive drugs for the rest of their 
lives. If lead is responsible for this dangerous rise in blood pressure, 
researchers may be able to devise a therapy to fix the underlying problem, Hu 
speculates.

 The lead-hypertension study, published in the April 17 Journal of the American 
Medical Association (JAMA), has received kudos, with the usual reservations, 
from other scientists. "This is very credible work...an elegant study," 
Landrigan says. "Like any study with major implications, it's got to be 
confirmed," he adds.

 Epidemiologist Peter A. Briss at the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention in Atlanta calls the new study's findings important. "This gives us 
another piece in the puzzle linking lead exposure to high blood pressure in 
adults," Briss says.

 Five years ago, Hu, an epidemiologist at the Harvard School of Public Health 
in Boston, and his colleagues set out to resolve a puzzling discrepancy. They 
knew that some earlier studies had demonstrated a positive association between 
hypertension and the concentration of lead circulating in the bloodstream. 
Other studies had discovered no link between the two.

 Hu's team wondered if researchers had been looking in the wrong place for a 
connection. Concentrations of lead in the blood represent exposure to the metal 
within the last few months. Yet hypertension takes decades to develop. Hu 
decided to take a different tack, using a new technique that measures lead 
stored in the bones.

 Following a person's exposure to lead, the kidneys excrete most of the metal. 
However, 7 to 10 percent of the remaining lead circulating in the bloodstream 
is later stored in the bones. Because the metal can stay there for a lifetime, 
researchers use it as a measure of cumulative lead exposure. For that reason, 
Hu and his colleagues thought that readings of lead in bone might prove a 
better predictor of hypertension than lead in the bloodstream.

 The Harvard team relied on an instrument that looks like a dental X-ray 
machine and uses a technology called K X-ray fluorescence (KXRF) to measure the 
signals from lead and calcium in the bone. "The ratio of those two signals is a 
very accurate measure of concentration of lead in bone mineral," Hu says.

 The researchers recruited men who were already participating in the Normative 
Aging Study, established by the Department of Veterans Affairs in 1961 to 
observe almost 2,300 men for 30 years. The men, mostly white veterans from the 
Boston metropolitan area, underwent a thorough examination before being 
enrolled in the study. Those who suffered from hypertension or other chronic 
health problems were excluded.

 Hu's team focused on 590 men who were seen at a research clinic at the Brigham 
and Women's Hospital in Boston between August 1991 and December 1994. During 
that time, the researchers noted participants who had started taking 
antihypertensive medication or developed high blood pressure. They defined 
hypertension as systolic (heart-contracted) blood pressure higher than 160 
millimeters of mercury or diastolic (heart-resting) pressure of 96 or higher.

 High blood pressure forces the heart to work harder. Over time, high blood 
pressure can lead to heart attacks and strokes.

 Using KXRF, the researchers measured the lead stored in two bones, the patella 
(kneecap) and the tibia (shin bone).

 They found that lead in the tibia of the participants ranged from less than 1 
to 96 micrograms per gram of bone mineral; lead in the patella ranged from 1 to 
142 micrograms per gram. Both measures rose with age in a linear fashion.

 They also represent fairly low exposures to lead and are typical for 
middle-aged white men in the United States, Hu says.

 When the researchers did a statistical analysis, they found that men with 
hypertension typically had higher lead values in these bones than 
nonhypertensive men. After controlling for other factors that cause 
hypertension, the researchers found that lead stored in the tibia, but not in 
the patella, appeared to predict high blood pressure. They speculate that lead 
in the tibia is socked away for a lifetime, whereas lead in the patella often 
leaches out into the bloodstream. The long-term accumulation of lead may put 
people at risk of hypertension, they suggest.

 Indeed, the analysis demonstrated that men with 37 micrograms of lead per gram 
of bone mineral in the tibia (the 90th percentile of this group) ran a 50 
percent greater risk of hypertension than men with 8 micrograms of lead (the 
10th percentile).

 If lead and high blood pressure are linked, as Hu's study suggests, does it 
follow that when lead sequestered in the bone leaches out, it increases blood 
pressure directly? Hu believes that lead in bone may be a marker for 
long-lasting, but low, concentrations of lead in the blood.

 A second study hints at how lead might cause high blood pressure.

 Led by Rokho Kim, also at the Harvard School of Public Health, it generated 
data suggesting that even low exposures to lead may harm the kidneys. That 
subtle injury, in turn, leads to a rise in blood pressure, Kim and his 
colleagues speculate in the same issue of JAMA.

 Originally, however, Kim's group knew only that at very high doses, such as 
those incurred by workers in an occupational setting, lead damages the kidneys. 
No one was certain whether lead in low doses would also be a problem.

 So Kim and his colleagues, including Hu, again turned to the Normative Aging 
Study for participants. They settled on 459 men who had not taken part in the 
hypertension study and who had no evidence of kidney damage at the study's 
start in 1961.

 The researchers had access to 15-year-old frozen blood samples for each man. 
They also had data on a test that measures concentrations of creatinine in the 
blood. People with kidney damage have higher than normal amounts of this 
compound in their bloodstream. With such information, the researchers believed 
they could reconstruct a picture of lead exposure and kidney function for each 
participant during a 15-year period.

 Kim and his group controlled for age, smoking, alcohol consumption, education, 
and body mass index, all factors that relate to hypertension and could confuse 
the analysis. They found that lead concentration in the blood was positively 
and significantly associated with the concentration of creatinine in the 
bloodstream. Indeed, their analysis demonstrated that a 10-fold rise in lead 
concentration had the same impact on kidney function as 20 years of aging.

 Their research revealed that increased lead in the bloodstream precedes a 
decline in kidney function. This observation is very important because the link 
between lead and kidney dysfunction would be meaningless if the kidneys started 
to malfunction first. In that case, one would expect more lead to slip past the 
kidneys and into the bloodstream, Kim says.

 Usually, the malfunction observed in the study was slight. "It is a very small 
impact on renal function" that would probably go unnoticed by most individuals, 
Kim says.

"We're not talking about an effect that will thrust you into the health care 
system," Hu says. "But if you had borderline function to begin with, it could 
push you over the edge into clinical kidney failure." He points out that renal 
disease is silent, rarely showing any symptoms until the kidneys stop working 
altogether.

 Kim and his colleagues believe that lead damages the kidneys directly. 
Previous research suggested that lead may injure the renal tubule cells.

 The kidneys help regulate blood pressure, Hu points out. If low concentrations 
of lead do harm them, even minimally, one could expect an impact on blood 
pressure. Diseases known to cause major damage to the kidneys, such as 
polycystic kidney disease, result in a deadly rise in blood pressure, Hu adds.

 Hu says his data suggest that 16 percent of men age 50 and over who suffer 
from hypertension can attribute their illness, at least in part, to lead.

 However, the lead, kidney, and hypertension connection could also affect 
middle-aged women and others not included in this initial study.

 Indeed, Hu worries that lead's impact might prove more destructive for women. 
They are more susceptible to the bone-wasting disease osteoporosis, he notes.

"If the release of lead from bone plays an active role in the blood pressure 
process, then women might experience a heightened effect of lead on blood 
pressure," Hu says.

 Hu notes that black people in the United States run a higher risk of 
hypertension than their white counterparts. They are also disproportionately 
exposed to lead in a deteriorating urban environment. "If you put the two facts 
together, it really makes you wonder whether lead might be responsible for the 
higher rate of hypertension [in the black population]," Hu says.

 The average age of recruits in the lead study was 66, but the researchers 
suspect the lead and hypertension connection probably affects younger people as 
well.

"The fact of the matter is that for many, many decades the environment in this 
country was significantly lead contaminated," says Ellen Silbergeld, an 
environmental toxicologist at the University of Maryland at Baltimore. From the 
1940s through the 1970s, cars spewed out exhaust that contained lead. During 
that time, houses were built with lead water pipes, a practice that 
contaminated public water supplies, she notes.

 Although the United States has taken steps to reduce lead in the environment, 
Kim and Hu believe more should be done. They would like to see a tightening of 
the federal regulations for exposures to lead in the workplace. Current 
regulations allow concentrations of 40 micrograms of lead per deciliter of 
blood. "Very few of these subjects in our study had blood lead levels over 40 
at any time," Hu says. Yet such low values may, as time goes on, cause renal 
damage and high blood pressure, he says.

 For researchers, the findings bring up some tantalizing leads. If lead is 
damaging the kidneys and thus causing high blood pressure, is the injury 
reversible? If scientists can figure out how to repair that damage, millions of 
people who now take drugs to control their high blood pressure might get a cure 
instead of maintenance treatment, Hu says.

 Would a drug that reduces the body's burden of lead bring down soaring blood 
pressures? Hu and his colleagues plan to test that hypothesis in a clinical 
trial of men with high lead burdens and hypertension that is difficult to 
control with medication.

 For the millions of people with high blood pressure, such questions are far 
from rhetorical.


