Science News Online (5/4/96): Yeast genetic blueprint publicly unveiled

 May 4, 1996

 Yeast genetic blueprint publicly unveiled

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 The entire genetic blueprint of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a yeast commonly 
used by bakers and brewers, was made public at press conferences in the United 
States and Belgium last week. The unveiling marks the first time scientists 
have sequenced all the genes of an organism with cells similar to humans cells.

 Investigators expect the achievement to provide significant insight into how 
human cells operate and why they go awry in some diseases. "When we understand 
how [yeast] works, it's remarkable how often that explains how we work," says 
Ronald W. Davis of Stanford University School of Medicine.

"All of yeast biology will be effectively divided between the pregenome era and 
the postgenome era, and today we cross that threshold," remarked Francis S. 
Collins, head of the National Center for Human Genome Research in Bethesda, 
Md., at the U.S. press conference announcing the achievement.

 Investigators say the experience gained in sequencing yeast's DNA will 
facilitate the sequencing of the much larger human genome, a task they predict 
will be finished in 7 to 9 years.

 To emphasize the relevance of yeast biology, Collins compares the human body 
to a skyscraper such as the World Trade Center. Someone with no experience in 
construction and without access to the blueprint could not hope to grasp how so 
complicated a structure was built, he says.

 If that person first learned how to build a one-bedroom house, many principles 
behind the World Trade Center's construction would be clearer, notes Collins. 
"Yeast is our one-bedroom house."

 The yeast sequencing effort began in 1989 as a loose collaboration among a few 
dozen European laboratories. The European-led project quickly expanded to 
include nearly 100 research groups worldwide, among them DNA sequencing centers 
at Stanford and at Washington University in St. Louis. This division of labor 
enabled investigators to finish the sequencing years ahead of schedule.

 Researchers found that the yeast genome contains more than 12 million 
nucleotide base pairs, the chemical subunits of DNA. Parceled into 16 
chromosomes containing some 6,000 genes, these bases encode the information 
that yeast cells use to create the myriad proteins they need.

 Before the yeast triumph, only the much smaller genomes of viruses and 
bacteria had been completely sequenced. The yeast genome is nearly seven times 
the size of the genome of Haemophilus influenzae, the first bacterium to be 
sequenced (SN: 6/10/95, p. 367), and more than double that of Escherichia coli, 
the popular laboratory bacterium whose sequence is nearing completion.

 Unlike bacteria, however, yeast cells possess many of the features of human 
cells. Both yeast and human cells store their genetic material in an internal 
envelope called a nucleus. Furthermore, yeast genes required for cell division 
and sexual reproduction resemble those active in comparable human cellular 
processes. Yeast "is much more similar to humans than bacteria [are]. That's 
what gets us so excited," says Davis.

 The completed yeast sequence is likely to help identify the roles of newly 
discovered human genes. Testing this idea, investigators recently searched a 
partial yeast genome database for DNA sequences similar to 52 human disease 
genes. One in four of the human genes matched a yeast gene, says Philip Hieter 
of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore.

 The disease neurofibromatosis offers an example of how yeast genetics has 
helped explain a human disease. In 1990, investigators pinpointed the human 
gene at fault in this nerve cell cancer. The gene resembles two yeast genes 
whose proteins inhibit the activity of ras, a molecule known to regulate cell 
division. The match immediately suggested that ras is overactive in 
neurofibromatosis patients, leading to uncontrolled cell division.

 Without this match to the yeast genes, "we'd still be pretty much in the dark 
about how the disease comes about," Collins notes. Physicians, he says, can now 
consider treating neurofibromatosis patients with ras inhibitors already 
developed for other cancers.

 Completion of the yeast sequence does not signal an end to ambitious yeast 
projects. Researchers already plan to determine the interactions among all the 
proteins encoded by the thousands of yeast genes.


