Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/1/96

 June 1, 1996

 Bright Comet Poses Puzzles

 Hyakutake's tails of mystery By RON COWEN

 It came, it shone, it undoubtedly conquered. During its sojourn near Earth 
last March, Comet Hyakutake wowed observers with a ghostly blue-white gas tail 
stretching a third of the way across dark northern skies. Even in urban areas 
swamped by light pollution, the newly discovered comet made a memorable 
apparition as a bright, fuzzy snowball.

 On May 1, Hyakutake achieved its closest approach to the sun, its dust tail in 
full bloom. The comet's orbit then took it south, and astronomers are now 
catching a few fleeting glimpses of this icy, fragile wayfarer as it leaves the 
inner solar system. Although Hyakutake won't grace terrestrial skies for at 
least 10,000 years, it has left behind several mysteries.

 Among the puzzles are chemical fingerprints hinting that Hyakutake assembled 
from a chillier mix of ice and dust than several other comets. The first X-ray 
emissions ever associated with a comet posed another riddle, one researchers 
think they have now solved.

 Only spacecraft can detect X rays from comets, because this radiation can't 
penetrate Earth's atmosphere. Thirteen years ago, the last time a comet came as 
close to Earth as Hyakutake did, few craft with the capability of recording X 
rays were in orbit. Soon after the discovery of Hyakutake, astronomers realized 
that its brightness and proximity to Earth--it came within one-tenth of Earth's 
distance from the sun--would present a rare target of opportunity for ROSAT, a 
German-U.S.-British X-ray satellite.

 Still, ROSAT scientists didn't expect to see much of a signal. No previous 
observations or theory suggested that comets emit or are associated with a 
substantial amount of high-energy radiation.

"It was a thrilling moment when the X rays from the comet appeared on our 
screen at the ROSAT ground station," recalls Konrad Dennerl of the Max Planck 
Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany.

 The X-ray emission was 100 times brighter than predicted, says Carey M. Lisse 
of the University of Maryland at College Park and NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center in Greenbelt, Md., who led the X-ray investigation.

 ROSAT images taken over 30 hours revealed that the puzzling, crescent-shaped 
area of emission was variable, its intensity changing dramatically over just a 
few hours. The location of the radiation, says Lisse, provides a clue to its 
origin. The emission came from a region on the sunward side of the comet, some 
20,000 kilometers outside the icy nucleus and well into the outer coma, the 
low-density shroud of gas and dust surrounding Hyakutake's core.

 Lisse and his ROSAT colleagues, including Robert Petre of Goddard, believe 
that the comet alone doesn't generate the X rays. If it did, at least some of 
the emission should have come from the innermost dense regions of the coma. 
Instead, researchers believe, the sun must have somehow played a role.

 That would seem to leave open two possibilities, notes Petre. X rays that 
originate from the sun and scatter off the comet might produce the high-energy 
glow, in the same way that solar radiation striking the moon's surface 
generates an X-ray pattern (SN: 9/15/90, p. 167). However, the moon is a solid 
body, whereas the comet's coma consists of an extremely low density collection 
of gas and dust particles. It's difficult to understand, says Petre, how light 
scattering off the coma could produce such a bright X-ray pattern.

 A more likely explanation, he and Lisse assert, relies on the interaction 
between the comet and the solar wind, the breeze of charged particles blowing 
out from the sun. When this high-speed wind and its associated magnetic field 
collide with gas at the leading edge of the coma, it creates a shock wave 
similar to the V-shaped wave that precedes a speedboat.

 Ionized gas molecules that peel off from the coma get trapped inside the 
wind's magnetic field, which has become tangled by the collision. These ions 
bounce back and forth in the tangled field, accelerating to energies high 
enough to emit X rays, Petre and Lisse suggest.

 Most recently, a review of data taken by ROSAT's extreme-ultraviolet camera 
has revealed that the X rays form a continuous spectrum over a broad range of 
energies. John P. Pye of Leicester University in England and his colleagues, 
including Lisse, reported this finding in a May 9 circular of the International 
Astronomical Union. The spectrum seems to match that predicted by the solar 
wind model and appears to rule out the scenario in which solar X rays scatter 
off the comet.

"The new data make the case for the solar wind model much stronger," says Lisse.

 A follow-up ROSAT study, now scheduled for late June, may help to confirm this 
scenario, though the researchers say they will need more detailed spectra.

 Observations planned for a Japanese satellite carrying several X-ray 
spectrometers may give the final word.

 Comets rank as invaluable fossils--pristine, frozen relics of a tumultuous 
past. Traditionally, two theories have addressed the nature of these fossils. 
In one model, their icy composition reflects conditions in the dense 
interstellar cloud that later collapsed to form the primitive solar system. In 
the other model, comets derive directly from the disk of gas and dust that 
surrounded the infant sun, 4.5 billion years ago.

 In the interstellar model, ices form on dust grains in the dense cloud that 
preceded the sun. This mix of ice and dust then gathers together into a comet 
without appreciable chemical modification.

 In the solar model, the ices that form in the interstellar cloud don't 
initially gather together but turn to vapor as they become part of the disk of 
gas and dust around the young sun. The vaporized ices later resolidify and 
assemble into comets. If these ices underwent chemical changes during their 
gaseous phase, then the comets formed from these materials would have a 
different composition from those made directly from interstellar ice.

 Most comets are extremely faint, and taking their chemical fingerprints, or 
spectra, has proven difficult. In this regard, astronomers have had a field day 
with Hyakutake. The body's close approach to Earth enabled researchers to 
identify a slew of compounds thought to exist in comets but never before 
observed. Those detections include ammonia, acetylene, and ethane.

 Michael J. Mumma of Goddard and his colleagues found ethane while observing 
Hyakutake with NASA's Infrared Telescope Facility atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea. The 
researchers report in the May 31 Science that they detected it at a high 
concentration, roughly half that of a more familiar cometary constituent, 
methane.

"The detection of ethane was a blinding surprise," says Mumma. "This [spectral] 
line came screaming off the screen."

 At first, Mumma proposed that Hyakutake had to have assembled near Jupiter's 
orbit, where a variety of hydrocarbons, including methane and ethane, are 
abundant. He now believes that the comet may have gathered its icy material 
directly from the interstellar cloud. Mumma speculates, however, that the comet 
assembled from ices that originated in a chillier region of the cloud than did 
the ices in several other comets, which contain a high abundance of methanol 
but little or no ethane.

"We have found some real evidence that icy material in comets has a [direct] 
interstellar origin," says Mumma.

 In one scenario proposed by Mumma's team, the hydrocarbon acetylene resides as 
a gas in the interstellar cloud but then condenses as ice on frigid dust grains 
that don't exceed 20 kelvins. Later, when the sun formed, the acetylene 
remained frozen but reacted with hydrogen to make ethane. Hydrogen atoms are 
most abundant near the sun, where solar radiation can split apart 
hydrogen-bearing molecules. Thus, before assemling, the comet's icy building 
blocks may have migrated to a region closer to the sun than Uranus. They could 
not have come too close, however. Inside Jupiter's orbit, acetylene would have 
vaporized.

 The frigid temperatures required for acetylene to freeze suggest that 
Hyakutake gathered its ices from the inner part of the cloud, Mumma speculates. 
Bolstering this model, he notes that other researchers have found acetylene in 
the comet. In addition, Hyakutake's nucleus appears to emit relatively little 
carbon monoxide, a finding that makes sense if carbon is tied up in heavier 
molecules, such as ethane and formaldehyde.

"Hyakutake does indeed seem to have unusual [compounds] present," says Lisse. 
"But until the astronomical community meets and presents all the evidence...it 
is too soon to start speculating on the possible formation sites."

 Nonetheless, the comet behaves strangely, note Lisse and A'Hearn. Astronomers 
had expected to see a sharp increase in the amount of water-ice converted into 
vapor as Hyakutake neared the sun. Instead, measurements showed that the water 
vapor remained nearly constant from mid-February through mid-March.

 Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and the International Ultraviolet 
Explorer showed that the amount of water vapor increased only slightly in late 
March and early April.

 That behavior, says A'Hearn, is suggestive of a comet on its first visit to 
the inner solar system. Yet analyses of the comet's orbit have firmly 
established that Hyakutake has toured the inner solar system many times before.

"This is a real puzzle," says A'Hearn.

 Another curiosity stems from the sheer amount of water vapor produced by the 
comet. One of the detectors aboard the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory 
(SOHO), designed to study the sun, has periodically cast its eye on the comet. 
The detector counts hydrogen atoms, an indirect measure of water vapor, by 
recording the intensity of a particular wavelength of ultraviolet light emitted 
by the atoms.

 Data collected by the instrument in late March indicate that the comet was 
then expelling 6 tons of water vapor a second, SOHO researcher Jean-Loup 
Bertaux of the Service d'Aeronomie du CNRS in Verrieres-le-Buisson, France, 
told Science News. Hubble measured a slightly higher rate a week later, says 
Michael R. Combi of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

 That rate is intriguing, says Bertaux, because radio waves bounced off the 
comet indicate that its nucleus is small, only about 2 km in diameter, or 
one-fifth the diameter of Halley. Solar heating must have made Hyakutake's 
entire surface "active"--turning water-ice into jets of steam-in order to 
account for all the water vapor, he argues. Bertaux notes that among the 
handful of comets that scientists have observed closely, usually only a small 
fraction of the surface is active.

 Hyakutake's high abundance of diatomic sulfur also fascinates researchers. 
Compared to other sulfur molecules, the diatomic form is short-lived. A'Hearn 
says no existing theory can account for its abundance, but he suggests its 
presence indicates that observers are directly seeing material from the comet's 
inner coma or perhaps even its heavily shrouded nucleus.

 Comet expert Brian G. Marsden of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in 
Cambridge, Mass., marvels at the cooperation among astronomers, who quickly 
joined forces to observe a comet that was only discovered in late January. "I'm 
very impressed with how many astronomers got together and made supporting 
observations... even though this comet was unexpected and lasted for a short 
time."

 The myriad observations of Hyakutake bode well for studies of Comet Hale-Bopp, 
a visitor expected to tour the inner solar system next spring (SN: 12/23&30/95, 
p. 428). Astronomers will have had more than a year to prepare for the arrival 
of this icy body, which they predict will be the comet of the century.

 Skywatchers, you ain't seen nothin' yet!


