Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/15/96

 June 15, 1996

 Uncertainties greet latest planet finds

 By RON COWEN

 Tucked away in the constellation Ursa Major, the dim star Lalande 21185 stands 
out from the crowd. At a mere 8.1 light-years from Earth, it's one of the stars 
closest to our solar system. It's also one of the fastest.

 Now, an astronomer argues that Lalande 21185 may have an even greater 
distinction: It may harbor two planets. Instead of moving at a constant 
velocity in a straight line across the sky, the star follows a curving path, as 
if two unseen companions were tugging on it.

 The finding remains uncertain, in part because one of the two proposed planets 
takes some 30 years to orbit and the researcher has accurately tracked its 
motion for only 8 years. If other studies confirm the report, Lalande 21185 
would rank as the nearest star to the sun known to have planets.

 Moreover, the orientation and locations of the two proposed planets--both 
appear to orbit Lalande 21185 in the same plane and to lie relatively far from 
their parent star--resemble the architecture of our own solar system. Indeed, 
"this is the place to look for an Earthlike planet," comments theorist Alan P. 
Boss of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.).

 George D. Gatewood, director of the University of Pittsburgh's Allegheny 
Observatory, announced the tentative results this week at a meeting of the 
American Astronomical Society in Madison, Wis. Gatewood divided the study into 
two parts. He reanalyzed the movement of Lalande 21185 recorded on photographic 
plates taken at the observatory between 1930 and 1984, and he tracked the 
star's motion from 1988 to the present using a photoelectric detector called 
MAP (Multichannel Astrometric Photometer). Both parts of the study show the 
star increasing its velocity and moving in the same direction.

 From the old photographs, Gatewood deduced the presence of a planet that 
orbits Lalande 21185 at 10 times Earth's distance from the sun. He says the 
planet's orbit is about 30 years, indicating that the body is about 1.5 times 
as massive as Jupiter.

 Combined with the photographs, the newer, more sensitive MAP observations hint 
that the star's motion requires two massive planets. One would have the 
location indicated by the photographic study and about the same period. The 
other, MAP data suggest, would be nearly as massive as Jupiter and circle 
Lalande 21185 every 6 years. This planet would lie at a distance equal to 2.5 
times Earth's distance from the sun.

"The short time span of the MAP data does little to establish the longer 
period," admits Gatewood. He adds that even the tug of two planets can't 
entirely account for the star's complex motion.

 The observational method that Gatewood used, known as astrometry, relies on 
the fact that a planet and its parent star orbit a common center of mass (SN: 
11/18/95, p. 332). Because a star is much more massive than any of its planets, 
it lies close to the center of mass and so has only a small orbit.

 When a star is orbited by a planet lying far from it, the center of mass lies 
farther out, enlarging the star's orbit and making it easier to observe. Thus, 
astrometry typically finds planets that take a long time to orbit their parent 
star.

 In contrast, astronomers have found most planets that lie outside our solar 
system by using the radial velocity method, which tracks the back-and-forth 
motion of a star along the line of sight to Earth. A planet nearer its star 
produces a faster wobble, so this technique usually discovers planets that take 
only a short time to orbit their parent star.

 R. Paul Butler of San Francisco State University and the University of 
California, Berkeley, a codiscoverer of several planets with the radial 
velocity technique, says that barring an unusual geometry, either method could 
detect Gatewood's planets. He and his collaborator have examined Lalande 21185 
for 8 years but have found no evidence of wobble, Butler says. Their finding is 
inconclusive, he adds, because detecting a planet with a 30-year orbit would 
require many more years of data.

 Other researchers suggest that Gatewood's interpretation of his findings may 
be too speculative. "I think the acceleration indicates something is 
there--whether it's one object or two and whether they are planets remains to 
be seen," says David C. Black, director of the Lunar and Planetary Science 
Institute in Houston.

 Ironically, Gatewood has disproved several reports of other extrasolar 
planets. "I spent 3 months deciding if I should say anything about this," he 
notes.

"He's a cautious fellow," adds Boss. "My bet is he's really got something 
there."


