Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/8/96

 June 8, 1996

 Boosting cryptography's role in security

 By IVARS PETERSON

 The U.S. State Department has regulations restricting the export of 
cryptographic software. Applying these rules, however, can lead to 
contradictory actions.

 In 1994, officials ruled that a cryptography textbook that contained complete 
computer programs for several strong cryptographic schemes was freely 
exportable. Yet, when the same programs were put on a computer diskette, the 
department argued that the diskette qualified as a "defense article" and 
required a special license for export.

 These rulings were obtained by Philip R. Karn Jr., a network engineer who 
works for Qualcomm in San Diego, to test the regulations governing the export 
of cryptographic technology. Karn's appeal of the decisions remains mired in 
the courts. Last week, a panel of the National Research Council released a 
report, "Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information Society," to highlight 
the importance of cryptography for the future of information technology and to 
point out shortcomings in current government policy on export controls.

 Representing a wide range of interests, the 16-member panel recognized a 
tremendous and widespread need for technology to encrypt electronic 
information, making it easier to protect financial data, telecommunications 
networks, and other assets from crime and terrorism. Such technology could also 
provide greater privacy for individuals and boost the competitiveness of U.S. 
companies in international markets, the panel argued.

"Current [government] policy discourages the use of cryptography," says panel 
chair Kenneth W. Dam of the University of Chicago Law School.

 The panel members strongly endorsed the idea that no law should restrict the 
manufacture, sale, or use of any form of encryption within the United States. 
It recommended progressively relaxing, though not eliminating, export controls 
on encryption technology.

 Products incorporating a highly regarded cryptographic scheme known as the 
Data Encryption Standard should be easier to export, the panel suggested. One 
effect of such a change would be to encourage U.S. companies to include this 
high level of cryptographic security in their products. Congress is already 
considering legislation to relax export controls.

 Even if the U.S. government heeds the suggestion, however, it may still be too 
little, too late, says Jim Bidzos of RSA Data Security in Redwood City, Calif.

 One Japanese company is already producing and selling throughout the world 
computer chips that offer considerably stronger cryptographic security than the 
Data Encryption Standard, he remarks. U.S. companies are currently shut out of 
this market.

 The panel also concluded that the government plan to introduce so-called 
escrowed encryption is "relatively untried and entails its own potential 
risks." In this scheme, a third party (in addition to the message recipient) 
holds the digital keys required to unlock encrypted information (SN: 8/28/93, 
p. 394; 2/12/94, p. 100). Such an approach is attractive to law enforcement and 
national security agencies because with a court order they could obtain the 
relevant key from the third party and decipher the otherwise incomprehensible 
data.

"The NRC report is a very valuable contribution to this debate," says Bruce 
McConnell of the Office of Management and Budget and cochair of the interagency 
working group on cryptography policy. The report recognizes that a balance must 
be struck between computer security and concerns about national security and 
law enforcement. "Where we differ is in exactly how you achieve that balance," 
he notes.

"In the past, government officials have tended to treat many aspects of 
cryptography policy as top secret," Dam says. Most of the panel members had 
access to this classified information, and they concluded that such knowledge 
isn't essential for an informed public debate on cryptographic issues.


