Science News Online - This Week - 7/13/96

 July 13, 1996

 EPA honors a greening of U.S. industry

 By Janet Raloff

 Picture a process that would enable farmers to raise livestock on treated 
grasses and field stubble as efficiently as they now raise them on corn, a 
costly grain. Or imagine converting a primary ingredient of Nutrasweet into the 
first biodegradable soil dispersant for laundry detergents.

 These novel technologies are among the five recipients of the first annual 
Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards. Selected from a field of more 
than 100 candidates, the winners received no money this week, just a pat on the 
back from Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Carol Browner for 
helping launch the nation's industrial ecology movement. This new approach to 
industrial design minimizes resource use and waste generation throughout a 
product's life cycle.

 The Monsanto Co. of St. Louis was recognized for retailoring its synthesis of 
Roundup, the firm's popular herbicide. The company had been using hydrogen 
cyanide, ammonia, formaldehyde, and hydrochloric acid to create a needed amino 
acid. Making it with a novel copper catalyst instead reduced the toxicity of 
the process and decreased wastes from 1 pound for every 7 pounds of the amino 
acid to virtually zero, notes Monsanto chemist Thaddeus Franczyk.

 Dow Chemical Co. of Midland, Mich., won for its 10-year development of a 
process to make sheets of polystyrene foam that employs carbon dioxide instead 
of hydrocarbons or ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Though hardly a 
novel idea, developing a means of reliably extruding polystyrene while blowing 
density-reducing carbon dioxide bubbles into it proved quite difficult, says 
Gary Welsh, a chemical engineer on the project.

 In making foam for egg cartons, retail meat and produce trays, and fast-food 
packaging, Dow's process has eliminated the equivalent of 3.5 million pounds of 
CFCs and related ozone-damaging chemicals since 1991.

 Identification of a safer barnacle-killing agent for use in paints applied to 
the hulls of large ships brought Rohm and Haas Corp. of Spring House, Pa., its 
green chemistry award. Once the new isothiozolone migrates out of paint, it 
degrades quickly-within about 1 day in water or 1 hour in sediment. This 
breakdown is far shorter than the 9 days in water and up to 9 months in 
sediment typical of the tributyl tin oxide it replaces. Also unlike the tin, 
the new compound shows no long-term reproductive toxicity to marine life.

 A small firm won another of the awards for creating a biodegradable substitute 
for the polyacrylates that make up about 5 percent of each box of laundry 
detergent. By imparting a negative electrostatic charge to loosened dirt, they 
prevent it from redepositing back onto other items in the wash. "About 4 
billion pounds of this polyacrylate is produced around the world annually, and 
none of it is biodegradable," notes Larry Koskan of Donlar Corp. in Bedford 
Park, Ill.

 By heating L-aspartic acid into long-chain molecules, then adding water and 
sodium hydroxide, Donlar now cooks up biodegradable polyaspartate. The 
polyaspartate also finds use on farms, where it enhances plant roots' uptake of 
fertilizer, and in industry, where it prevents the buildup of scaly calcium 
deposits inside water lines.

 Cooking strawlike plant wastes with lime (calcium oxide or hydroxide) appears 
to remove acetate, more than doubling the plant material's digestibility for 
ruminants. Adding oxygen eliminates the similarly indigestible lignin in 
woodier wastes.

 Mark T. Holtzapple and his group at Texas A&M University in College Station 
won their award for these findings and their application to as-yet-unpatented 
industrial processes that mimic a cow's fermenting rumen. With them, Holtzapple 
says, bioreactors should be able to economically create solvents, high-grade 
alcohol fuels, and feedstocks for plastics.

 EPA needs to encourage environmentally beneficial change in a nonregulatory 
way, says Bruce Piasecki of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y. 
That, he suspects, is "a hidden message behind the new green chemistry awards."


