Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/29/96

 June 29, 1996

 Growers bee-moan shortage of pollinators

 By JANET RALOFF

 Most people in the northern half of the United States will remember the winter 
of 1996 for record snows that seemed to take forever to melt. Apiculturists, 
however, will remember it as the winter their bees died.

"We've been hearing regularly of people who lost 80 or 90 percent of their 
[commercial] honeybees," reports Anita M. Collins of the Agriculture 
Department's bee research lab in Beltsville, Md. Honeybees, the most versatile 
and widely cultivated of natural pollinators, play a pivotal role in the 
fruiting or seed development of numerous plants, including at least 30 U.S. 
crops valued together at about $10 billion annually, according to Roger Morse 
of Cornell University.

 The shortage extends beyond the snow belt and managed bee colonies, observes 
Gary P. Nabhan, of the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum in Tucson. In Arizona, for 
instance, "we've seen a 70 percent loss in [wild] honeybees since 1991," he 
says. Nationally, he reports, only about 2.7 million wild and managed honeybee 
colonies exist--fewer than half as many as 50 years ago. "And half this loss," 
he notes, "occurred within just the last 5 years."

 The pandemic spread of two parasitic mites has fostered this decline in the 
honeybee population. "We know they are everywhere now in the United States," 
Collins says of the mites, and "perhaps one-quarter of the [bee] colonies have 
both."

 The tracheal mite, which entered the United States from Mexico in 1984, 
burrows holes through the inside wall of a bee's windpipe to get at the 
insect's equivalent of blood. The Varroa mite, which entered the country 3 
years later, attaches to the outside of the honeybee and sucks out this 
bloodlike fluid.

 The parasites weaken, but do not kill, the honeybees. However, Collins says, 
new data suggest that they increase the insects' vulnerability to disease and 
early death.

 In another 10 years, U.S. honeybees may become resistant to the mites, Morse 
predicts, just as their kin in Europe and South America have. For now, he says, 
"we're just squeaking through."

 Indeed, bee nurseries weren't able to supply beekeepers with all the stock 
they requested this year, Collins notes. "So if we get a big kill like this 
next year," she says, "Lord knows what will happen."

 The honeybee crisis "is part of a larger pattern of pollinator declines," 
Nabhan notes. A report he prepared last month lists more than 180 species of 
vertebrate pollinators--including geckos, hummingbirds, warblers, parrots, 
bats, weasels, and lemurs--that are threatened with extinction.

 In The Forgotten Pollinators (Island Press, Washington, D.C.), to be published 
next month, Nabhan and pollination ecologist Stephen L. Buchmann of the Carl 
Hayden Bee Research Center in Tucson link falling numbers of these vertebrates, 
as well as insect pollinators other than bees, to two major phenomena: 
inadvertent poisoning with pesticides and human activities that fragment an 
animal's habitat.

 At a press conference this week, the pair stated that funding is urgently 
needed to develop pollinators that can substitute in the near term for 
honeybees. They say that most of the pollination scientists whom they have 
surveyed agree.

 Buchmann and Nabhan also suggest that national programs extend the protection 
given the habitats of endangered plants to the habitats of the plants' 
pollinators and that farmland retired under the conservation reserve program be 
planted with forages attractive to important pollinators.


