Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/29/96

 June 29, 1996

 Fighting Stereotype Stigma

 Studies chart accuracy, usefulness of inferences about social groups By BRUCE 
BOWER

 Psychologist Yueh-Ting Lee received an electronic mail message several years 
ago that included some barbed observations about the quality of life in several 
countries. "Heaven is a place with an American house, Chinese food, British 
police, a German car, and French art," Lee's correspondent wrote. "Hell is a 
place with a Japanese house, Chinese police, British food, German art, and a 
French car."

 While these national stereotypes fall short of absolute truths, asserts Lee of 
Westfield (Mass.) State College, they are accurate enough to give the aphorism 
its humorous punch. Houses in the United States indeed boast more space, on 
average, than Japanese dwellings. A Chinese inn probably holds greater culinary 
potential than a British pub.

 In this respect, stereotypes, rather than representing unjustified prejudices, 
typically function as thought-efficient starting points for understanding other 
cultures and social groups, as well as the individuals who belong to them, Lee 
holds.

"Stereotypes are probabilistic beliefs we use to categorize people, objects, 
and events," Lee proposes. "We have to have stereotypes to deal with so much 
information in a world with which we are often uncertain and unfamiliar."

 Many psychologists find this opinion about as welcome as a cut in their 
research grants. They view stereotyping as a breeding ground for errant 
generalizations about others that easily congeal into racism, sexism, and other 
forms of bigotry.

 In the squalid realm of stereotypes, mental acumen goes begging, while 
misjudgment reigns, maintains Charles Stangor of the University of Maryland at 
College Park. People employ stereotypes mainly to simplify how they think about 
others and to enhance their views of themselves and the groups to which they 
belong, Stangor holds. In the hands of politically powerful folks, stereotypes 
abet efforts to stigmatize and exploit selected groups, he adds.

 Stangor's argument fails to give stereotypes their due as often helpful, if 
not absolutely precise, probes of the social world, Lee responds. He contends 
that a growing body of research suggests that in many real-life situations, 
stereotypes accurately capture cultural or group differences. Much of this 
evidence appears in Stereotype Accuracy: Toward Appreciating Group Differences 
(1995, American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.), a book edited by 
Lee and two other psychologists, Lee J. Jussim of Rutgers University in New 
Brunswick, N.J., and Clark McCauley of Bryn Mawr (Pa.) College.

 For more than 60 years, scientists have treated stereotypes as by definition 
erroneous, illogical, and inflexible. This view harks back to journalist Walter 
Lippman's 1922 book Public Opinion, in which he argued that stereotypes of 
social groups invariably prove incomplete and biased.

 In the 1950s, psychologist Gordon W. Allport characterized stereotypes as 
invalid beliefs about all members of a group. Allport treated the opinion "all 
Germans are efficient" as a stereotype, but not "Germans, on average, are more 
efficient than most people in other countries." Debate arose at that time over 
whether some stereotypes encase a "kernel of truth."

 Lippman's fear that stereotypes wreak social havoc gained particular favor 
after 1970, as psychologists flocked to expose errors and biases in social 
judgments.

 Over the past decade, however, psychologists have shown more interest in 
delineating the extent to which decision making proves accurate in specific 
contexts (SN: 10/29/94, p. 280).

 Lee's approach to stereotypes falls squarely within the focus on accuracy of 
judgment. His interest in how people comprehend ethnic and cultural differences 
intensified after he emigrated from China to the United States in 1986 to 
attend graduate school. At that point, he began to suspect that a keener 
scientific understanding of stereotypes might have valuable applications. For 
instance, Lee asserts, efforts at conflict resolution between ethnic groups or 
nations may work best if both sides receive help in confronting real cultural 
disparities that trigger mutual animosities.

"Group differences, not prejudice, are the root cause of tension and conflict 
between various cultural and racial groups," he contends. "The most effective 
way to improve intergroup relations is to admit and to discuss frankly the 
existing differences, at the same time explaining that there is nothing wrong 
with being different."

 Bridge-building efforts of this kind counteract the natural tendency to 
emphasize negative features in stereotypes, argues Reuben M. Baron of the 
University of Connecticut in Storrs. Humans evolved in groups that negotiated a 
dangerous world, he states. Our ancestors must have relied on stereotypes to 
marshal quick responses to potential threats, such as distinguishing predators 
from prey, friends from enemies, and fellow group members from outsiders, Baron 
asserts.

 The ability to categorize individuals into "types" may also have been crucial 
for communicating with others as groups grew in size and complexity, Baron 
proposes. In large communities, stereotypes capitalized on people's propensity 
to fill social roles that match their own personal qualities. Warriors in an 
ancient society, for instance, might reasonably have been stereotyped as 
aggressive and unemotional, while storytellers and musicians were accurately 
tagged as expressive and friendly.

 Despite their handiness, even accurate stereotypes can result in mistaken 
beliefs about others, according to Baron.

 Consider the misunderstandings over punctuality that crop up between Mexican 
and U.S. businesspeople. Lee says that north of the border, Mexicans get 
stereotyped as "the manana people" because of their tendency to show up for 
meetings considerably after prearranged times and to miss deadlines for 
completing assigned tasks. U.S. officials may see this trait as unforgivable 
deal breaking, whereas their Mexican counterparts--who do not dispute their own 
tardiness--deride Americans as "robots" who rigidly reach conclusions by 
specified dates before gathering all relevant data and fully grasping the 
issues.

 Businesspeople from each culture perceptively categorize the behavior of those 
in the other group but misunderstand the cultural roots of their different time 
perspectives, Lee says.

 Such subtleties of stereotyping have gone largely unexplored, remarks David C. 
Funder, a psychologist at the University of California, Riverside. Most 
research of the past 25 years has tried to catalog the ways in which 
expectations about social categories distort a person's judgment, usually by 
placing the individual in laboratory situations intended to elicit racial or 
sexual stereotypes.

 This approach neglects to ask whether people in a wide array of real-life 
situations incorporate accurate information into their stereotypes, Funder 
holds.

"We desperately need to know which of the judgments we make of each other, and 
of ourselves, are right, which are wrong, and when," Funder contends.

 Some researchers suspect that even if stereotypes draw on genuine group 
differences, they routinely get exaggerated as people selectively seek evidence 
that confirms their biases toward others or makes convenient scapegoats of 
them. Accumulating evidence suggests otherwise, according to McCauley.

 In one study, directed by McCauley, five groups of white adults--consisting of 
high school and college students, graduate students in social work, members of 
a church choir, and members of a labor union--estimated the percentage of black 
U.S. citizens and all U.S. citizens matching each of seven characteristics.

 These included having finished high school, living in a family receiving 
welfare, living in a family headed by a woman, and having been unemployed in 
the previous month.

 Most of the volunteers' estimates coincided closely with U.S. Census figures, 
McCauley states. The few areas in which participants disagreed with government 
tallies involved underestimates of actual differences between blacks and the 
entire population.

 Members of ethnic minority groups, on the other hand, may pay particular 
attention to differences between themselves and others in order to bolster a 
positive sense of their social identity, proposes psychologist Carey S. Ryan of 
the University of Pittsburgh.

 In a study of black and white students at the University of Colorado at 
Boulder, Ryan found that blacks reported a stronger tendency to note certain 
stereotypical attributes in themselves (such as "dance well," "strong emotional 
bonds to family," and "financial support from athletic scholarships") and other 
attributes in whites (such as "high SAT math scores," "at least one parent has 
a college degree," and "spends money frivolously"). However, black students 
were more adept than their white counterparts at gauging the prevalence, as 
reported by the students, of these features in both groups--but particularly in 
whites. White students judged their own traits more accurately than those of 
black students.

 These results support the theory that members of ethnic minority groups have a 
greater stake in understanding a more powerful majority population than 
majority members have in understanding minority groups, Ryan argues.

 Exaggerations of stereotypical characteristics may arise most commonly when 
one group perceives another as an enemy, McCauley suggests. For instance, many 
U.S. citizens held stereotypical caricatures of the Japanese during World War 
II and vice versa. These highly charged assumptions have since eased on both 
sides, although negative stereotypes can still arise during conflicts over 
issues of national importance, such as trade practices.

 Stereotypes exert an insidious effect in the schools, another influential line 
of research suggests. Children perform much better on achievement and IQ tests 
if their teachers have positive expectations about their intellectual ability, 
whereas intellectual decline occurs for kids held in low regard by instructors, 
these studies find. Robert Rosenthal of Harvard University, who first described 
this phenomenon in 1968, refers to it as the Pygmalion effect.

 However, evidence of Pygmalion's classroom shenanigans comes mainly from 
studies in which teachers were fed information about students whom they had not 
yet met, notes Jussim. Participating teachers typically have no opportunity to 
interact with students or observe their achievement over an extended period, he 
adds.

 In the real world of elementary education, however, teachers exhibit a good 
deal of sensitivity to which of their students do and don't have the right 
academic stuff, according to a project conducted by Jussim and Jacquelynne 
Eccles of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

 Their investigation consisted of nearly 100 mathematics teachers and 2,600 of 
their students in the Michigan public schools. At the end of the first month of 
sixth grade, teachers rated each of their students' performance, talent, and 
effort at math; students also rated themselves on these attributes. Final 
grades in fifth-grade math classes offered an objective measure of each 
student's performance; scores on standardized math achievement tests completed 
in late fifth or early sixth grade served as a measure of talent.

 Teachers' perceptions of their students closely matched the students' 
self-reported motivation and their actual performance, Jussim and Eccles 
contend. No evidence emerged for teacher bias against black students, girls, or 
students from poor families.

 When teachers evaluated students from one group more favorably than those from 
another group, their ratings usually reflected actual disparities in math 
ability and effort, the researchers assert. For instance, teachers perceived 
girls as performing slightly better than boys, and girls indeed had obtained 
somewhat better fifth-grade math marks than boys had.

 In one exception to this overall trend, teachers felt that girls tried harder 
than boys to do well at math, although the self-assessments showed no such 
disparity. This may have stemmed from the fact that girls tend to adopt a more 
cooperative and pleasant attitude in class, two traits that teachers prefer in 
their students, Jussim and Eccles propose.

 Stereotypes that teachers held about particular groups of students probably 
assumed less importance as they became familiar with individuals from those 
groups during the first month of the school year, the researchers theorize.

"Social problems associated with gender, social class, and race undoubtedly 
exist and are terribly important," Jussim remarks. "But the role of 
individuals' stereotypes in creating those problems is less clear."

 A sharper picture of how stereotypes can go awry will emerge only if 
researchers strive to understand the advantages they confer in the social 
world, argues Lee.

"A concern for stereotype accuracy would also have the beneficial effect of 
coaxing social psychologists out of their ivory tower laboratories and into the 
field, where real people perceive and interact with other individuals and 
groups," Lee holds.


