Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/29/96

 June 29, 1996

 Romanian cave contains novel ecosystem

 By ERIK SKINDRUD

 A cavern isolated from the rest of the world under a Romanian cornfield 
nourishes the first known ecosystem of its kind, three biologists report this 
week. The 48 animal species-including 33 new ones-found in Movile Cave are part 
of a food chain that draws sustenance solely from energy-rich molecules in 
rocks instead of from the power packed in the sun's rays. Almost all life 
systems on Earth depend on photosynthesis-- directly or indirectly--to fill 
their metabolic needs. Most animals that live only in caves rely to some extent 
on photosynthesis because they consume decayed plants swept down from the 
surface, says Brian K. Kinkle, a microbiologist at the University of Cincinnati.

 Scientists have discovered other ecosystems that derive their energy purely 
from chemical sources, such as bacteria living underground (SN: 10/21/95, p. 
263) or deep-sea communities that feed off mineral-rich hydrothermal vents.

 However, the Romanian cave is unique, Kinkle says, in that it contains the 
first known land animals not tied to photosynthesis. The biologists analyzed 
the animals' diet by taking specimens of bacteria, fungi, and small 
invertebrates and comparing the ratios of four nonradioactive carbon and 
nitrogen isotopes. The results showed that the animals live on fungi and 
bacteria floating on water that partially fills the cave, Kinkle and his 
colleagues report in the June 28 Science. These microorganisms consume hydrogen 
sulfide from the rocks.

 The scientists see Movile Cave as a biological time capsule.

 It was sealed off more than 5.5 million years ago, they say, and its creatures 
have evolved into specialized, self-sufficient forms. The only thing they need 
from above is oxygen, which leaks into the cave via minute cracks.

 Thomas C. Kane, a biologist at the University of Cincinnati and report 
co-author, said he was excited by "not just finding a new species--that happens 
every day--but finding 33 new species."

 The discoveries include grazers such as four species of isopods, or pillbugs, 
six springtails, a millipede, and a bristletail. Among the new species of 
carnivores are two pseudoscorpions, a 2-inch-long centipede, a worm-sucking 
leech, four spiders, and a water scorpion.

 That such a diverse community can feed itself in a cave's perpetual night is 
news to other scientists, too. Larry Lemke of NASA's Ames Research Center in 
Mountain View, Calif., says Movile qualifies as an excellent "Mars analog site."

 Lemke works on the design of new missions to search for life on the Red 
Planet. Scientists now hold that life may have existed there 3.5 billion years 
ago, when the planet was warmer and wetter (SN: 8/27/94, p. 137). If that life 
still survives, it would have to be underground, where liquid water could 
exist, as it does in Movile Cave.

"Movile Cave is interesting because it seems to be truly closed to outside 
sources of organic material," notes Lemke.


