Science News Online - Past Issues - 6/8/96

 June 8, 1996

 When Science and Beliefs Collide

 A large and growing share of the population rejects aspects of science By 
JANET RALOFF

 Raymond Eve first became interested in alternative ways of thinking about 
science when he read about a Chicago woman who ties knots in her electric cords 
to reduce her monthly utility bill.

 Since then, this social psychologist at the University of Texas at Arlington 
has collected a series of equally fanciful anecdotes. They include the woman 
who concluded that NASA faked pictures of the moon landings. Because her 
television couldn't receive signals transmitted by stations in New York, she 
reasoned that it certainly hadn't picked up live broadcasts from the moon.

 What most scientists fail to realize, observes sociologist Susan Carol Losh of 
Florida State University in Tallahassee, is how many people seriously 
misunderstand or consciously reject many of the basic precepts and findings of 
science. In the United States, she observes, their numbers are large and 
growing--currently approaching half the population. "Many of these people are 
likely to be your neighbors," influencing social mores and community policies.

 Eve says that although the scientific community has traditionally written most 
of these people off as "ignorant, stupid, or mentally deranged," his data argue 
that misconceptions about science often trace to deeply held belief systems 
through which an individual interprets the world.

 Losh sees evidence of this in her ongoing analyses of nearly 40 local 
religious congregations, roughly half of them spiritual home to Christian 
fundamentalists. For these fundamentalists, she says, the way to interpret the 
world "is to quote the appropriate chapter and verse in the Bible," rather than 
to form hypotheses and test them.

 Other types of doctrines also pose a challenge to science, according to a 
panel of researchers at the American Association for the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS) annual meeting earlier this year. Some radical feminists, blacks, and 
others see science as a means by which white men have asserted their dominance 
in Western society.

 Physicist and science historian Gerald Holton of Harvard University is 
particularly concerned about the school of thought known as postmodernism, 
among other names. In Einstein, History and Other Passions: The Rebellion 
Against Science at the End of the Twentieth Century (New York: Addison-Wesley), 
a book published last week, he notes that proponents of postmodernism have 
described science as a useful myth and argue that the distinction between 
science and fiction should be abolished.

 This attack on the legitimacy of science is not idle rhetoric, he contends. 
Its adherents "have infiltrated most universities, and in some cases taken them 
over," he told Science News. The result is that people who study electrons, 
gravity, and other invisible entities or forces are dismissed as building 
careers on "nothing more than socially constructed fictions," Holton explains.

 Rejection of scientific truths and logic is also eroding support for the 
teaching of critical thinking and objective analysis--the bedrock of basic 
research, maintains philosopher Paul Kurtz of the State University of New York 
at Buffalo. Unless the problem is addressed quickly, he says, the United States 
may find itself unable to compete in an ever more complicated and 
technology-driven global economy.

 Such concerns are premature, says political scientist Jon D. Miller, vice 
president of the Chicago Academy of Sciences.

 His new survey data, just unveiled in separate reports issued by the National 
Science Foundation (see p. 367) and the European Union, indicate that, overall, 
the U.S. public not only accepts the validity of science but happily supports 
its inquiries, even those that have no obvious, near-term benefits.

 One point on which all of the researchers agree is that scientists need to 
work at effectively winning over critics who challenge the validity of science.

 To probe how beliefs affect attitudes about science, Eve and his coworkers 
administered a questionnaire to two divergent populations of believers. One 
consisted of attendees at a creationism fair last summer in Glen Rose, Texas. 
The second was made up of Wiccans (white witches), pagans, and adherents of 
other goddess sects who were attending a magical-arts fair outside Austin, 
Texas.

 Eve found that belief in creationism "cuts across social class lines and 
religious denominations much more than most people think." Indeed, he detected 
only a small correlation with Christian fundamentalism. What most united the 
creationists was respect for tradition and authority.

 Wiccan-pagans reject Christianity and other mainstream "patriarchal" 
religions. In Eve's survey, they also tended to reject fundamentalism, while 
subscribing to postmodernism and an abiding respect for nature. Believing 
objective reality to be largely "an individual matter," they expressed somewhat 
more antiscientific attitudes than creationists--for example, holding that 
astrology accurately predicts personality and behavior.

 Moreover, their attitudes cannot be ascribed to ignorance. Many of the 
Wiccan-pagans that Eve polled were very well educated.

 On issues associated with traditional family values and morality, the 
creationist and Wiccan-pagan groups represented polar extremes. Attitudes 
toward social issues rooted in biomedical science also divided the two groups. 
Wiccan-pagans, for example, were far more receptive than creationists to 
genetic engineering and fetal transplants.

 Creationists and Wiccan-pagans came together, though, in their opposition to 
aspects of modern science. While it's hardly surprising that more than 80 
percent of the creationists believe Earth is not at least 4 billion years old, 
the survey indicated that more than 60 percent of the largely noncreationist 
Wiccan-pagans shared this view. Roughly one-quarter of both groups thought 
science causes spiritual decline, and some 40 percent of each said scientists 
possess dangerous powers.

 Science classes in schools have served as the most important means of 
imparting a basic understanding of science and technology and the reasoning 
skills that underpin them. Eve observes that the people he has polled were 
exposed to such teaching, yet in many cases chose to reject or ignore it. He 
cites one fundamentalist Christian on his campus, for instance, who correctly 
answered questions about the human fossil record on an archaeology exam, only 
to point out at the bottom of the test sheet: "Of course, I don't believe any 
of this. I believe in the Bible."

 Holton, in contrast, blames educators for much of today's antipathy to or 
misunderstandings about science. To begin with, he says, elementary and high 
school science teaching tends to intimidate students by making subjects 
abstract, imposing, and inaccessible. The reason, he says, is that often 
"teachers themselves are intimidated by the subject" and poorly trained to 
teach science.

 While the situation might be ameliorated somewhat among those who continue 
their education, he points out that "it's only in about 30 percent of U.S. 
colleges that you have to take even a single course in science or math." Even 
Harvard, he notes, will graduate nonscience majors with just one physical and 
one biological or social science class.

 Holton also worries about the insidious creep of postmodernism into science 
education. He notes, for instance, that a 1992 draft of the new National 
Science Standards (SN: 2/3/96, p. 72) announced that they would be "based on 
the postmodernist view"--one that "questions the objectivity of observation and 
the truth of scientific knowledge." Though the final draft excised these 
phrases, Holton says it still advocates that science students construct a 
personal meaning from observations rather than search for universal truths. 
Viewed through this interpretive filter, he maintains, "Madame Curie did not 
discover radium, she `constructed' it."

 Religious beliefs also have served as a potent barrier to the acceptance of 
more circumscribed areas of science, observes anthropologist Eugenie C. Scott, 
executive director of the National Center for Science Education in El Cerrito, 
Calif. This nonprofit clearinghouse is working to keep evolution in public 
schools and creationism out.

 To many fundamentalist Christians, she observes, accepting evolution places an 
individual on a slippery slope from God's word to sin. "So by fighting 
evolution, they're saving souls," she says. "We on the proevolution side have a 
far tougher row to hoe in terms of motivation."

 Miller, whose study compares scientific literacy in 15 industrialized nations, 
argues that creationism "is a peculiarity of the American landscape." His data 
indicate that U.S. creationists often accept some aspects of science that do 
not address biological evolution. In fact, he suspects that the adamancy of 
belief in creationism traces to the litmus test that many U.S. fundamentalist 
sects use for membership: literal acceptance of the biblical account in Genesis 
of God's week-long creation of the universe and everything in it some 6,000 to 
10,000 years ago.

"Those people who reject evolution tell us at the same time that there are 
thousands of planets in the universe on which life might have developed--which 
is not a Genesis point of view," says Miller. "They will also agree with the 
statement that the continents on which we live have been moving in their 
locations for millions of years." This popular version of plate tectonics also 
violates the biblical timetable. The good news, Miller says, is that 80 percent 
of U.S. adults, including many creationists, believe the benefits of science 
outweigh its harms.

 While Losh accepts Miller's data, she does not share his generally rosy view 
of what they imply for scientific literacy and appreciation.

 What fundamentalists really like, her results suggest, is not science but the 
fruits of science, such as vaccines against infectious diseases, cleaner water, 
and especially technology. Her studies indicate that they don't welcome the 
untethered inquiry that led to those fruits--and that scares her.

 Creationists prefer thinking that is geared toward accepting the word of 
church-approved authorities without question, Losh finds. This approach to 
learning may produce good technologists, she argues, "but it doesn't tend to 
generate good science."

 A flurry of recent popular feminist books has interpreted the development of 
Western science in terms of male chauvinism and aggression against women, notes 
chemist Noretta Koertge, a historian of science at Indiana University in 
Bloomington.

 At the AAAS meeting, she cited one radical feminist interpretation of why 
fluid dynamics matured as a research discipline much later than the mechanics 
of solids. Men were more comfortable working with rigid environments, which 
reflect their "sex organs that protrude and become rigid," Koertge recounted.

 In contrast, early scientists associated fluidity with women and their 
menstrual blood and vaginal secretions. "In the same way that women are erased 
within masculinist theories and language, existing only as not-men, so fluids 
had been erased from science, existing only as not-solids," she explained.

 Koertge worries that propounding such machismo interpretations of science may 
lead women to associate any problems they have in understanding physics, for 
instance, with the philosophy of a textbook writer or theorist. That could 
prove a major disservice if the real problem were, say, a weak grounding in 
math. Moreover, she argues, this sort of feminism can alienate women from 
science by characterizing its logic-based method of inquiry as "incompatible 
with women's ways of knowing."

 The research community needs to recognize that whole segments of society today 
may be unreceptive to all or parts of science, Eve says. Until scientists 
understand why, he says, "we won't make much progress gaining political support 
for science or see much of an improvement in science literacy."

 In other words, he argues, "we need to be anthropologists in our own land," 
exploring believers' cultures from their own points of view.

 Many might feel more inclined to accept the explanations offered by science if 
they felt that doing so wouldn't subsume their religion. The job of the 
scientific community, then, may be to find ways of showing how science and 
faith can coexist, says Scott.

 It's a topic Cornell University astronomer Carl Sagan tackles in his new book, 
The Demon-Haunted World (New York: Random House). In it, he argues that 
"science is not only compatible with spirituality, it is a profound source of 
spirituality."

 Science is not religion, however, and scientists need to make it clear that 
they have never meant science to be portrayed as such, Scott maintains.

 Indeed, Eve observes, "Science can't tell you what the meaning of life is, why 
we're here, or how to handle bereavement or guilt. Those things are for 
theology."


