Science News Online - This Week - 7/13/96

 July 13, 1996

 AIDS optimism high despite therapy cost

 By Steve Sternberg

 With 21 million people locked in its global grip-750,000 of them in the United 
States alone-HIV, the AIDS virus, shows no sign of letting go. But researchers 
at the 11th International Conference on AIDS in Vancouver say they can loosen 
that grasp--though temporarily and at great expense.

 Basing their claim on new drugs, the scientists seem surprised by their 
success. Peter Piot, head of the United Nations' AIDS program, called the 
pandemic "huge, unstable, and mainly invisible" in his opening address on June 
7 but then waxed enthusiastic: "Nobody can call AIDS an inevitably fatal and 
incurable disease anymore."

 Yet such optimism prompted Eric Sawyer, cofounder of the protest group ACT UP, 
to retort, "We are no closer to a cure for AIDS than we were 10 years ago." 
Both views contain elements of truth. Researchers can reduce the amount of HIV 
in the blood with drugs that short-circuit the virus' ability to replicate 
itself. But the drugs are complicated to use, produce serious side effects, and 
are so expensive that very few patients can afford them. The cost rules out not 
only many people in the United States, but also the vast majority of the 14 
million afflicted people in sub-Saharan Africa and the 5 million in Asia.

 Nevertheless, the results of numerous studies seem to justify the hope that 
relief for some is on the way. Two advances outpace the others: drugs that 
attack protease, an enzyme critical to HIV replication, and new tests that 
detect HIV activity in the blood and may thus enable doctors to measure disease 
progression, gauge the effects of therapy, and predict survival.

 So far, three protease inhibitors have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration: saquinovir (trade-named Invirase), indinovir (Crixivan), and 
ritonavir (Norvir). Two more, nelfinavir and VX-748, also show promise. All of 
them work best in combination with other drugs, including AZT (zidovudine), ddC 
(HIVID), and 3TC (Epivir), which cripple a different viral enzyme.

 Studies of the first human trials reported in Washington, D.C., in February 
(SN: 3/23/96, p. 184) showed that the new drugs, either singly or in 
combination with other drugs, could reduce HIV in the blood to undetectable 
amounts for 24 weeks after therapy began. Extensions of these trials reported 
this week show the effect may last even longer.

 Roy Steigbigel of the State University of New York in Stony Brook found that 
indinovir reduced HIV to undetectable amounts in 70 volunteers for almost a 
year. Miklos Salgos of Hoffman-La Roche in Nutley, N.J., reported that 
saquinovir and ddC together reduce the amount of HIV and restore the body's 
infection-fighting capability-as measured by a rise in the number of the white 
blood cells known as CD4 lymphocytes-more effectively than either drug alone. 
His study of almost 1,000 patients ran for nearly a year.

 Scientists believe the new drug combinations may confound HIV's ability to 
rapidly mutate resistant strains. "Prevention of resistance is achievable by 
potent virus suppression," asserts Scott M. Hammer of Harvard Medical School in 
Boston. To survive, the virus would have to develop eight separate mutations, a 
feat researchers consider highly unlikely.

 Hammer says HIV nevertheless remains a wily adversary. Although the new drugs 
may clear the virus from the blood, it may lurk elsewhere, perhaps behind the 
blood-brain barrier, a particularly impenetrable barricade. Nonetheless, Hammer 
continues, recent progress suggests that HIV can be eradicated from the body, a 
notion that "6 months ago would have been deemed . . . ludicrous."

 Eradication of the virus will only occur, however, if patients can afford 
therapy and can follow a complicated drug regimen of 20 to 30 pills a day. 
Margaret Fischl of the University of Miami notes that treating the 2,500 
patients at one hospital with three drugs and monitoring their HIV activity 
would cost $22 million a year.


