Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 7/20/96

 July 20, 1996

 Putting a New Spin on Earth's Core

 By Richard Monastersky

 By eavesdropping on earthquake vibrations passing through the globe's innards, 
seismologists have discovered that Earth's solid core is a solo dancer, 
spinning separately from the rest of the planet.

 Earth's metallic core consists of a solid iron sphere, about three-quarters of 
the size of the moon, sitting within an outer shell of roiling liquid iron. 
Hidden beneath 2,600 kilometers of rock, the core has remained the most cryptic 
realm of our planet. Some theorists have argued that electromagnetic forces 
inside Earth should cause the core to spin separately from the planet's outer 
layers. Others have hypothesized that the core should spin in synchrony with 
the mantle and the crust.

 Xiaodong Song and Paul G. Richards of the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in 
Palisades, N.Y., have found that the inner core rotates in the same direction 
as the rest of the planet but about 1 degree per year faster. They report their 
observation in the July 18 Nature.

 The surface of the core, at its equator, is moving about 20 km per year 
relative to the liquid outer core. "That's 100,000 times faster than the types 
of motion we normally associate with properties of the solid Earth," says 
Richards. In contrast, the continents creep across Earth's surface at only a 
few centimeters per year.

 Song and Richards embarked on their research after a computer simulation at 
Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory predicted that Earth's core should spin 1 
degree to 2 degrees faster per year than other parts of the planet.

 Gary A. Glatzmaier of Los Alamos says he was surprised that Song and Richards 
could actually observe the core's rotation. "We were really excited to hear 
that they had found this," says Glatzmaier.

 The Lamont-Doherty scientists could not have detected the core's movement 
without the help of recent discoveries about inner Earth. Ten years ago, 
seismologists found that earthquake vibrations passing through the solid core 
travel at different speeds, depending on their direction--a property called 
anisotropy. Waves go most slowly in the plane of the equator and most quickly 
when heading poleward.

 To explain the differences in speed, researchers proposed that the iron 
crystals in the inner core have a distinct orientation, like the grain in wood. 
Waves moving along this crystalline grain travel faster than those going 
against it.

 In the last 4 years, seismologists have uncovered evidence that the grain is 
skewed slightly from an exact north-south alignment. The axis of 
anisotropy--corresponding to the fastest direction for seismic waves--tilts 
about 10 degrees from Earth's axis of rotation.

 Song and Richards realized that this axis of anisotropy, which currently 
points toward Siberia, should shift over time if the core rotates separately. 
To test the idea, they pulled out old recordings made in central Alaska of 
earthquakes that occurred in the South Atlantic. Some of the seismic waves from 
the southern quakes passed through the inner core on their way north. Comparing 
the old records with newer earthquake recordings, the scientists determined 
that seismic waves now take about 0.3 second less to complete the journey than 
they did during the 1960s. This finding suggests that the core has rotated in a 
way that speeds seismic waves heading from the South Atlantic to Alaska.

 The Lamont-Doherty scientists and other teams of researchers are now examining 
different seismic records to validate the discovery and to measure the core's 
rotation with more precision.

"I think this is one of the most exciting things to happen in the last several 
years in deep-Earth studies," says Kenneth C. Creager of the University of 
Washington in Seattle.


