Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 8/10/96 August 10, 1996

 Meteorite Hints at Early Life on Mars

 By Ron Cowen

 For 8 years, a meteorite discovered in an Antarctic ice field languished in a 
storage cabinet at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston. Now, a 2-year 
analysis of that rock, believed to hail from Mars, offers tantalizing evidence 
that primitive life existed on the Red Planet some 3.6 billion years ago.

 Scientists have long speculated that the planet, cut by long, sinuous channels 
that might be dry riverbeds, may once have been a warmer, wetter place that 
supported some form of life.

 In an article scheduled for the Aug. 16 Science, researchers describe an array 
of intriguing findings from the meteorite ALH84001, the oldest of the 12 rocks 
thought to have fallen to Earth from Mars. The team discovered organic 
molecules that might be associated with life, several minerals characteristic 
of biological activity, and tiny tubular and egg-shaped structures that 
resemble the fossils of ancient, single-celled bacteria found on Earth. 
Moreover, all of these compounds and structures lie within a few hundred 
thousandths of a centimeter of each other.

 Examined separately, each finding might have a nonbiological explanation, but 
taken together, "all explanations except life seem far-fetched," asserts study 
coauthor Richard N. Zare of Stanford University.

"The evidence is exciting, even compelling, but not conclusive," says NASA 
administrator Daniel S. Goldin. "NASA is ready to assist the process of 
rigorous scientific investigation and lively scientific debate that will follow 
this discovery."

"They've done a very respectable paper," comments Allan H. Treiman of the Lunar 
and Planetary Institute in Houston. "They have a number of observations that 
could be indicative of [ancient] life." If the new findings were in Earth 
rocks, he adds, "people would say "you've got intriguing evidence, but you 
haven't proved it yet.'"

"It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let 
alone on Mars," notes Zare. "The existing standard of proof, which we think we 
have met, includes having an accurately dated sample that contains native 
microfossils, mineralogical features characteristic of life, and evidence of 
complex organic chemistry."

 In studying the fractured surface of the meteorite, the team used laser 
spectroscopy and electron microscopy to measure minute concentrations of 
organic compounds and to image structures less than one-hundredth the thickness 
of a human hair. Recent advances in these techniques enabled the team to detect 
indications of life not seen in previous studies of ALH84001 or other Martian 
meteorites, they say.

 The team found two distinctive compounds--iron sulfide and magnetite--that on 
Earth are commonly produced by anaerobic bacteria and other microscopic 
organisms. Moreover, the compounds were found in the same tiny region that 
contains carbonate globules and possible bacterial fossils. The Martian 
microfossils are similar in shape to, though slightly larger than, those 
produced by the tiniest known terrestrial bacteria. Fossils formed by 
nanobacteria have been discovered in calcite deposits from ancient groundwater 
in southern Italy.

 The first suggestion that ALH84001 might contain evidence of ancient Martian 
life came more than a year ago, when the same researchers reported that they 
had detected carbonates and organic molecules known as polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs) concentrated in some areas of the 1.9-kilogram meteorite 
(SN: 3/25/95, p. 180). On Earth, PAHs are produced by the decay or combustion 
of plants and other organisms.

 Some researchers have argued that the Antarctic ice field in which ALH84001 
landed some 13,000 years ago could have contaminated the meteorite with 
terrestrial PAHs or other organic materials. But the team's analysis shows that 
the concentration of PAHs increases from the meteorite's crust to its 
interior--exactly the opposite pattern one would expect if the organic 
molecules were foreign contaminants.

"We're very confident that we're not looking at PAH contamination," says Zare.

 The team has suggested that the carbonates formed on Mars some 3 billion years 
ago, when water rich in dissolved carbon dioxide percolated through the rock. 
Other researchers have raised doubts about whether water, a compound associated 
with life on Earth, necessarily played a role.

 In the July 4 Nature, Ralph P. Harvey of Case Western Reserve University in 
Cleveland and Harry Y. McSween Jr. of the University of Tennessee in Knoxville 
argue that carbonates might have formed in the absence of water. They propose 
that about 1 billion years ago, an asteroid smashed into the Martian surface, 
heating some of the planet's abundant reserves of carbon dioxide frost and ice 
to a temperature as high as 700 kelvins. The heat would have vaporized any 
liquid water and sent a pulse of hot carbon dioxide fluid into the planet's 
crust, where it would have reacted to form the carbonates recently discovered 
in the meteorite.

 Such debate is certain to continue. "We are putting this evidence out to the 
scientific community for other investigators to verify, enhance, 
attack--disprove if they can," says David S. McKay, a coauthor of the Science 
article, who is at the Johnson Space Center.

 Three Mars-bound spacecraft-- two U.S. and one Russian--are scheduled for 
launch this fall. Of these, NASA's Mars Pathfinder, which will land a rover on 
the planet to collect soil samples, holds the most promise of finding other 
clues of past or present life on Mars, Treiman says.

"There are certain defining moments of an age," says Zare. "The discovery, if 
it proves to be such, that we are not alone, would be such a defining moment."


