Science News Online - Past Issues - 7/6/96

 July 6, 1996

 Enzymes may turn paper, grass into fuel

 By John Travis

 Imagine generating enough fuel from grass clippings, old newspapers, corn 
syrup, and cheese whey to run a car, light up a house, or heat a city. That 
flight of fancy remains science fiction, but investigators may have taken a 
small step toward realizing it with their recent development of an enzymatic 
method of transforming such renewable resources into hydrogen gas.

 The prospect of using hydrogen as an environmentally friendly, or clean, fuel 
has long tantalized energy researchers. Unlike fossil fuels, whose combustion 
creates many pollutants, hydrogen generates little besides water when it burns. 
Moreover, in devices called fuel cells, hydrogen reacts efficiently with oxygen 
to produce electricity.

 Hydrogen power has not yet been embraced by the world, in part because of an 
ironic scarcity of the ubiquitous element: Hydrogen is almost always bound up 
in chemical compounds. Current methods of hydrogen production include 
liberating it from water with the use of electricity, a technique called 
electrolysis, or breaking methane and other fossil fuels into their essential 
components, which include hydrogen.

 Yet electrolysis is not cost-effective. Moreover, using nonrenewable fossil 
fuels to make hydrogen is not a favored long-term option, partly because that 
strategy generates waste gases such as carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide. 
Enzymes stolen from bacteria may now offer another hydrogen production option, 
contend Jonathan Woodward of Oak Ridge (Tenn.) National Laboratory and his 
colleagues. In the July Nature Biotechnology, they provide the first 
demonstration that a simple two-enzyme system can generate hydrogen gas from 
glucose.

"It's a long way from anything commercially viable, but I think it's a nice 
demonstration that such things are possible," comments Richard Cammack, who 
studies hydrogen production methods at King's College in London.

 The new process first combines glucose with a bacterial enzyme called glucose 
dehydrogenase. In the presence of a compound known as NADP, this enzyme 
transforms a glucose molecule into gluconic acid and attaches a freed hydrogen 
atom to NADP, forming NADPH. Another enzyme, a hydrogenase isolated from 
bacteria found in a deep-sea hydrothermal vent, then releases the hydrogen from 
NADPH, generating hydrogen gas and enabling NADP to repeat the cycle. Glucose 
would come from renewable resources such as cellulose, lactose, and starch, say 
the researchers. Wood pulp, grass clippings, and newspapers are excellent 
sources of cellulose that simply go to waste, Woodward points out. In 
Wisconsin, whey created in the process of making cheese offers a significant 
source of lactose, he adds.

 Woodward's group has calculated that the cellulose in the waste newspaper 
generated each year in the United States could theoretically provide enough 
hydrogen to meet the energy demands of 37 cities the size of Oak Ridge, which 
has a population of around 27,000.

"We need to optimize conditions for hydrogen production, something I don't 
think we've achieved yet. Right now, the majority of material generated is not 
hydrogen, it's gluconic acid," says Woodward. While that product may also be 
mined for additional hydrogen atoms, gluconic acid itself is a valuable 
chemical compound currently used by a number of industries.


