Science News Online - Past Issues - 7/6/96

 July 6, 1996

 The Moon's Tug Stretches Out the Day

 By Richard Monastersky

 If the hours seem to streak by and each day ends too quickly, stop a moment 
and consider the tempo of time during the Proterozoic era, 900 million years 
ago. Earth revolved 30 percent faster back then, and the day lasted only 18.2 
hours, according to a team of scientists studying ancient rock deposits that 
record lunar tides.

 Using theories of celestial mechanics, physicists long ago surmised that the 
day should be growing longer because tides raised principally by the moon put a 
brake on Earth's rotation. By robbing Earth of momentum, the moon edges farther 
away, thus increasing its velocity through space.

 Modern measurements have verified part of the theory by showing that the moon 
is receding from Earth at 3.8 centimeters per year. But proving that the Earth 
has slowed down requires records from the distant past.

 Charles P. Sonett of the University of Arizona in Tucson and his colleagues 
gleaned the history of Earth's spin from sedimentary stones known as tidal 
rhythmites. These rare rocks formed along prehistoric shorelines, where tides 
deposited alternating bands of dark- and light-colored silt and sand.

 The rhythmites display layers of varying thickness, reflecting the high spring 
tides and low neap tides that mark the lunar month. By analyzing how the tidal 
cycles vary in thickness with the seasons, the scientists could count the 
number of lunar months per year. This enabled them to calculate how much 
momentum the moon had stolen from Earth. From that, they could figure ancient 
Earth's rate of rotation.

 Sonett's group examined four sets of tidal rhythmites, from Indiana, Alabama, 
Australia, and Utah, with ages ranging from 305 million to 900 million years. 
When the oldest rocks formed, each year had 481 days, the scientists report in 
the July 5 Science.

 Although simple in theory, the study of these deposits is complicated; ancient 
storms and other factors have erased some of the tidal layers. To work around 
these irregularities, Sonett's group analyzed the tidal record 
mathematically-by ranking the frequency of variations in the layers-to pull out 
the lunar cycles. "It's not an easy thing. It's taken us the last year to 
satisfy ourselves of these numbers," says Sonett.

 Previous reports of ancient astronomical cycles have run into trouble. In the 
1960s and 1970s, paleontologists used bands in corals and clams to infer 
information about the number of days per year, but these studies drew a great 
deal of criticism and the field foundered, says paleontologist Gary D. 
Rosenberg of Indiana and Purdue Universities in Indianapolis. Skeptics charged 
that the counting of growth bands was subjective and that researchers had 
failed to account for uncertainties in their work.

 Tidal rhythmites provide more accurate records because they have fewer 
irregularities than corals and other organisms. Sonett and coauthor Erik Kvale 
of the Indiana Geolgical Survey in Bloomington have "really given new life to 
the field," says Rosenberg.

 Although previous studies have made use of tidal rhythmites, they have not 
included the Utah deposits, discovered 2 years ago (SN: 9/10/94, p. 165). 
"Sonett has analyzed the oldest recognized rhythmites, and he has clearly used 
the most sophisticated mathematical methods to date. For that reason, it is 
significant," comments Gregory Ojakangas, a space scientist at the University 
of Minnesota in Duluth.

 Ojakangas cautions, however, that scientists will need to test this analysis 
against other tidal rhythmites and records of ancient algal mounds. "There is a 
lot more data out there. Tidal rhythmites are being discovered in more and more 
places." In fact, he has recently found 2-billion-year-old rhythmites in 
Minnesota and is currently analyzing them.


