Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 7/20/96

 July 20, 1996

100-Day Cough Do adults spread the whooping cough bug?

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 Jane had a cough that just wouldn't quit. All through her pregnancy, she 
hacked and coughed. Nothing seemed to help. Days after delivery, her infant 
fell desperately ill and died. Only then did doctors make the connection 
between Jane's cough and Bordetella pertussis, the bacterium that causes 
whooping cough.

 Is Jane's case a tragic anomaly?

 New research suggests that infection with B. pertussis is far more common in 
adults than previously recognized. Researchers have reported that 12 to 31 
percent of adults with a persistent cough have undiagnosed pertussis.

"Infections in adults are common," James D. Cherry of the University of 
California, Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Medicine told scientists attending a 
pertussis conference in Washington, D.C., last month.

 For adults, the staccato cough often results in repeated trips to the doctor's 
office. A misdiagnosis, or no diagnosis at all, is the usual result. The adult 
version of pertussis rarely results in the telltale whoop that marks the 
disease in children. After months, the cough usually subsides on its own.

 For unprotected infants, however, the disease is far more dangerous. Infection 
at first causes a runny nose, sore throat, and mild cough. But later, the cough 
can turn vicious. The babies cough spasmodically, then whoop as they try to 
catch their breath. They may vomit or turn purple. If the brain is deprived of 
oxygen, babies may suffer seizures or develop permanent brain damage. Some 
infected infants die. Pertussis is less likely to be fatal in older children, 
but they occasionally develop ear infections or pneumonia.

 Most U.S. infants receive their first dose of the pertussis vaccine at age 2 
months. The disease remains a threat, however, especially for younger infants 
and children who have not been vaccinated.

 Since the 1980s, pertussis infection in the United States has surged 
cyclically, with peaks every 3 to 4 years. The last upsurge occurred in 1993. 
If the pattern holds, public health officials expect another outbreak this year 
or next. Some researchers believe that undiagnosed pertussis infection in 
adults may fuel this sometimes deadly cycle in children.

 Mary E. Nennig, a researcher at the Kaiser Permanente Pediatric Vaccine Study 
Center in San Francisco, realized a few years ago that several previous studies 
indicated a pertussis problem in U.S. teenagers and adults.

 Chief among them was a 1992 study of 130 UCLA students who had sought help for 
a cough that lasted more than 6 days. Cherry and his colleagues found that 34 
of them had undiagnosed infection with B. pertussis (SN: 11/25/95, p. 356.)

 More recently, Seth W. Wright of the Vanderbilt University Medical Center in 
Nashville studied 75 adults who had visited a hospital emergency room 
complaining of prolonged coughing. Wright's team discovered that 16 had 
unrecognized pertussis (SN: 4/8/95, p. 214).

 Nennig wondered if she would find similar rates of pertussis among adult 
members of a Kaiser health plan, who would more closely represent the general 
population. She and her coworkers studied 153 people age 18 and older who 
visited the San Francisco health facility complaining of a chronic cough.

 Establishing a diagnosis of pertussis is notoriously tough. B. pertussis is a 
fickle organism, difficult to grow in culture or isolate in patients.

 The problem is that most adults don't rush to the doctor the minute they 
develop a cough. In the Kaiser study, participants had suffered a cough for an 
average of 6 weeks before seeking help. By that time, the body's immune system 
may have already killed B. pertussis.

 Yet this bug often leaves a nasty legacy of prolonged coughing. Some 
scientists theorize that one of several toxins exuded by B. pertussis damages 
airway cells involved in the cough reflex. Until those cells are repaired, the 
harsh cough continues. Indeed, folk legends refer to pertussis as the 100-day 
cough, Nennig notes.

 To solve the problem of diagnosis, the team relied on a blood test that looks 
for an antibody to a known pertussis toxin. Antibodies are proteins made by the 
immune system to fight an invader such as B. pertussis. Nennig and her 
colleagues assigned a diagnosis of pertussis to those people with a chronic 
cough who also had very high concentrations of this antibody.

 The team discovered that 19 of the patients with a persistent cough had 
evidence of pertussis infection, translating into a disease prevalence of 12.4 
percent. Nennig and her colleagues published the results of this study in the 
June 5 Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

 To calculate the disease incidence in the general population, the team had to 
do some more homework. The investigators considered the total number of 
patients using the San Francisco facility during the study and then zeroed in 
on the number of Kaiser patients who had complained of a prolonged cough. Their 
calculations led them to estimate an incidence of at least 176 adult cases per 
100,000 people per year. They concluded that adult pertussis is approximately 
as widespread as peptic ulcer disease.

 That newly calculated rate of pertussis is significantly higher than local and 
national estimates, Nennig notes. The San Francisco Health Department reported 
an incidence of 1.6 cases per 100,000 people in all age groups during 1994. 
That translates to about 12 cases of pertussis in all of San Francisco. Nennig 
points out that her team found 19 just by looking at one Kaiser clinic.

 Similarly, national figures appear to underestimate the scope of the pertussis 
problem. In the July 21, 1995 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported 1.8 cases per 100,000 
people of all ages in the United States in 1994 and just 0.2 case per 100,000 
for people age 20 and older.

 Outside the research community, doctors rarely, if ever, recognize adult 
pertussis. Adults may experience mild, coldlike symptoms and a cough. "It's a 
very prolonged cough without being productive," Cherry says, in contrast to 
bronchitis, whose victims often cough up mucus.

 In Cherry's study of the 34 pertussis-infected UCLA students, none had been 
correctly diagnosed when they sought treatment for the cough.

 When Nennig and her colleagues went back to the Kaiser medical records, they 
found that not a single chart had noted pertussis infection as a possible cause 
of the persistent cough, even though some patients had gone to the clinic as 
many as nine times for cough symptoms. Three of the 19 patients whom 
researchers later diagnosed as having pertussis infection had been sent to a 
specialist, such as an allergy or asthma doctor.

 The Kaiser doctors--following what appears to be standard medical 
practice--attributed their patients' coughs to a variety of ills, including 
sinus infection, reactive airway disease, bronchitis, asthma, allergy, and 
viral syndrome. In some cases, no diagnosis was made.

"The average physician doesn't have a clue about pertussis [in adults]," Cherry 
says. "They don't recognize the illness."

 Even if a physician were to suspect pertussis in an adult, there's no easy way 
to test for the bug, Nennig says. The antibody test used by the Kaiser team 
remains a research tool and is not available to physicians.

 For the adult with pertussis infection, misdiagnosis can result in expense and 
anxiety. Patients, and insurers, end up paying for unnecessary, sometimes risky 
tests and medication. If the tests turns up nothing, the patient is left with 
the worry of a chronic cough.

"It can be a nightmare for the physician and the patient," Nennig says.

 For public health experts, the greatest significance of adult pertussis may be 
its link to children.

"Adults and adolescents are an important reservoir for pertussis in the United 
States," says Peter M. Strebel, an epidemiologist at the Atlanta-based CDC. 
They are often the first in a household to suffer a pertussis infection, 
Strebel told scientists attending the pertussis conference, which was sponsored 
by the National Institutes of Health. Moreover, B. pertussis does not appear to 
cause disease in animals other than humans.

 During the early, most contagious stage of pertussis infection, adults may 
notice what they think is an insignificant cough. But infants who inhale 
microscopic droplets of the extremely infectious sputum can develop full-force 
whooping cough, Strebel says.

 If doctors can stop pertussis in adults and teens, they might be able to 
quench the outbreaks of pertussis that kill or disable many infants.

 Although in some countries vaccination is not routine, most U.S. adolescents 
and adults were vaccinated as children. Researchers now know that pertussis 
protection wears off in about a decade, leaving people vulnerable to infection. 
However, bouts with B. pertussis in such people tend to be mild and thus go 
unrecognized.

 The development of a new crop of pertussis vaccines has spurred talk of a 
booster program for adults. The vaccine currently in clinical use contains 
whole, killed bacteria that spur immunity against B. pertussis. These 
whole-cell pertussis vaccines sometimes cause painful swelling and other 
unpleasant reactions.

 The new, so-called acellular vaccines rely on the pertussis proteins, rather 
than a whole bacterium, to spark immunity and are therefore thought to be 
safer. Two studies of infants published in the Feb. 8, 1996 New England Journal 
of Medicine demonstrated that the acellular pertussis vaccines provide disease 
protection and provoke fewer reactions than the whole-cell vaccine.

 The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve the acellular vaccines 
for infants shortly. The adult version requires further testing.

 In theory, adults and teenagers would get booster shots of a pertussis vaccine 
every decade or so. But nobody really knows how long such vaccines would hold 
B. pertussis at bay. If the shield lasted just a year, the cost of giving the 
vaccine to adults would prove prohibitive.

 The NIH plans to launch a clinical efficacy trial to see how well the 
acellular vaccines perform as adult boosters, according to David Klein of the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in Bethesda, Md. 
That trial is scheduled to last about 3 years, he says.

 Rather than vaccinate the entire population, some researchers advocate 
focusing on certain groups. For example, scientists know that adults can 
unknowingly spread pertussis to unvaccinated infants. NIAID plans an initial 
study in which researchers would give the acellular pertussis vaccine to 
pregnant baboons in hopes of establishing immunity in their offspring. If all 
goes well, they might launch a similar test in pregnant women, Klein says.

 Will U.S. adults submit to a booster shot for an infection that causes a 
cough? That's a big question, researchers admit. But the most compelling reason 
to vaccinate adults is to stop the lethal spread of B. pertussis in children, 
says Nennig's coauthor Kathryn M. Edwards of Vanderbilt.

 Some researchers advocate an all-out war against B. pertussis. "I think we 
ought to think about vaccinating adults," Edwards says. Cherry adds, "Our 
ultimate goal should be the elimination of the organism."

 A link between pertussis and crib death

 Preliminary research supports a link between Bordetella pertussis and some 
cases of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). It is the first time this 
bacterium has been associated with the syndrome, which causes apparently 
healthy infants to die in their sleep.

 James D. Cherry of the University of California, Los Angeles School of 
Medicine, Ulrich Heininger of the University Hospital in Erlangen, Germany, and 
others began to investigate the link after they had worked on a case in which a 
German baby nearly died in its sleep. The baby survived, and the team later 
diagnosed a pertussis infection. Cherry and his colleagues began to wonder if 
B. pertussis causes other episodes in which breathing stops.

 The German baby, for example, didn't suffer from a recognizable cough. Yet it 
exhaled a lot of air without drawing in enough to replace it, Cherry noted. 
Rather than the cough and whoop of an older child, a newborn with pertussis 
infection may simply appear to hold its breath periodically, he says.

 The researchers decided to investigate additional cases of crib death. From 
December 1990 to November 1993, the team collected nose and throat secretions 
from infants who had died of SIDS, but tests for B. pertussis gave uniformly 
negative results. Because of the difficulty of growing this bacterium in 
culture dishes, the team decided to try a different tack.

 They used polymerase chain reaction, a powerful molecular test, to search out 
the DNA that codes for a known toxin produced by B. pertussis. The team studied 
51 additional babies who had died of SIDS. This time, they hit pay dirt.

 At the time of death, 18 percent had evidence of pertussis infection, the 
researchers reported in September 1995 at the annual meeting of the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America held in San Francisco. Cherry notes that B. 
pertussis attacks the airway cells in young infants, who may not be strong 
enough to cough. Only when an infant abruptly stops breathing does the illness 
show itself, he adds.

 Still, this study remains preliminary. Cherry cautions that further research 
is needed to demonstrate the link, if any, between pertussis and crib death.


