Science News Online - Past Issues - Feature Article - 8/31/96 August 31, 1996

 How to Light a Fire Studies of the sun's corona heat up

 By RON COWEN

 You want hot? They've got hot. You want a puzzle? They've got a puzzle. For 
nearly 50 years, a simple fact about the sun's outer atmosphere, or corona, has 
bedeviled astronomers.

 Though it lies several hundred thousand kilometers above the sun's surface, 
the corona has a temperature of at least 1 million kelvins, about 200 times 
greater than that of the surface itself. It's as if the air high above a candle 
were hotter than the flame that heats it.

 Exactly how the sun has managed such a feat continues to confound astronomers. 
Because the corona is low-density, its high temperature results from a 
relatively small amount of energy. Just one ten-thousandth of the sun's total 
energy is sufficient to heat the corona, and scientists haven't lacked for 
theories about how this could happen. But no particular model has yet emerged 
as the winner because researchers haven't had the means to make the key 
observations required to thoroughly test predictions.

 Enter the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), a spacecraft dedicated to 
studying the sun (SN: 5/4/96, p. 277). Launched last December, its findings 
have intrigued and even astonished solar astronomers. Recent SOHO measurements 
reveal that ionized atoms in some parts of the corona reach velocities greater 
than 200 kilometers per second. According to one model, these velocities 
correspond to thermal temperatures in excess of 100 million kelvins-nearly 100 
times greater than had been previously recorded.

 Faced with these blistering temperatures, solar astronomers would seem to have 
an even greater problem on their hands. But rather than stumping researchers, 
the SOHO observations may in fact point the way to a deeper understanding of 
the corona and the origin of its towering temperature.

 Visible to the eye only during an eclipse, when the moon slips between the sun 
and Earth, the corona stands out from the darkened sun like a pale wreath of 
light. This ghostly glow belies the fiery nature of the corona, a place where 
vast, arching magnetic fields hold sway and bursts of high-energy radiation 
stream into interplanetary space.

 To study the corona, a spectrometer aboard SOHO recreates a solar eclipse by 
using an occulting disk, or coronagraph, to block the blinding light from the 
sun's surface. John L. Kohl of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
in Cambridge, Mass., and his colleagues, including Giancarlo Noci of the 
University of Florence, used the spectrometer to measure the wavelengths of 
ultraviolet light emitted by a variety of ionized atoms, ranging from hydrogen 
to magnesium.

 The wavelength of light emitted by a single atom appears as a sharp spectral 
line. The spectrum of a group of atoms, however, spreads into a bell-shaped 
curve, because the speeds of individual atoms vary. Light radiated by atoms 
moving toward an observer gets shifted to shorter wavelengths, while light from 
atoms moving away gets shifted to longer wavelengths. The greater the range of 
velocities, the greater the smearing.

 To Kohl's surprise, the ultraviolet spectral lines that his team measured in a 
particular part of the corona were extraordinarily broad, suggesting that the 
atoms there are extremely energetic and have high velocities.

 In this case, the large velocities suggest that at a height of 500,000 
kilometers above the visible solar surface-well into the corona-hydrogen 
reaches a temperature of 6 million kelvins and oxygen an astounding 100 million 
kelvins. These numbers indicate that the atoms are heated roughly in proportion 
to their atomic weights, oxygen being 16 times more massive than hydrogen. Kohl 
and his colleagues reported the findings in June at a meeting of the American 
Astronomical Society in Madison, Wis.

 Assuming that the high speeds measured by Kohl's team do correspond to high 
thermal energies, two groups of researchers say they can explain the findings. 
They discussed their models at a SOHO workshop at Harvard in late June and at a 
biennial meeting on space physics that convened in July in Birmingham, England.

 Both models begin beneath the corona with the generation of waves at the sun's 
visible surface, or photosphere. Produced by the heat-driven motion of ionized 
gases that rise and fall within the solar cauldron, these waves represent 
oscillations constrained to move along the sun's magnetic field. Looping upward 
from the photosphere, magnetic field lines carry waves into the corona.

 These waves have a certain set of frequencies. Charged particles in the corona 
also have characteristic frequencies, as they gyrate about the magnetic field 
lines.

 If the frequency of a wave matches that of a gyrating particle, then something 
special happens. Under this resonance condition, the charged particles readily 
absorb the energy contained in the waves and rapidly accelerate to high 
velocities, which could account for Kohl's findings. Anyone who has pushed a 
child on a swing has observed the same type of phenomenon: When you push at the 
right time, in sync with the frequency at which the child is moving back and 
forth, the child will swing to great heights.

 So far so good-except that the waves at the sun's surface are thought to have 
too low a frequency to match those of the gyrating charged particles. The two 
models part company in how they overcome this apparent obstacle.

 Ian Axford and James McKenzie of the Max Planck Institute for Aeronomy in 
Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany, focus on minuscule flare-ups that have been 
observed near the base of the corona. They propose that these miniexplosions 
are caused by taut magnetic field lines that snap and reconnect, unleashing 
bursts of energy. These bursts could generate the requisite high-frequency 
waves needed to heat the corona.

 In another model proposed several years ago, Joseph V. Hollweg of the 
University of New Hampshire in Durham and his colleagues came up with a 
different way to explain the high-frequency waves. In their scenario, the 
low-frequency waves encounter furious turbulence from the solar gases and 
convert to higher frequency vibrations that match the jiggle of charged 
particles in the corona.

 Whatever the mechanism behind the coronal heat, high-frequency waves may 
generate the high-speed solar wind that continually blows out from the sun and 
washes over the planets. This wind has its greatest speeds above the sun's 
poles (SN: 8/5/95, p. 89).

 Robert Rosner of the University of Chicago notes that Kohl's measurements were 
made in regions known as coronal holes. In these regions, near the sun's poles, 
the magnetic field lines extend out into interplanetary space, providing the 
pathway for the sun's wind of charged particles to reach the planets.

 By generating both coronal heat and solar wind, the high-frequency waves, 
Rosner says, would "kill two birds with one stone."

 Rosner cautions that the SOHO findings may have another interpretation. The 
high speeds of charged particles measured by the craft may not indicate that 
the particles have high thermal energies, which are created by random 
motion-atoms moving every which way. Rather, these velocities may be an 
indicator of coordinated atomic movement directed by low-frequency waves in the 
corona. Such waves can rev charged particles in the corona to speeds great 
enough to generate the high-speed solar wind, but they can't directly heat the 
sun's outer atmosphere. In that case, coronal heating might remain a puzzle, 
albeit a smaller one, since the corona would have a thermal temperature closer 
to 1 million kelvins than to 100 million kelvins.

"Kohl has enormously interesting results," Rosner says. "If the measurements 
are a combination of temperature and velocity associated with wave motion, then 
he's discovered waves in the solar atmosphere. That's an absolutely wonderful 
coup." Whether his observations solve a puzzle or simply change it, "He's in 
the catbird seat, and he has the pleasure of having theorists fight it out."

 A spacecraft currently on the drawing board might eventually settle the 
controversy, says Rosner. Known as Solar Probe, the proposed craft would take 
3.5 years to reach the sun, venturing into the corona for about a day.

 The probe "would stick its finger out and measure the temperature [of the 
corona] directly," notes Rosner. With such a measurement, "the Solar Probe 
would eliminate all arguments."


