Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 8/17/96 August 17, 1996

 Talkative Parents Make Kids Smarter

 By Bruce Bower

 An exhaustive study of how "typical" parents talk with their children during 
the youngsters' first few years of life has yielded a mountain of valuable data 
and some initial findings with serious social implications.

 Striking class differences in the nature and extent of parental interaction 
with children between the ages of 9 months and 3 years result in a hefty 
intellectual boost for kids in white-collar families, a modest lift for those 
in blue-collar households, and a disturbingly weak assist for youngsters in 
welfare families. Young children whose parents talk extensively to them score 
much higher on later IQ tests than those exposed to minimal amounts of parental 
talk, assert study codirectors Betty Hart of the University of Kansas in 
Lawrence and Todd Risley of the University of Alaska, Anchorage.

"The more parents talk with their young children, the more good things happen 
intellectually for those kids later on," Risley contends. "But the massive 
class differences in this parental behavior surprised us and suggest that 
children in welfare families face problems that cannot be reversed by a few 
hours of Head Start classes every week."

 Hart and Risley presented their findings, based on at-home observations of 42 
families in the Kansas City area, at the annual meeting of the American 
Psychological Association in Toronto last week.

 The study enlivens an already intense debate over the relative influence of 
genes and environment on IQ and intellectual potential, both in individuals and 
racial groups (SN: 4/8/95, p. 220).

 But the scope of the 2 1/2-year investigation, which was followed by 3 years 
during which researchers analyzed reams of written and tape-recorded 
observations, adds a new wrinkle to the nurture side of the controversy.

 Families in Hart and Risley's study functioned well and exhibited no serious 
problems, such as child abuse or psychiatric illness. Thirteen professional 
families included at least one parent who worked in a white-collar occupation; 
in 23 working-class families, jobs included electrician and plumber; six 
families subsisted mainly on welfare.

 Families represented a range of racial and ethnic groups; eight were headed by 
a single parent. Children in the study had from zero to six siblings.

 Trained observers spent 1 hour every 2 months tape-recording and writing down 
the nature of all at-home interactions with a designated child in each family 
beginning at 9 months of age. Observers focused only on that child and whoever 
talked or interacted with him or her. They never offered advice to parents, 
even when asked, Risley notes.

 The parent or parents in each family displayed a characteristic level of talk 
with their young children, month after month, Risley asserts. Overall, parents 
in professional families proved most talkative; they made nearly twice as many 
statements per hour to their kids as working-class parents did and about four 
times as many as welfare parents.

 Parents in all the families devoted approximately equal effort to controlling 
children and keeping them out of trouble and danger, Risley says. But those 
parents who talked to children the most added critical elements to those 
interactions, such as affirming the child's efforts, responding to questions, 
providing guidance, and using a diverse vocabulary.

 Children exposed to high levels of talk from their parents performed markedly 
better on a measure of developmental IQ at age 3, even controlling for 
socioeconomic and other influences. Follow-up at age 9 found that those 
children had maintained their IQ advantage.

 Although genes affect intellectual ability, the new data indicate that the 
ways in which parents talk to their kids and communicate expectations about 
learning also loom large, holds psychologist Frances D. Horowitz of the City 
University of New York.

"This remarkable report represents a giant step toward a better understanding 
of normal child development," Horowitz argues.


