Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/10/96 August 10, 1996

 Bomb testers beware: Trace gases linger

 By Erik Skindrud

 An underground blast at the Nevada Test Site on Sept. 22, 1993, heaved Rainier 
Mesa up a meter or more, then let the mountain fall back to its resting place. 
The only casualties were some trees that lost their leaves unusually early that 
year.

 Scientists triggered this explosion, the start of the Non-Proliferation 
Experiment (NPE), to evaluate a sensitive new method for detecting clandestine 
nuclear tests. A ground inspection team armed with tubes for boring could find 
telltale radioactive gases from weeks to a year or more after an underground 
test, reports a group from the Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory 
in the Aug. 8 Nature.

 Lars-Erik De Geer of Sweden's National Defence Research Establishment notes in 
an accompanying commentary that the experiment proves "an on-site inspection 
has a good chance of finding conclusive evidence for a "well-contained" nuclear 
blast--the kind of test a cheater nation might stage. The success of the NPE 
thus bolsters the prospect of rigorously enforcing the Comprehensive Test Ban 
Treaty (CTBT), now being negotiated. The treaty would ban all nuclear testing, 
above and below ground (SN: 5/11/96, p. 298).

 The NPE blast was not triggered by a nuclear device. In a chamber 400 meters 
underground, U.S. Department of Energy technicians rigged up more than a 
million kilograms of chemical explosives, comparable to a small, 1-kiloton 
nuclear bomb. The Lawrence Livermore team added two nonradioactive trace gases, 
helium-3 and sulfur hexafluoride, to substitute for the rare xenon-133 and 
argon-37 produced by a nuclear bomb.

 Since the experimental blast, the group has tested hundreds of samples 
collected from tubes inserted 1 or 2 meters into the ground. They were able to 
detect helium-3 after 375 days and sulfur hexafluoride after only 50 days. 
Because of its small size, the helium molecule tends to pass into surrounding 
rock rather than rise directly to the surface, the report notes.

"I really think we have a breakthrough here," says lead researcher Charles R. 
Carrigan of Lawrence Livermore. Similar techniques could detect argon-37 from a 
nuclear bomb, even though a mere 15 cubic centimeters of the gas--"the volume 
of a Ping-Pong ball"-- would be produced per kiloton of explosive yield, he 
explains.

 Although the scientists had expected to detect the trace gases, they were 
surprised by the route those gases took to the surface. Carrigan thought the 
test explosion would produce fissures reaching up to the surface, but the blast 
was completely contained. So instead of traveling through fissures created by 
the blast, the gases rose through preexisting faults.

 Even if an "evader" nation managed to test in a relatively fissurefree zone, 
Carrigan says, "all we need is one fracture" to send the gas to the surface. De 
Geer points out that the method can't guarantee detection, but "it certainly 
highlights a problem and a great source of uncertainty for the cheat."

 Low barometric pressure, associated with storms, is needed to pull gases 
toward the surface, so weather conditions would influence the gases' arrival 
time. Diffusion alone, they calculate, would require "tens to hundreds of 
years" to produce detectable quantities.

 Carrigan calculates that under the same weather conditions, a team monitoring 
a nuclear blast would have detected radioactive xenon-133 after 50 days and the 
lighter argon-37 after 80 days. The argon should remain detectable for more 
than a year, he adds.

 The new sampling technique will almost certainly become a part of the official 
detection network established by the CTBT, says Steven R. Bratt, director of 
the U.S. Nuclear Treaty Programs Office in Arlington, Va.


