Science News Online - News Feature - Past Issues - 8/31/96 August 31, 1996

 No-Cal Powder May Sub for Food's Fat

 By Corinna Wu

 A new, no-calorie fat substitute called Z-Trim may change the adage that 
whatever's good for you must taste bad. Z-Trim, a bland mix of insoluble fiber 
made from the crushed hulls of grains, can replace the fat and some of the 
carbohydrates in foods such as chocolates, brownies, cheese, and ground beef.

"It represents a new generation of fat replacers," says its inventor, George E. 
Inglett of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Biopolymer Research Unit in 
Peoria, Ill. Inglett unveiled Z-Trim on Aug. 26 at the American Chemical 
Society meeting in Orlando, Fla.

 Most fat replacers based on carbohydrates add calories back to the food, 
Inglett says. One example is a fat substitute that Inglett himself developed 6 
years ago, called Oatrim (SN: 5/26/90, p. 330). Made of a digestible fiber from 
oat flour, it provides 4 calories per gram--less than half the calories of fat 
but calories nonetheless. By contrast, Z-Trim passes through the body 
undigested.

 Z-Trim also differs from the notorious, no-calorie fat substitute olestra, 
which can cause gastrointestinal distress and sweep vitamins and carotenoids 
out of the body (SN: 1/27/96, p. 61). The new substitute does not have those 
drawbacks, Inglett declares. He argues that to reduce their chances of 
developing intestinal disorders, people should actually eat more of the kind of 
insoluble fiber that makes up Z-Trim. Unlike olestra, however, Z-Trim cannot be 
used to fry foods.

"I wouldn't expect Z-Trim to have the same kinds of problems as olestra," says 
Margo Wootan, a senior scientist at the Center for Science in the Public 
Interest in Washington, D.C. "Fiber is already found in our diet, while olestra 
is a synthetic chemical."

 Inglett spent 3 years perfecting a multistage processing technique to produce 
the smooth, palatable Z-Trim from the tough hulls of corn, oats, or rice. 
First, he crushed the hulls in a mill with a highly alkaline solution of 
hydrogen peroxide, shearing the plant cells apart. Spinning the mixture in a 
centrifuge washed away all the peroxide and other water soluble components.

 After this treatment, the pieces were still too large, making the fiber coarse 
and gritty, Inglett says. But putting the material through the mill and 
centrifuge again made it smooth and able to absorb a lot of water. "That second 
whammy is what really does the job," he says. "It takes every cell and busts it 
to fragments."

 The result is a fine, white cellulose powder that can be made into a gel by 
adding water. Different concentrations of the powder yield gels that vary from 
a pourable liquid to a soft solid, like mashed potatoes. He can also blend 
powders of the different grains to vary the gel's consistency.

 There is concern that the "microbial stability" of foods containing Z-Trim 
hasn't been adequately tested. "Whenever you remove the lipid material and 
replace it with water," says Thomas H. Parliment, a flavor chemist for Kraft 
Foods in White Plains, N.Y., "microbes are able to grow, and you can get mold." 
That concern would have to be worked out before Z-Trim could be used in the 
food industry, Parliment says.

 If you want to replace fat in food, Inglett says, only three safe, no-calorie 
possibilities exist: water, air, and fiber. "You don't sell anybody air, you 
don't sell anybody water, but you can sell them Z-Trim."


