Science News Online - Past Issues - Feature Article - 9/14/96 September 14, 1996

 Tagged Out New markers for explosives may lay old safety questions to rest

 By CORINNA WU

 Both deliberate and indiscriminate in its destruction, a bomb is the 
terrorist's favorite weapon. Within the past 3 years, several high-profile 
bombings on U.S. soil have made that fact all too apparent: the World Trade 
Center in New York, the Alfred P. Murrah building in Oklahoma City, and 
Centennial Olympic Park in Atlanta. Evidence now coming to light may add TWA 
flight 800's fiery crash to the list.

 The violence of these events has cast a spotlight on an issue that has been 
debated for nearly 20 years. Marking explosives with tiny, color-coded plastic 
chips, or taggants, would enable investigators to trace explosives back to the 
point of sale. Information about that sale might provide a valuable clue to 
finding the perpetrators. Widespread tagging might also deter criminals from 
making and using bombs.

 The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 signed by President 
Clinton last April authorizes $25 million for a 6-month study of taggants by 
the Treasury Department, which oversees the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and 
Firearms (ATF).

 Consideration of taggants has been confounded by disagreement over gunpowder. 
Easy to obtain, it is a common ingredient of pipe bombs.

 Gun users, however, are concerned that tagged gunpowder would be unstable and 
therefore unsafe for use in bullets. Pressure from lobbying groups such as the 
National Rifle Association (NRA) excluded gunpowder from the study that was 
included in the antiterrorism bill, although they say they wouldn't object to a 
study by an "independent agency." Another bill, passed by the House in July and 
ready for Senate consideration this month, provides for such a study. The last 
major government report on taggants, more than a decade ago, concluded that 
leaving out gunpowder would take the teeth out of any tagging program.

 Despite the controversies, a few companies have quietly proceeded with 
research into tagging. One new approach may make the old worries obsolete.

 In the 1970s, Richard G. Livesay, a research chemist at 3M in St. Paul, Minn., 
invented the most widely used tagging technology. Dubbed Microtaggant, the 
marker consists of irregularly shaped particles, about a tenth of a millimeter 
in diameter. To the eye, a pinch of taggants looks like black pepper, but it's 
really made of up to 10 slabs of brightly colored melamine plastic, a material 
that's chemically inert and difficult to destroy.

 The layers of color in the particles serve as a kind of bar code, identifying 
the manufacturer, the date of production, and the distributor of a batch of 
explosives, information that is stored in a database.

 For easy detection and decoding, fluorescent and magnetic materials are added 
to the taggants. If a bomb contains tagged explosives, technicians can shine 
ultraviolet light to see whether there is any fluorescence among the debris. 
After scooping up debris samples, they collect the taggants with a magnet. 
Placing the taggants on a magnet orients them so that their colors are visible. 
The investigators can then read the colors with a simple light microscope.

 Circumventing the technology would take a high level of sophistication. A 
particularly skilled criminal with the right equipment might be able to produce 
counterfeit tags, but tagging would eliminate "99 percent of the oafs out 
there," according to Gary Fuller, now director of research at Basic 
Technologies International Corp. in Annandale, Va., and a participant in a 
major study of taggants that began in 1977.

 The largest U.S. producer of taggants today is Microtrace, based in 
Minneapolis. Livesay acquired the license for Microtaggant from 3M in 1985 and 
formed his own company to manufacture it. "We only make taggants [for use in 
explosives] for one customer: the Swiss government," says Charles W. Faulkner, 
general counsel for Microtrace.

 The Swiss have used them to solve 559 bombing cases since 1984, he adds.

 From 1977 to 1980, Aerospace Corp., now in El Segundo, Calif., conducted a 
study on Microtaggants for ATF. Working with three leading explosives 
manufacturers at the time, Atlas Powder Co., DuPont Co., and Hercules, 
Aerospace tagged about 7 million pounds of explosives, not including gunpowder, 
over a 1 1/2-year period. Fuller says, "We distributed them all around without 
a single problem."

 For packaged explosives like sticks of dynamite, "the safety issues were put 
to bed back then," Fuller says. In 1979, a bombing case in Baltimore was 
actually solved using the taggants. But then the explosive manufacturers began 
to back out, he adds, mostly for fear of being held legally liable for the 
damage done by their products.

"Once they realized that [potential liability], the whole program died an 
ungraceful death."

 A 1979 lawsuit filed by Goex, a gunpowder manufacturer, also undermined 
interest in taggants. Goex claimed that taggants produced by 3M were to blame 
for a blast at its plant in Camden Park, Ark. Ultimately, 3M was exonerated.

 Fuller calls the lawsuit "a pure red herring," but he adds that "there are 
still some reasons to conduct more tests on smokeless powder and black powder 
[types of gunpowder]."

 The NRA says early tests showed that the gunpowder interacts with some 
component of the taggants, promoting spontaneous combustion and accelerating 
degradation.

 Those tests were conducted at a high temperature and used very high taggant 
concentrations, says Faulkner. Though Microtrace's recommended concentration is 
only 250 parts per million, equal parts of taggants and powder were mixed 
together in the tests. Under such extreme conditions, he says, "of course it's 
unstable."

 An oft-cited 1980 report on taggants conducted by the Office of Technology 
Assessment (OTA), the now-defunct research arm of Congress, stated, "Until this 
presumed incompatibility is resolved, taggants cannot be safely added to these 
explosive materials." OTA did not independently verify the claims of 
instability but relied on interviews and the findings of previous studies.

 Not much progress on resolving the gunpowder question has been made since. 
Passage of the pending bill would move the issue forward, Fuller and others 
predict. Faulkner notes that the Swiss haven't had any problems in their many 
years of experience with tagged gunpowder and other explosives.

 Most attention has focused on packaged explosives and gunpowder, but the 
experience of Oklahoma City highlighted another kind of threat: the bomb made 
from ammonium nitrate fertilizer and fuel oil. The 1980 OTA report acknowledged 
the danger, saying an effective bomb could be made out of those materials "if 
the criminal has adequate time, skill, knowledge, and motivation."

 A company in Houston claims to have a practical way to tag ammonium nitrate 
and perhaps other ingredients of explosives. By labeling explosives at the 
molecular level, Isotag says it can produce tags that are cheap, reliable, and 
chemically inert. "We believe that our technique makes the NRA's concerns 
regarding destabilization of black powder a moot point," says Isotag's chief 
financial officer, Desmonde Cowdery.

 Rather than using a foreign marker, Isotag modifies the molecules already 
present in the explosive. By replacing some of the atoms with nonstandard 
isotopes, which have more or fewer neutrons, the company creates molecules that 
are chemically identical to the standard version but have slightly different 
weights.

 The isotopically labeled compounds are extremely uncommon in nature, so they 
can be detected readily. Adding several isotopic markers to an ingredient of 
explosives--ammonium nitrate is the only one they've tested so far--further 
increases the rarity of the isotopic bar code.

 Unlike the plastic taggants, these markers can only be detected with fairly 
sophisticated laboratory equipment. If chemically tagged fertilizer were used 
in a bomb, technicians would need to collect residue at the site and send it to 
Isotag for analysis. To decode the marker, scientists would separate the 
constituent compounds with a gas chromatograph and then break each compound 
apart with a mass spectrometer to reveal the particular combinations of 
isotopes.

 Even though gas chromatographs and mass spectrometers are common fixtures in 
chemistry labs, a person trying to find the tags would have a hard time 
identifying the isotopically labeled compounds without knowing the code, says 
Isotag chemist Ken Laintz. "We take pride in our ability to hide the tags."

 The labeled molecules would be used at concentrations of a few parts per 
billion, and they can be detected when present at concentrations of only parts 
per trillion.

 Isotag completed a study in late 1995 with a major manufacturer of ammonium 
nitrate fertilizer. It showed that the markers are stable and can survive a 
blast. But fertilizer companies began to bow out of such marker investigations, 
as the explosives companies did earlier, preferring to spend their money on 
combating taggant legislation, says Laintz.

 Now, they will have to pick up where they left off. Fertilizers, considered 
explosive precursor chemicals, are part of the Treasury Department study 
authorized by the April antiterrorism act. Isotopic marking will probably be 
included in the tagging study. "We've made information about our technology 
available to Congress," Cowdery says.

 Whether these studies will actually lead to an explosives tagging program 
remains to be seen. The antiterrorism bill allows the Treasury Department to 
mandate the addition of markers to explosive materials if they're deemed safe 
and effective. The pending gunpowder bill, on the other hand, makes no such 
provision.

 Tagging has turned out to be an explosive issue in more ways than one.


