Science News Online - Past Issues - Feature Article - 9/21/96 September 21, 1996

 Healing Waters Flooding rivers to repent for the damage done by dams

 ByTINA ADLER

 If Noah had been hanging around the Grand Canyon at the end of March, he'd 
probably have thought he was having one distorted flashback.

 He would have seen Department of the Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt push a 
button controlling the Glen Canyon Dam and let loose a huge flood of the 
Colorado River below. As in the Bible story, much preparation preceded the 
deluge. More than a hundred investigators who had received word of the coming 
torrent moved some endangered animals to higher ground and set up about 30 
projects to study the effects of the flooding.

 Babbitt and his crew didn't plan this flood to punish anyone. Instead, they 
wanted to restore the river to at least a shadow of its former self, before the 
dam was constructed in 1963. They hoped to improve certain features of the 
river, such as sandbars, that benefit both native fish species and human 
campers.

 This marked the first time that dam managers have used a large flood to renew 
the health of a river ecosystem, they say.

 The flood began gradually, then flowed at 45,000 cubic feet per second (cfs) 
for a week. A flood that big hadn't hit the Grand Canyon since a natural deluge 
in the mid-1980s. Before the dam was built, floods averaging 125,000 cfs 
occurred annually. In recent years, 12,000 cfs of water would normally travel 
over the dam during late March.

 Huge water flows alter a river's ecology by scouring out backwater lagoons, 
washing away the banks' vegetation, and moving sand from the bottom toward the 
shore to create sandbars. New lagoons form behind these sandbars. Ecologists 
liken the services that floods provide rivers to the benefits that fires offer 
forests.

 Today, most big rivers in the United States are controlled by dams, which 
floods rarely overpower. As part of its recent efforts to make up for ecosystem 
changes that have resulted from the lack of flooding, the Interior Department's 
Bureau of Reclamation decided to go along with scientists' requests to run a 
trial flood in the Grand Canyon.

 Final reports from the researchers who monitored the effects of this $1.5 
million flood are due out at the end of the year. A couple of weeks after the 
event, Interior Department staff were describing it as a resounding success, 
but scientists who collected data on the river this summer are providing mixed 
reviews.

 High on the project organizers' list of goals for this torrent was creating 
better conditions for the beleaguered native fish. Only five native species 
remain of the eight that graced this stretch of the Colorado River before the 
dam began operation, explains ecologist Richard A. Valdez of Bio/West, an 
environmental consulting firm in Logan, Utah. Of those five, the humpback chub 
and razorback sucker are endangered.

 Before construction of the dam, the Colorado River ran hot and cold through 
the Grand Canyon, reaching highs of almost 90!F in the summer and dropping to 
almost freezing in the winter. Now, 45!F water from the bottom of Lake Powell 
gets pumped into the river at the dam, so the temperature rarely exceeds 60!F.

 The native fish, however, need a warmer environment for spawning and for their 
young to develop. They still reproduce in tributaries, which are warmer than 
the river, but there they must endure cramped quarters and an occasional flash 
flood, Valdez explains. Moreover, the young often die of cold when they leave 
the tributaries to enter the Colorado.

 Since the dam began operation, the fish have had fewer nurseries--the warm 
lagoons where the young mature before competing with the adults in the river. 
Without flooding, few new lagoons had developed, and established ones had 
become overgrown with vegetation.

 This year's artificial flood created at least 55 new sandbars, the Interior 
Department announced at the end of May. More than half of the existing sandbars 
grew bigger, and only 10 percent lost sediment. It's difficult, however, to 
predict how long any of them will last.

"Sandbars are relatively ephemeral," explains Edmund D. Andrews of the U.S. 
Geological Survey in Boulder, Colo. They can erode in a few days to a few years.

 Some nurseries will form behind the new and the improved sandbars as the river 
gradually scours out the channel between the shore and the sandbar, predicts 
Lawrence E. Stevens, a river ecologist with Applied Technology Associates who 
works as a consultant to the Bureau of Reclamation's Glen Canyon Environmental 
Studies program in Flagstaff, Ariz.

 Because of its modest size, the flood proved less successful at carving out 
lagoons than at creating sandbars, at least in the near term. "With this flow, 
it doesn't look like backwater habitats did all that great," asserts geologist 
Matt Kaplinski of Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff.

"Rejuvenation of backwaters? Some happened, but not as much as we would have 
liked to have seen," agrees Stevens. Only four of the several hundred along the 
flooded stretch improved dramatically. Others filled in with sediment or 
remained unchanged. Overall, he says, "we may have gained a little bit in 
backwater."

 Besides water temperature and lack of nurseries, the native fish have another 
big problem: their nonnative neighbors, which eat them, their food, and their 
eggs; carry parasites and diseases; and compete with them for the river's prime 
habitat. The greatest threats include the channel catfish, fathead minnow, 
common carp, mosquito fish, brown trout, and rainbow trout, says Valdez. Most 
of the trout come from tributaries, where they were stocked in the 1940s, says 
David L. Wegner, a fisheries biologist and program manager of the Glen Canyon 
program.

 Researchers had hoped that the flood might flush some of the nonnative fish 
into Lake Mead, about 300 miles below the dam, Valdez says. Most of the 
nonnatives had evolved in slow-moving waterways, so researchers expected them 
to be unprepared for huge rushes of water.

 During the flooding, the natives either took to the tributaries or to eddies 
in the river. The centers of these swirling waters remain fairly quiet and trap 
an abundance of insects and plant matter on which the fish dine.

 Unexpectedly, most of the nonnatives also survived the March torrent--by 
hiding in the shoreline vegetation, which a bigger flood would have destroyed, 
he notes.

 Larger, naturally occurring floods, including one in 1984 in the Colorado 
River above Lake Powell, have knocked down the nonnative populations, Valdez 
says. The 1984 Colorado flow carried twice the water of this year's event.

 Staging a flood that big "would be politically difficult to do and maybe 
structurally too," Valdez warns. The flood might damage the dam walls. Also, it 
would probably prove unpopular with people who benefit from the water and the 
electricity the dam generates; the upper basin states would have to agree to 
give the lower basin states the water.

"Out here [people say], "You can have my beer and my wife, but not my water,'" 
Valdez jokes.

 The artificial flood ripped out or buried much of the shoreline vegetation 
that had grown up since the last big flow. Such destruction provided 
campgrounds for tourists and returned the shore closer to its pre-dam state. 
The loss of vegetation, however, worried some scientists, including Stevens.

 Two of the waterway's endangered terrestrial natives, a snail and a bird, live 
near the river's edge. They have both come to rely on vegetation that spread 
down to the river after the end of the regular floods, explains Stevens.

 The kenab ambersnail traditionally lived higher up on the banks and consumed 
both bacteria living on the crimson monkeyflower and decayed parts of its 
leaves, flowers, and stems. The dam's control of flooding allowed that native 
plant, and thus the snails, to move closer to the river's edge. The snails have 
also developed a taste for watercress, a nonnative plant flourishing along the 
banks, thanks to the dam, Stevens says.

 To protect the snail population, he and his coworkers moved 1,300 of the 
approximately 3,100 creatures to a higher elevation. The flood, as expected, 
washed away those left behind, as well as the plants. However, the fecund 
survivors are doing a good job of boosting the depleted population. Much of the 
monkeyflower and watercress has also returned, and the snails are beginning to 
move back towards shore, Stevens finds.

 In the course of their flood-related research, he and his colleagues unraveled 
a mystery. By observing the snails, they discovered the perpetrator of mass 
ambersnail murders that have occurred twice in the past few years. Mice, they 
learned, enjoy an occasional feast of escargot. "They hammer the [population 
of] snails pretty hard," Stevens says.

 The endangered bird, a type of flycatcher, has also come to rely on a 
nonnative species--salt cedar trees--that thrives along the river. The few 
flycatchers that remain in the Grand Canyon nest in these trees, feeding on the 
insects that live among their branches and in the marshes. These birds survived 
the flood without human intervention. Their nesting sites remain intact, and 
enough vegetation persists that they have plenty to eat, Stevens reports.

 Because of the successes of this large Colorado River flood, scientists hope 
to repeat it in 5 to 10 years.

 Owners and managers of power systems are discussing plans for restoration 
floods in the Columbia River basin in the Pacific Northwest and in the Missouri 
River basin, says Wegner. Government officials and others in Japan and Turkey 
have talked to him about organizing such floods in their countries, he reports.

 Initiating any large torrent inevitably involves many people and a lot of 
land, water, electricity, and money, say participants in the Grand Canyon 
project. Moreover, each river has different needs and obstacles. Designing the 
studies for this recent flood and getting the approval of all the groups took 
about 10 years, says Wegner.

 Restoration floods may not become a trend, Valdez suspects. However, river 
managers are experimenting with other techniques to make the dams more 
environmentally friendly. For example, at Glen Canyon they are considering 
pumping warmer water from Lake Mead into the river to help the native fish. 
They must first determine whether such a move benefits the natives more than 
the nonnatives, he adds.

 Mark Schaefer, deputy assistant secretary for water and science with the 
Department of Interior, says, "In general, most people [at the Bureau of 
Reclamation] feel that we can do more to try to run some of our river systems 
more naturally."


