Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 8/3/96 August 3, 1996

 Geologists ponder the depth of earthquakes

 By Erik Skindrud

 When a section of the Pacific plate scrapes North America, seismologists 
expect to see a whole lot of shakin' goin' on. In Southern California, where 
this clash is ongoing, experts puzzle over the limited size and number of 
quakes over the past century.

 Geologists Harold Magistrale of San Diego State University and Hua-wei Zhou of 
the University of Houston help resolve the mystery in the Aug. 2 Science. They 
report that a hidden layer of soft schist rock helps to buffer Southern 
California from the most violent shaking.

 They also say their data can improve predictions of the biggest quake likely 
to strike specific sites.

 Zhou used earthquake data from 1981 through 1994 to determine hypocenters--the 
location and depth--of 37,000 Southern California earthquakes. They found 
differences of 4 to 10 kilometers in depth between some quakes that were 
geographically close together, indicating that Earth's brittle, quake-prone 
outer layer has well-defined "steps" where its thickness changes dramatically. 
Where composed of schist, the layer is thinner.

 An earthquake's magnitude is proportional to the length and depth of the 
rupture created by slipping plates. Because schist softens under less 
temperature and pressure than other rock in the outer layer, it does not 
rupture as far down, thus limiting a quake's magnitude.

 While schist outcrops on the surface are widely scattered in Southern 
California, the new data show that a broad region on either side of the San 
Andreas fault rests on schist, as does the area west and offshore of the 
Newport-Inglewood fault, which runs under densely populated zones.

 Rock distribution can explain much, but improved predictions of quake 
magnitude will have to await a more thorough grasp of heat flow under the 
region, says Hiroo Kanamori, a geophysicist at the California Institute of 
Technology. Temperatures deep underground can vary 50 degrees C or more at 
sites less than 150 km apart, he notes, regardless of rock distribution.


