Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 8/3/96 August 3, 1996

 Bug sprays may bug you, too--for a day

 By Janet Raloff

 People whose homes have been sprayed for bugs frequently complain of symptoms 
that resemble mild insecticide poisoning--headaches, burning eyes, runny noses, 
nausea, even tightness in the chest. However, such symptoms are less likely to 
stem from reactions to the pesticide than to the added solvents that make it 
sprayable, a new study concludes.

 These emulsifiers and propellants account for up to 95 percent of sprayed 
material. Though manufacturers label them inert, this designation refers only 
to the fact that they are not part of the active pesticide, points out John A. 
Bukowski, formerly of New Jersey's Pesticide Control Program in Trenton. In 
fact, he notes, many of these solvents, which tend to enter the air far more 
readily than the pesticides do, are quite irritating.

 To see whether the solvents might reach concentrations likely to provoke 
symptoms, Bukowski's office teamed up with New Jersey's Environmental and 
Occupational Health Sciences Institute in Piscataway to study apartments 
treated with the insecticide chlorpyrifos.

 Exterminators sprayed just the perimeter of two identical, unoccupied 
apartments, hitting baseboards and crevices along the edges of the floor. In 
another two, they sprayed a fine mist of the pesticide over the entire floor 
area, including carpets.

 Computer models had indicated that solvent concentrations in such unventilated 
apartments would peak in 2 to 4 hours, suggesting that the dwellings should be 
ventilated for 3 to 6 hours. Though the concentrations peaked as predicted at 
about 22 milligrams per cubic meter of air, they didn't do so until 10 to 12 
hours after treatment.

 Even after 24 hours, solvents remained elevated in three of the apartments at 
more than twice their prespray concentrations, the researchers report in the 
August Environmental Science & Technology.

 These solvents--some of which are found in paints or resemble volatile 
chemicals emitted by glues and fabric in new furniture and carpets--have been 
associated with sick building syndrome, notes Bukowski, now at the University 
of Prince Edward Island in Charlottetown. "What we're basically showing," he 
says, "is that you can get a sick building syndrome for a day or so from an 
insecticide application."

 Robert Dyer, assistant director of the Environmental Protection Agency's 
National Health Effects and Environmental Research Laboratory (NHEERL) in 
Research Triangle Park, N.C., is not convinced. Bukowski's assertion that the 
elevated solvents could cause symptoms comes from comparing concentrations of 
the unidentified volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) emitted by chlorpyrifos to 
symptom-provoking concentrations of a well-defined mix of 22 VOCs studied at 
NHEERL. Unless the two groups of VOCs match, Bukowski's group may be "comparing 
apples and oranges," Dyer says.

 The new study does "point to an issue that's very important," however--the 
need to improve labeling on when and how long to ventilate an area that has 
been treated, says Lynn R. Goldman, EPA's assistant administrator for 
prevention, pesticides, and toxic substances. Few pesticides developed for 
indoor use recommend vacating treated premises temporarily, Bukowski notes, or 
give airing-out instructions beyond "ventilate adequately."

 Currently, EPA is reevaluating information and labeling for all pesticides 
registered before 1985. So far, Goldman told Science News, "in every case, 
we're finding a need to change how [pesticides] are used," which can include 
ventilation requirements. In the near future, she says, expect labeling with 
more explicit prescriptions on how long to air out treated areas, based on data 
for additives as well as active ingredients.


