Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 9/14/96 September 14, 1996

 Banned pollutant's legacy: Lower IQs

 By Janet Raloff

 One by-product of the United States' industrial culture is the ubiquitous 
contamination of the environment--and our bodies--with polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs). Exposure to these persistent, now-banned chemicals begins 
before birth, as a woman's blood delivers to the fetus some of the PCBs stored 
in her fat. This legacy, even when not unusually large, can impair brain 
development.

 By fifth grade, a new study finds, its effects can show up as diminished IQs.

 Joseph L. Jacobson and Sandra W. Jacobson of Wayne State University in Detroit 
have followed several hundred Michigan children born in the early 1980s. They 
stratified the children into exposure groups, using PCBs in the mothers' breast 
milk as a gauge of how much of the pollutant the mothers carried.

 Once used primarily as insulators in electrical transformers, PCBs now taint 
most soils and water. Much of the pollutant in the most heavily exposed 
Michigan children traced to their mothers' having eaten large quantities of 
Great Lakes fish--notorious for their PCB contamination.

 Earlier studies had shown that children with the highest prenatal PCB 
exposures exhibited developmental delays, starting in infancy. Though 
breast-feeding sometimes added substantially to an infant's store of PCBs, only 
prenatal exposures appeared to affect a young child's development--especially 
his or her short-term memory.

 The Jacobsons now describe IQ and achievement test results for 212 Michigan 
children. While there was no "gross intellectual impairment," they report in 
the Sept. 12 New England Journal of Medicine, the average IQ was 6.2 points 
lower in the 30 11-year-olds who had the highest prenatal PCB exposures (based 
on at least 1.25 micrograms per gram of fat in their mothers' breast milk) than 
in children with smaller exposures.

 PCBs appear to exert their greatest effect on short-term memory, planning 
skills, and distractibility, says Joseph Jacobson. Although affected kids "are 
still in the normal range," he notes, high exposures "are just pulling a lot of 
them into the bottom of the normal range." In word comprehension, for example, 
the highly exposed children lagged 6 months behind the other group.

 Most of the children are middle-class, says Joseph Jacobson. "I thought that 
once they reached a structured school environment, whatever minor [PCB-induced] 
handicaps they had would be overcome. So I was quite surprised to find that, if 
anything, the effects were stronger and clearer at age 11 than they had been at 
age 4."

 While unexpected, the findings are "plausible," judging by recent data from 
children born to victims of PCB poisoning (SN: 11/11/95, p. 310), observes 
Walter J. Rogan of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences in 
Research Triangle Park, N.C. He notes that even the highest exposures in the 
Michigan children could occur anywhere in the United States. "The notion of a 
background substance that everybody's exposed to doing that kind of detectable 
damage is disturbing."

 See this week's Food for Thought: 


