Science News Online - Past Issues - Feature Article - 8/3/96 August 3, 1996

 Flaws of the Heart Sudden death in athletes is often caused by cardiac defects

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 On Nov. 29, 1995, two-time gold medalist Sergei Grinkov collapsed suddenly 
while training at an ice rink in Lake Placid, N.Y. He died later that day. The 
28-year-old had suffered a fatal heart attack.

 Grinkov's death represents a tragedy for his family, friends, and the many 
fans of his elegant skating style. Yet like the sudden deaths of other famous 
athletes, it has focused attention on a killer that stalks people in the prime 
of life.

 Sudden cardiac death kills an estimated 250,000 people in the United States 
each year, making it a public health problem of enormous magnitude.

 As the summer games play out in Atlanta, several research teams are reporting 
discoveries about this heart hazard. One group recently identified a genetic 
flaw that played a role in Grinkov's untimely death. Another concluded that, in 
most cases, sudden death in athletes can be blamed on the heart--specifically, 
on one of several structural abnormalities.

 Grinkov probably suffered no pain on that fateful morning last November. In 
medical terms, he suddenly went into ventricular fibrillation, a 
life-threatening quivering of the heart. A medical technician at the ice rink 
started cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and Grinkov was rushed to the emergency 
room at the Adirondack Medical Center in Lake Placid.

 By the time Grinkov got to the hospital, his heart had stopped. Physician 
Joshua Schwartzberg and other staff members there nonetheless tried for more 
than an hour to bring him back to life. An autopsy revealed that Grinkov had 
suffered from severely clogged coronary arteries, the vessels that supply the 
heart with blood.

 Although he was an elite athlete, Grinkov had the coronary arteries of a 
70-year-old man with atherosclerosis. His widow and skating partner, Ekaterina 
Gordeeva, told Schwartzberg that her husband had never complained of chest pain 
or any other symptoms of heart disease. The only foreshadowing of the impending 
disaster had been his father's death at age 52 of a sudden heart attack.

 Pascal J. Goldschmidt of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore read an account 
of Grinkov's death in the New York Times. Goldschmidt, Paul F. Bray, also at 
Hopkins, and their colleagues had just described a genetic flaw that heightens 
the risk of early heart attack. He wondered if Grinkov had the trait.

 So Goldschmidt put in a call to the Adirondack Medical Center. He got lucky: 
The pathologist had saved a sample of Grinkov's blood and would ship the frozen 
vial to Baltimore.

 When the vial arrived, the Hopkins team first extracted DNA from white cells 
in the blood sample. Then they searched for a particular version of the 
platelet antigen gene, which codes for a protein known to play a key role in 
the blood-clotting process. The group had reported on a link between a 
variation of this gene and heart attacks in the April 25 New England Journal of 
Medicine.

 The platelet antigen gene comes in two forms-- Pl A1 and Pl A2. The only 
difference between them is a slightly altered sequence of nucleotides, the 
building blocks of DNA. The Hopkins team had fingered Pl A2 as the villain in 
early heart attacks.

 The researchers had studied 71 people with a heart attack or severe symptoms 
of heart disease. They compared those people to 68 people who had no known 
heart problems. Their investigation revealed that the heart patients were twice 
as likely to have inherited at least one Pl A2 gene as the controls.

 Grinkov's blood sample revealed that he, too, had inherited one Pl A2 gene, 
presumably from his father. Goldschmidt, Bray, and Schwartzberg published their 
findings on Grinkov's death in the June 29 Lancet. The team believes that just 
one Pl A2 gene is enough to confer a heart risk.

 Both PlA genes code for protein receptors on the surface of platelets, the 
disk-shaped cells active in the clotting process. Those receptors bind to 
molecules in the blood that form a bridge between platelets, Bray says. The 
resulting mesh of platelets forms the familiar gelatinous blood clot. However, 
Pl A2 codes for a protein that may be overly efficient when it comes to 
clotting, he says.

 The Hopkins researchers think they know what happened to Grinkov on that 
fateful day in November. They speculate that a piece of the fatty debris on 
artery walls broke off and left a hole. Grinkov's Pl A2 swung into action, but 
instead of forming just a small clot to plug the injury, the protein receptor 
overdid it. A massive clot blocked the entire coronary artery and stopped blood 
flow to the heart.

 Although Pl A2 seems to be the proximate cause of Grinkov's collapse, 
researchers wonder whether it also plays a role in the slow process of 
atherosclerosis. Goldschmidt notes that this same protein receptor shows up on 
the endothelial cells lining the interior walls of blood vessels. Something 
about this protein may increase the likelihood that cholesterol and other fats 
will cling to the wall, he says.

 About 20 percent of the U.S. population has the Pl A2 gene, the researchers 
estimate. "It could be a major player in the generation of a heart attack," 
Goldschmidt says. It is not a death sentence, however. "This does not mean that 
being Pl A2--positive guarantees that you will have a heart attack," Bray says.

 Researchers believe, however, that the gene may, in combination with other 
risk factors, put people in greater jeopardy of suffering a heart attack. If 
future research proves this theory, people with a family history of early heart 
disease may be able to get a blood test that looks for the gene variant. If 
they get a positive test, they could take steps to lower their risk.

 An aspirin a day might be such a step. Aspirin is known to inhibit blood 
clotting, so people with a tendency to form clots could take this drug to 
offset their risk, Goldschmidt says. People with a higher-than-average risk 
could also cut down on their intake of fatty foods, a factor known to 
contribute to atherosclerosis.

 Grinkov was only the most recent champion to collapse suddenly and die. Such 
deaths have struck athletes ranging from high school team members to 
professional basketball players. In the largest investigation of sudden death 
in athletes to date, cardiologist Barry J. Maron of the Minneapolis Heart 
Institute Foundation and his colleagues have found that most die from one of 
several heart abnormalities, only some of which have known genetic links.

 Most are young athletes who harbor one of these cardiovascular defects from 
birth, Maron said at a New York press briefing held by the American Medical 
Association. Such defects "usually cause no symptoms prior to the catastrophe," 
he added. Maron and his colleagues detail their findings in the July 17 Journal 
of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

 They collected information on sudden deaths in athletes from 1985 through 
1995. The probe turned up 158 such deaths, 134 of them with a cardiovascular 
origin.

 The athletes ranged in age from 12 to 40. The largest group, 83 of the 134, 
was competing in high school sports. However, the series included 16 athletes 
who had achieved national or international fame in their sport. Sudden death 
felled the greatest number of young athletes in basketball and football. It 
also struck track, soccer, and baseball players and a few in eight other sports.

 The most common cardiovascular disease identified as responsible for sudden 
death was an inherited condition known as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a 
finding in line with previous research. In this disorder, caused by any one of 
several mutated genes, the heart's main pumping chamber, the left ventricle, is 
abnormally thick.

 The researchers were surprised to find that HCM was responsible for 48 percent 
of the sudden deaths in black athletes and just 26 percent of the deaths in 
white athletes. Earlier medical studies of HCM suggested that blacks rarely 
suffer from it. Maron thinks it possible that blacks with this genetic 
condition don't get a correct diagnosis as often as their white counterparts.

 Other causes of sudden cardiac death in this series include birth defects and 
other abnormalities of the coronary arteries; aneurysm, or ballooning of the 
aorta; and myocarditis, a disease that begins with an infection that leads to 
changes in the heart muscle. A small number of athletes--like Grinkov--suffered 
from premature clogging of their coronary arteries.

 At the press briefing, Maron said that in many cases, physical exertion 
appeared to trigger sudden death. The researchers found that 90 percent of the 
athletes collapsed during or immediately after a training session or 
competition.

 How does exertion magnify the risk of a heart attack? That depends on the 
underlying cardiac condition, Maron says.

 For people with HCM, strenuous activity increases the chance that the heart 
will develop arrhythmias, abnormal rhythms that can cause death, Maron points 
out. For athletes with aneurysms, exertion increases the likelihood that the 
weakened artery wall will burst.

 In the JAMA study, only 24 of the 134 athletes had reported symptoms of 
cardiovascular disease, such as chest pain or fainting spells, in the 3 years 
before their fatal episode. Grinkov, who had never complained of chest pain, 
had apparently been having a heart attack for hours before he collapsed, 
Schwartzberg said.

 Routine physical exams often don't turn up a cardiac condition in young 
athletes, that study shows. Of the 134 athletes who died of heart problems, 115 
had received a standard screening. Doctors suspected only 4 of the 115 had 
cardiovascular disease. Just one case received a firm diagnosis of a heart 
condition, the authors note.

 Unfortunately, there's no simple test to detect the variety of cardiovascular 
ills that may put an athlete in jeopardy, Maron says. "Some are virtually 
impossible to detect with a routine exam," he says. He favors standardizing the 
screening process so that more at-risk young people are identified.

 So does Christine E. Seidman, an HCM researcher with the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. Seidman believes 
researchers will someday develop blood tests capable of identifying the genetic 
mutations responsible for HCM and some other disorders that cause sudden death. 
Until then, physicians evaluating youngsters for competitive sports must use 
the tools at hand, including family histories, to find clues to cardiac risk.

 Indeed, a more aggressive approach to screening might be in order for athletes 
with a family history of sudden cardiac death, Maron adds. Such athletes may 
want to consult a cardiologist before signing up for competitive sports. Heart 
specialists can more easily detect subtle symptoms of a heart disorder, he adds.

 A young athlete who does get diagnosed with a cardiac flaw may find the 
prescription tough to take. For someone with HCM, for example, withdrawal from 
sports is the only way to reduce the risk, Maron says. Even that course of 
action is "no guarantee of a normal life expectancy," he adds.

 No one knows how many young athletes harbor a silent defect of the heart. 
Scientists hope that Sergei Grinkov's highly publicized death will leave a 
lasting legacy in the form of research to improve detection and reduce the risk 
of sudden cardiac arrest.


