Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 9/28/96 September 28, 1996

 New multiple sclerosis drug clears hurdle

 By Steve Sternberg

 Multiple sclerosis (MS) begins as a tragic case of mistaken identity.

 In this autoimmune disease, white blood cells, the body's roving guardians 
against infection, view the fatty sheath surrounding nerve fibers as a threat. 
The cells promptly begin to digest bits of the nerves' insulating coating. Like 
frayed wires, the damaged nerves short-circuit, blocking communication between 
brain and muscles.

 Fascinated with such processes, Ruth Arnon, Michael Sela, and Dvora Teitelbaum 
at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, set out 27 years ago 
to create synthetic molecules capable of provoking an immune response. They 
ended up developing an entirely new way of treating MS -- and perhaps other 
autoimmune diseases as well.

 The pivotal step involved making a replica of a protein from the sheath of 
human nerve cells. This protein triggers an MS-like response when injected into 
guinea pigs, and the researchers had hoped that their replica would do the 
same. Instead, they found, it appears to act as a decoy, diverting the immune 
onslaught from nerve tissue.

"It is a new approach to the treatment of autoimmune diseases," Sela asserts. 
Although it will not prevent the disease, he says he thinks of the new 
treatment as "a synthetic 'vaccine' against MS."

 The research achieved a practical milestone on Sept. 19. A Food and Drug 
Administration advisory committee recommended that the agency approve one of 
the group's decoys, copolymer 1, as a treatment for MS. The FDA typically 
follows its advisory committees' advice.

 If approved, copolymer 1 would be the third drug in 3 years okayed for the 
treatment of MS, an incurable disease known for intermittent and progressively 
more severe episodes of pain and paralysis.

 Until recently, all doctors could do to slow the steady slide into paraplegia 
was prescribe steroids. They hoped that the anti-inflammatory drugs would 
hamper the immune system, forcing it to leave the nerves alone. That solution 
rarely worked for long.

 The two other new remedies for MS are Avonex and Betaseron, genetically 
engineered versions of the immune modulator interferon. Both cause unpleasant, 
flulike side effects.

 Copolymer 1, which patients must inject daily, appears to be free of major 
side effects other than a temporary inflammation at the injection site and a 
fleeting tightness in the chest. Like the interferons, copolymer 1 cuts the 
number of MS episodes by about one-third.

"Two well-controlled, double-blind studies indicate that the drug reduces the 
rate of relapses of MS," says Sid Gilman, chairman of the FDA advisory 
committee and a neurologist at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann 
Arbor.

 Made of a combination of four amino acids, copolymer 1 was developed for 
clinical use by Israeli chemical giant Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. The 
company trade-named the new drug Copaxone and designed the larger of the two 
trials that demonstrated its effectiveness.

 This study, carried out at 11 medical centers in the United States, involved 
approximately 250 patients. Half of them received the drug; the other half were 
given a placebo.

 Completed in 1994, the study found that people taking copolymer 1 for 35 
months had 32 percent fewer relapses than those taking the placebo. People in 
the drug treatment group were also more likely to improve or retain the nerve 
function they had when entering the study, whereas those taking the placebo 
tended to get worse, says Teva Vice-President Carole Ben-Maimon, who presented 
the company's case to the FDA committee. An earlier study of just 50 patients 
yielded similar results, she says.

 After the committee's vote, Ben-Maimon expressed delight that the members were 
convinced by the firm's evidence. "We're happy for patients as well as 
ourselves."


