Science News Online - Past Issues - News Feature - 9/7/96 Spetember 7, 1996

 Infants tune up to music's core qualities

 By Bruce Bower

 Babies may not know the difference between Beethoven and Boys II Men, but 
don't underestimate their musical judgment. Infants perceive pairs of musical 
tones just as adults do, finding certain acoustic duos pleasant and others 
jarring, a new study finds.

 People may possess innate brain mechanisms that consistently endow specific 
combinations of musical tones with either a dulcet or a distasteful sound, 
assert psychologists Marcel R. Zentner of the University of Geneva and Jerome 
A. Kagan of Harvard University.

 Certain pairs of musical tones differ in frequency, or number of sound waves 
per second, in such a way as to prove likable, or consonant, to adult ears when 
played together. Disparities between the frequencies of other pairs of tones 
are perceived as harsh, or dissonant.

 At 4 months of age, babies mirror the musical tastes of their elders by 
showing a clear fondness for consonant sounds and an abiding dislike for 
dissonant sounds, according to Zentner and Kagan's study.

"The human infant may possess a biological preparedness that makes consonance 
perceptually more attractive than dissonance," the researchers contend in the 
Sept. 5 Nature.

 Research conducted in the past several years by other scientists indicates 
that the ability to discriminate consonant from dissonant pairs of tones 
emerges by age 6 months.

"But this appears to be the first evidence suggesting that infants actually 
prefer consonance to dissonance," holds psychologist Laurel J. Trainor of 
McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.

 Zentner and Kagan studied 32 babies, all 4 months old, selected from white, 
middle-class families. During testing, each infant reclined in a flexible seat 
placed on a table and listened to music originating from a nearby speaker 
emblazoned with an eye-catching bull's-eye pattern.

 Infants heard 35-second segments adapted from two European folk songs, neither 
of which they had heard at home. Each segment consisted of pairs of notes 
played simultaneously by a music synthesizer.

 The researchers produced a consonant and a dissonant rendition of each tune. 
The versions were identical in tempo, rhythm, and all other respects except the 
frequency differences between the pairs of tones.

 Infants looked substantially longer at the bull's-eye pattern on the speaker, 
made fewer movements, and exhibited less fussiness while hearing the consonant 
melodies than when listening to the dissonant versions of the same tunes, 
Zentner and Kagan contend. This suggests that the babies preferred consonant 
melodies and experienced physiological arousal during the dissonant 
counterparts.

 Moreover, eight infants turned away from the speaker or emitted sounds of 
distress, such as whining, only during the dissonant versions. None of the 
infants reacted in these ways only to consonant renditions.

"These new findings are interesting, but they build on previous work pointing 
to an innate basis for musical perception," says psychologist Carol L. 
Krumhansl of Cornell University.

 For instance, Krumhansl and Peter W. Jusczyk of the State University of New 
York at Buffalo have found that by the age of 4 1/2 months, babies listen 
longer to Mozart minuets that have short pauses inserted between phrases, which 
musicians treat as "natural" segments of the musical flow, than to the same 
minuets with pauses placed in the middle of phrases.

 Other investigations indicate that 6-month-old infants prefer listening to 
musical scales sampled from a variety of cultures rather than to scales 
composed of randomly chosen notes (SN: 7/21/90, p. 46).


