Science News Online - Past Issues - Feature Article - 9/7/96 September 7, 1996

 The Big Question Giant ears await alien broadcasts

 By ERIK SKINDRUD

 The radio telescopes of Pocahontas County hum like giant refrigerators as they 
point their faces above the white pine, red maple, and oak forest of West 
Virginia. With a crop of eight big, dish-shaped antennae, the National Radio 
Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank seems misplaced in this rural setting.

 Here, in 1960, a young radio astronomer named Frank D. Drake used an 85-foot 
parabolic radio antenna to conduct the world's first Search for 
Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence, or SETI. That first project was called 
Ozma--for a princess in a tale by Wizard of Oz author L. Frank Baum--and it 
listened for any alien signals that might be emanating from the vicinity of two 
nearby stars, Epsilon Eridani and Tau Ceti.

 But nothing was heard, and to this day no definite extraterrestrial signals 
have been recorded by the more than 70 radio searches undertaken. Two SETI 
searches have produced tantalizing hints, however, and astronomers are trying 
harder than ever for an unambiguous signal.

 By the time of Drake's search, many scientists had come to believe that 
conditions for life might be common in the universe. Drake's 
calculations--though they were little more than educated guesses--suggested 
that sunlike stars with water-bearing planets might pepper our galaxy. On such 
planets, life might begin as it did on Earth, scientists thought.

 Recent discoveries have confirmed many of Drake's assumptions. Within the past 
year, astronomers discovered several planets that orbit other stars. Scientists 
have found complex organic molecules floating in interstellar space. And NASA 
stunned the world with evidence that primitive life may have existed on Mars 
several billion years ago (SN: 8/10/96, p. 84).

 The Mars bombshell has brought a dose of respect to SETI radio searches for 
alien civilizations, says Drake, who is now president of the SETI Institute in 
Mountain View, Calif., and has listened to two U.S. senators ridicule his 
efforts over the years. Six teams of astronomers are currently pushing ahead 
with the effort, sifting the skies for the "brrring!" of an extremely 
long-distance call.

 The idea that life on distant planets is likely to be signaling us still 
generates controversy among scientists. Harvard zoologist Ernst Mayr, an 
outspoken critic of SETI, argues that its proponents fail to grasp the huge 
evolutionary odds stacked against intelligent life (see box). "We have to deal 
with realities--not pipe dreams," says Mayr, who calls SETI "hopeless" and "a 
waste of time."

 Even the SETI scientists admit their goal is difficult and may take decades to 
achieve. "No one can promise you success in this," says Jill C. Tarter of 
Project Phoenix, a SETI program based in Mountain View, Calif. "We look around 
and do our best."

 S ETI investigators see the possibility of receiving two types of radio 
signals from intelligent aliens. One source of radio waves might be leakage 
from communication technology. Consider the expanding sphere of radio waves 
sweeping outward from Earth. Like ripples sent out by a stone plunked into a 
pond, early commercial radio and television broadcasts and contemporaneous 
military radar waves are now passing the nearest stars.

 Picking up this kind of leakage radiation, which weakens rapidly with 
distance, would probably require aliens to employ a radio telescope larger than 
any in use now on Earth. Similarly, our SETI searches might pick up distant 
broadcasts if we had large enough antennae. With the technology available, 
however, none of the SETI searches to date has had a reasonable chance of 
picking up broadcasts from civilizations around our neighbor stars, they say.

"The leakage is hard [to detect]," says Tarter, "because it requires the kind 
of sensitivity we're just getting down to."

 If distant civilizations were deliberately signaling to Earth, scientists 
believe they'd have a better chance of detecting the message. Drake and his 
SETI colleagues argue that radio would be the obvious medium, as it can travel 
interstellar distances with considerably less interference than other 
wavelengths, such as visible or infrared light. The message could be encoded in 
carrier waves, modulated signals like those of AM or FM transmissions, or in 
pulses that would carry further given the same amount of energy.

 What's more, the extraterrestrials could maximize our chance of picking up the 
signal by transmitting at frequencies around 1420 MHz, where interstellar gas, 
dust, and the Earth's atmosphere cause little interference. This was Drake's 
best guess in 1960, and it remains the underlying assumption of most SETI 
searches today.

 The ongoing Project Phoenix is currently the most sensitive search and the 
only one capable of detecting pulsed signals. The privately funded program 
continued NASA's search (SN: 11/7/92, p. 317) after Congress terminated its 
support in 1993. Phoenix uses some of the largest radio telescopes on Earth and 
points them at more than 1,000 stars within 150 light-years. The program has 
developed special electronic equipment that the scientists carry in a trailer 
to the different telescopes.

 In July, at the 5th International Conference on Bioastronomy in Capri, Italy, 
Tarter reported on the most recently completed phase of Project Phoenix. The 
Southern Hemisphere phase of the search used the 210-foot Australian telescope 
in Parkes, New South Wales, to look at 202 sunlike stars. While it found no 
extraterrestrial signals, Tarter deemed this part of the project a success 
because it accurately detected and eliminated all interfering signals of 
earthly origin by comparing the Parkes telescope's data with that from a 
smaller telescope 230 kilometers away.

 Although the failure to find an extraterrestrial signal is no proof that 
aliens aren't out there, Tarter reported, "it suggests that signals as powerful 
as terrestrial radars may not be common" in our part of the galaxy.

 The Phoenix electronic components are now being hooked up to the 140-foot 
antenna at Green Bank--near the smaller dish used by Ozma. There the Phoenix 
scientists plan to continue scanning likely stars until 1998, when the program 
is scheduled to move on to the giant 1,000-foot dish at Arecibo, Puerto Rico.

 While Phoenix listens to one star at a time, other SETI searches sweep the 
whole sky, looking for powerful but intermittent signals that may drift in 
frequency, or "chirp." These sky surveys are led by Project SERENDIP, a search 
almost as sensitive as Phoenix.

 SERENDIP, which is sponsored by the University of California, Berkeley, has 
gone from 100 channels 20 years ago to its present capacity of 4 million 
channels. According to current plans, the project will soon advance to 168 
million channels when the giant Arecibo antenna returns to service after a $24 
million retrofit and begins using an improved software package called SERENDIP 
IV to scan the sky.

 Still, the kind of searches capable of registering radar, radio, or TV leakage 
are some way off. "We're still just scratching the surface," says SERENDIP 
program manager Dan Werthimer. "The technology's changing very fast; we're just 
getting in the game."

 Harvard University's BETA search at the 26-meter dish in the Massachusetts 
town of Harvard rounds out the big three of SETI searches. While its smaller 
antenna gives less sensitivity than those of Phoenix and SERENDIP, BETA boasts 
an electronic brain that scans more than 2 billion frequency channels every 16 
seconds. It lacks the backup dish that Phoenix employs to screen out 
radio-frequency interference, but its single dish checks three parallel beams 
that can sort out Earth-based noise.

 BETA is a step up from its predecessor, META, which was funded in 1985 by ET 
creator Steven Spielberg. META recorded 37 radio signals that appeared to be of 
extraterrestrial origin but were never repeated. They were reminiscent of the 
strong signal that scientists at Ohio State University in 1977 picked up in the 
constellation Sagittarius. That signal, however, also disappeared before 
scientists could recheck it.

 In the Sept. 20, 1993 Astrophysical Journal, Harvard University physicist Paul 
Horowitz and Cornell University's Carl Sagan noted that most of these promising 
signals originated along the galactic plane--where stars, planets, and possible 
life sites are concentrated.

"We know of no astrophysical processes that could account for the narrow-band 
candidate signals META has recorded," Horowitz and Sagan wrote, "and we have 
been unable to find any correlation of source positions with unusual 
astrophysical objects."

 Was it ET? As Sagan often chides, "Extraordinary claims require extraordinary 
evidence," and extraterrestrial intelligent life is no modest claim. Only a 
signal that persists long enough to allow independent confirmation by other 
radio telescopes would have a chance of convincing the scientific community.

 The SETI researchers remain patient. "Our capability is doubling every year," 
Werthimer says. Still, he thinks "earthlings would be lucky" to winnow the 
golden signal from the chaff anytime soon. Proposals for 21st-century SETI 
projects are already on the table.

 The most ambitious and international of these is the Square Kilometer Array 
Interferometer, SKAI, which would assemble a large observing area from an array 
of smaller dishes. It would allow detection of the kind of leakage that Earth 
broadcasts to space every day.

 But to the investigators, SKAI's not the limit. "The ideal is a telescope the 
size of Arecibo on the dark side of the Moon," Drake says. "It's the only place 
in the solar system that never has Earth [with its radio noise] in its sky."


