Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/21/96 September 21, 1996

 Battling Evolution to Regrow Nerves

 By John Travis

 Humans may have paid a stiff price for their complex brains: the well-known 
inability of the brain and spinal cord to generate new connections between 
nerve cells after an injury.

 To help explain how the mammalian central nervous system (CNS) evolved, 
researchers have theorized that it had to develop special means to protect its 
intricate circuits from inadvertent remodeling by immune cells, especially 
macrophages. As evidence, they point out that the CNS is one of the few sites 
in the body where mammals actively suppress their immune cells.

 A study now suggests that suppression of macrophage activity provides the main 
barrier to nerve cell regeneration in mammals. "Macrophages may be the missing 
link in the process of wound healing in the CNS," Michal Schwartz of the 
Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, and her colleagues conclude 
in the September FASEB Journal.

 In a provocative experiment supporting this idea, Schwartz' group induced 
nerve cell regeneration by artificially stimulating macrophages and 
transplanting them to injured areas of the CNS.

 This surprising result, observed so far only in rats, may one day lead to new 
strategies to treat spinal cord injuries, suggests Schwartz.

 Schwartz's group only recently began to study seriously the role of 
macrophages. They had found that the mammalian CNS makes a molecule that limits 
macrophage recruitment into the injured brain or spinal cord. The same molecule 
seems to prevent activation of macrophages, says Schwartz.

 In the peripheral nervous system of mammals, which can regenerate after 
injury, activated macrophages are vital to healing. They rush to the wound and, 
among other duties, clear away debris, including dead cells and myelin, the 
fatty insulation around nerve cells. Previous studies had shown that myelin 
contains molecules that thwart nerve cell regeneration. Because the CNS has a 
macrophage-inhibiting molecule, the myelin cleanup process doesn't proceed 
efficiently there, and nerve cell regeneration stalls, asserts Schwartz.

 To overcome that obstacle, her group exposed rat macrophages to peripheral 
nerve tissue excised from a rat. They then placed those activated immune cells 
on the severed optic nerve of the same rat.

 After the macrophage transplant, the researchers report, new nerve extensions 
started to grow across the lesion. Macrophages exposed to CNS tissue or to 
nothing at all stimulated little or no regeneration.

 Schwartz envisions two potential treatment strategies emerging from her 
research. As in the current study, investigators could harvest macrophages, 
artificially activate them, and transplant them into damaged spinal cords or 
other injured CNS sites. Alternatively, researchers might use antibodies or 
other compounds to block the macrophage-inhibiting actions of the CNS.

 The work of Schwartz's group, and that of a few other research teams, offers a 
startling new perspective on the role of macrophages in the brain and spinal 
cord. Macrophages in the CNS have largely been considered a hazard, since they 
can also kill existing brain cells by releasing toxic substances.

"Most of the time when you encounter activated macrophages in the CNS, they're 
contributing to local inflammation, dysfunction, and disease," notes William 
Hickey of Dartmouth Medical School in Lebanon, N.H.

 Whether CNS macrophages are good or evil may ultimately depend upon how they 
are activated and how long they persist, says Schwartz.

 Indeed, Ira B. Black of the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Piscataway, 
N.J., and his coworkers have shown that activated CNS macrophages can make 
several compounds that promote nerve cell growth and survival.

"There is a story emerging here. It may hold the key to a lot of different 
diseases," says Black.


