Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 10/4/97

 October 11, 1997 

 Sampling and the Census

 Improving the accuracy of the decennial count

 By IVARS PETERSON

 The actual enumeration shall be made within three years after the first 
meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term 
of ten years, in such manner as they shall by law direct.

-- Article I, section 2, Constitution of the United States of America

 It sounds so simple. Just count everyone, dwelling by dwelling, across the 
nation and add up the numbers to obtain the total population.

 Ever since the first census, in 1790, however, those charged with performing 
the decennial enumeration have faced a host of difficulties in accounting for 
every individual in the country -- and they have inevitably fallen short. In 
George Washington's time, census takers were likely to miss settlers in remote 
areas, itinerant laborers, and other elusive residents. In some cases, they 
simply made up the numbers.

 Nowadays, the U.S. Postal Service delivers census questionnaires. Many people 
fail to reply to them, perhaps because they were away from home, because the 
form went to the wrong address, or because they simply refuse to provide such 
information to the government. Follow-up door-to-door enumeration improves the 
count, but a significant fraction of the population still escapes the tally.

 In 1990, the Bureau of the Census recorded 248,709,873 people. It estimates 
that more than 8 million were not counted, most of them children, people from 
racial and ethnic minorities, and poor people in rural and urban areas. At the 
same time, more than 4 million people were counted twice or incorrectly 
included in the census.

 Because the areas where undercounts and overcounts occurred don't necessarily 
overlap, the accumulated, block-by-block error in the 1990 census could have 
been as high as 10 percent, says statistician Stephen E. Fienberg of Carnegie 
Mellon University in Pittsburgh.

 Such inaccuracy does make a difference. Census data are used not only to 
reapportion seats in the House of Representatives but also to allocate funds 
for a variety of federal programs. Local governments often rely on census data 
to determine the need for new schools, hospitals, and other facilities.

 The statistics covering small areas such as counties and towns are 
particularly useful. "Accuracy at that level is very important," says Robert M. 
Bell, senior statistician at the RAND Corp. in Santa Monica, Calif.

 Last year, the Census Bureau officially announced its plan for the tally in 
the year 2000, declaring that its program had the "twin goals of reducing costs 
and increasing accuracy." Indeed, the new plan represents a complete redesign 
of the census, with an emphasis on collecting more accurate data on fewer 
people rather than spending time and money in an ultimately futile effort to 
get information from everyone.

 A key element of that plan is a significant increase in the use of statistical 
sampling. Instead of trying to visit every address from which there was no 
reply, enumerators would follow up only a carefully chosen sample of those 
addresses. The bureau would also conduct a separate nationwide survey of 
750,000 dwellings to help measure the quality of the census data and estimate 
the extent of the undercount.

 Despite an overwhelming consensus among statisticians favoring the use of 
sampling to improve the accuracy of the census, the bureau's proposal has 
proved highly controversial in Congress. Exercising their right to review 
census plans, members of the House of Representatives have voiced a variety of 
concerns. Last week, they voted to prohibit the substitution of sampling for 
direct enumeration until the Supreme Court rules on the matter.

"The dilemma is that [enumeration], like any other human process, is flawed," 
says historian Margo Anderson of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. "There 
have always been controversies over the quality and accuracy of the count, and 
they flare up in the context of complex political issues."

 The history of census methods has been one of continuous change. The 1790 
census was taken by federal marshals, who were directed to visit every dwelling 
and count the people living there. As the population grew, professional 
enumerators gradually replaced the marshals.

 Issues about how to conduct the census arose early on, and the American 
Statistical Association, now the major organization in the statistical 
profession, was founded in 1839 to deal with questions related to census 
taking. A few decades later, faced with the enormous task of tallying by hand 
the data collected in the 1880 census, bureau employees invented the punch card 
machine to ease the tabulation of results.

 In the 1930s, the federal government greatly expanded its role in managing the 
nation's economy, increasing its appetite for statistics of all sorts. In its 
first major use of sampling, the Census Bureau in 1940 introduced the "short 
form" set of questions for the majority of the population. Only a portion of 
the population received the "long form" questionnaire, from which nationwide 
trends could be extrapolated.

 Census directors and others have always known that the census fails to count 
everybody. The first clear evidence that minority groups were 
disproportionately undercounted surfaced in 1940, when 3 percent more draft-age 
men, including 13 percent more black men, than the census had tallied showed up 
for the draft pool. As one response to the discrepancy, the bureau began 
checking its data against such records as birth and death certificates.

 The Voting Rights Act of 1965 and a number of subsequent court decisions, 
along with the use of census data to allocate billions of dollars of federal 
aid annually to state and local governments, increased the political pressure 
to improve the accuracy of the count.

 In recent decades, census expenses have increased tremendously. Even 
accounting for inflation and population growth, the 1990 census cost twice as 
much as the 1970 census, which was the first to use forms sent by mail. At the 
same time, there were various signs that more people were missed in 1990 than 
in 1980, and the procedures used by the Census Bureau for collecting the 1990 
data were challenged in court.

 Congress concluded that the 1990 census had cost too much and counted too few 
people, and it demanded improvement.

"The irony is that, despite the fact that the undercount is much smaller than 
it used to be [decades ago], politically it makes a much bigger difference now 
than it ever did before," says sociologist Harvey M. Choldin of the University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

 Since 1990, the Census Bureau has conducted an extensive program of research, 
testing, and evaluation to develop methods for delivering census data of higher 
quality at lower cost. In part, the new plan was designed in response to expert 
advice from the National Research Council's Committee on National Statistics, 
which issued reports in 1994 and 1995.

"It is fruitless to continue trying to count every last person with traditional 
census methods of physical enumeration," the NRC panel concluded. "Simply 
providing additional funds to enable the Census Bureau to carry out the 2000 
census using traditional methods, as it has in previous censuses, will not lead 
to improved coverage or data quality."

 The panel recommended that the bureau cut back on its traditional practice of 
trying to contact every last individual and instead rely more heavily on 
statistical estimates of the number and characteristics of those not directly 
enumerated.

 The inclusion of sampling would reduce the workload in the field, making 
possible the use of a smaller, better-trained, more highly qualified staff of 
enumerators. It would also allow more timely completion of the follow-up phase, 
increasing data quality because respondents would give information to 
enumerators closer to Census Day. Presumably, there would be fewer errors 
because of faulty recall and less use of information obtained from indirect 
sources to fill in gaps during the final stages of data collection.

 Several subsequent NRC committees and other groups have reaffirmed the panel's 
initial conclusion that the use of sampling techniques is "critical to the 
success of the year 2000 census."

 Actually, sampling isn't new to the Census Bureau. It has sampled a small 
portion of the population, asking such questions as the number of rooms in a 
person's residence. It has also used sampling to monitor census interviewers, 
estimate the number of vacant dwellings, adjust results for incomplete data, 
and evaluate the thoroughness of its coverage.

 Using sampling to follow up on people who fail to respond to the mailed 
questionnaire requires the development of new techniques to provide accurate 
data down to the level of a county, census tract, or even block. "There are all 
kinds of interesting questions about how best to do it," says David A. Binder 
of Statistics Canada in Ottawa.

 Researchers need to decide the size of the sampling unit, whether to look at a 
whole block or just a selection of households in a block, when to start 
sampling, and many other issues. Experience from an extensive test in 1995 
helped the bureau refine its procedures.

"Part of the problem is that no matter what you do, there are still going to be 
errors in the results," Binder says. The idea, then, is to come up with methods 
that minimize those errors.

 Aided by advisory committees, the Census Bureau has devised a plan that 
includes developing a complete, accurate list of mailing addresses, designing 
questionnaires that are easier to understand and fill out, and using sampling 
to follow up on people who don't respond.

 Follow-up is a crucial component of the census. In 1990, the mail response 
rate was only 65 percent, and trends suggest that the return rate could fall 
even lower in 2000. At present, the bureau's goal is to collect data from at 
least 90 percent of the housing units in each census tract. A tract typically 
encompasses about 1,700 dwellings and 4,000 people, for a total of about 60,000 
census tracts across the country.

 Instead of visiting every address from which no response was received by mail 
or telephone, enumerators would go to a fraction of those dwellings, 
substantially reducing the cost of the follow-up phase while presumably 
improving the quality of the data. The bureau plans to use such techniques as 
computer-based random selection to ensure that the sample is distributed evenly 
among the nonresponding addresses.

 Moreover, to obtain information from 90 percent of the housing units in each 
census tract, the plan calls for sampling a higher share of units in those 
tracts that have lower mail-in rates. For example, if the initial response rate 
were 30 percent, six out of every seven nonresponding addresses would be in the 
sample. If the response rate were 80 percent, just one in two such addresses 
would be visited.

 The bureau's program addresses the undercount issue with an extensive 
post-enumeration survey, which means, in effect, making a second count using a 
sample of the entire population.

 A dress rehearsal -- focused on Sacramento, Calif.; Columbia, S.C., and 11 
surrounding counties; and the Menominee Reservation in Wisconsin -- scheduled 
for early 1998 will serve as a thorough test of the bureau's new procedures.

 Many members of Congress have questioned the Census Bureau's approach, 
expressing concern and, in some cases, dismay about the use of sampling methods 
in the initial enumeration phase of the census. Several critics have gone so 
far as to say they are willing to write a "blank check" to cover the additional 
cost of a traditional census plan to avoid the use of sampling.

 According to Census Bureau Director Martha F. Riche, however, such an approach 
would add at least $675 million to the $4 billion expenditure already slated 
for the 2000 census -- without guaranteeing an increase in accuracy.

 A few members of Congress have also voiced fears that the sampling process 
could be subverted or manipulated in some way to bias results. Statisticians 
argue that the precisely known, mathematical properties of scientific sampling 
would actually diminish the opportunity for political manipulation. In a 
sampling approach, attempts at manipulation would be more readily detectable 
because doctored data would no longer conform to expected statistical patterns.

 A joint House-Senate conference committee will next debate whether to prohibit 
the Census Bureau from using sampling for nonresponse follow-up. Most of the 
opposition to sampling comes from Republican members, some of whom fear that it 
could lead to the loss of their seats in the House.

"There is a grave concern that if [congressional] restrictions curtail certain 
census operations, the count in 2000 will be much worse than it was in 1990," 
Bell says.

"One should never forget that the census is about the apportionment of 
political power and resources -- 'moving power and money' -- among the various 
population constituencies that make up American society," Anderson and Fienberg 
write in the March-April Society. "The framers of the Constitution knew as much 
when they instituted it two centuries ago. It behooves us to remember their 
legacy to us today."

 How the current political controversy plays itself out may very well be 
reflected in what happens on Census Day, April 1, 2000.


