Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/21/96 September 21, 1996

 Ganymede may have an aurora of its own

 By Ron Cowen

 Auroras aren't just for planets anymore.

 Typically generated when a magnetic field sends charged particles crashing 
into a planet's atmosphere, the shimmering lights of an aurora grace the north 
and south polar skies of Earth, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.

 It now seems that Jupiter's moon Ganymede joins the ranks of the big guys. 
Ultraviolet emissions recorded by the Hubble Space Telescope suggest that this 
satellite has its own polar light show.

 If the finding is confirmed, Ganymede would be the first moon known to possess 
an aurora.

 Hubble has tracked Jupiter and its moons for over a year, first as a scout for 
the Galileo spacecraft, then as an occasional collaborator during the craft's 
2-year Jovian tour, which began last December. In June, just before Galileo's 
first rendezvous with Ganymede, Hubble's Goddard high-resolution spectrograph 
measured ultraviolet light emitted by the moon. The spectra revealed that 
Ganymede, like the Jovian moon Europa, has a thin atmosphere rich in oxygen.

 Ganymede's spectra show two distinct peaks caused by oxygen, indicating that 
such emissions do not arise uniformly throughout the moon's atmosphere. Judging 
from the orientation of Ganymede as it passed across the aperture of the 
spectrograph, Doyle T. Hall of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and his 
colleagues find that the peaks come from Ganymede's north and south poles.

 That pattern is just what an aurora would produce, says study collaborator 
Melissa McGrath of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. She 
reported the details last week at a workshop on the Goddard spectrograph at 
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md.

 The findings are all the more intriguing, notes Hall, because during its June 
rendezvous, Galileo found evidence that Ganymede has its own magnetic field and 
charged particles nearby--prerequisites for generating an aurora (SN: 7/20/96, 
p. 37). A Sept. 6 flyby has now confirmed the magnetic field, says Margaret G. 
Kivelson of the University of California, Los Angeles.

 Ganymede lies within the vast region dominated by Jupiter's huge magnetic 
field. Jupiter may supply the charged particles needed to create Ganymede's 
aurora, says John T. Clarke of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, much as 
the sun's wind supplies the charged particles that generate Earth's auroras.

 Astronauts are scheduled to replace Hubble's spectrographs next February with 
a device that can simultaneously record images and spectra. If Ganymede has an 
aurora, this device should detect it directly, McGrath says.


