Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 10/18/97

 October 18, 1997 

 Ancient Ape Shuffles to Prominence

by B. Bower

 Scientists have long viewed an upright, two-legged stride as a trait unique to 
hominids, the approximately 6-million-year-old human evolutionary family. 
However, it's time to give that assumption its walking papers, contend two 
anthropologists.

 According to their new fossil analysis, a 9-million- to 7-million-year-old 
apelike animal also spent much of its time standing upright, methodically 
shuffling short distances to collect fruit and other edible goodies on what was 
once a Mediterranean island.

 This achievement represents a small step for hominids, but it's a giant leap 
for apekind. Until now, it appeared that the fossil apes that preceded hominids 
could only climb, swing through trees, and walk on all fours.

 Further study of the ancient Mediterranean creature, known as Oreopithecus 
bambolii, should help to clarify how evolutionary pressures led to an upright 
stance, say Meike Kohler and Salvador Moya-Sola, both of the M. Crusafont 
Paleontological Institute in Sabadell, Spain.

"This a major contribution," remarks anthropologist David Pilbeam of Harvard 
University. "It convincingly shows that [an upright stance] did not evolve only 
in hominids."

 Oreopithecus fossils have been excavated for more than a century in parts of 
central Italy. The ancient ape, along with many other mammals, inhabited this 
area when it was an island in the Mediterranean Sea.

 About 40 years ago, a few researchers suggested that Oreopithecus possessed 
skeletal features consistent with upright walking. Their unorthodox view was 
generally rejected for lack of sufficient anatomical evidence.

 Over the past 2 years, Kohler and Moya-Sola have studied previously 
undescribed Oreopithecus specimens held at the Natural History Museum in Basel, 
Switzerland. The partial fossils include sections of the lower back, pelvis, 
leg, and foot. Overall, the creature's lower body falls in between that of apes 
and australopithecines, an early group of hominid species, the scientists 
report in the Oct. 14 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 Like hominids, Oreopithecus possessed a lower back that arched forward and a 
vertically aligned knee joint, two features crucial to upright walking, the 
Spanish investigators contend. Parts of the ancient ape's pelvis resemble 
corresponding areas of Australopithecus afarensis, the hominid species that 
includes the partial skeleton of the specimen known as Lucy, they add.

 However, Oreopithecus displays a foot like that of no other primate. Its big 
toe sticks out at about 90o from the remaining toes, all of which are shorter 
and straighter than toes of living apes. The foot provided a firm base for an 
upright stance, although its birdlike, tripod design probably restricted the 
animal to a short, shuffling stride.

 Life on an island inhabited by no predators and containing abundant foraging 
opportunities apparently fostered the evolution of Oreopithecus' unique style 
of walking, the researchers theorize.

 Further study of Oreopithecus may help researchers sort out influences on the 
evolution of upright walking in hominids, Pilbeam notes.


