Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 10/18/97

 October 18, 1997 

 More vitamin C means fewer cataracts

by J. Raloff

 Women who took vitamin C supplements for at least 10 years proved only 23 
percent as likely to develop cataracts as women who received the vitamin only 
in their diet, a new study finds.

 Allen Taylor of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research 
Center on Aging at Tufts University in Boston has been probing the relationship 
between cataracts and antioxidant vitamins, such as vitamin C, for more than a 
decade. Initially working with eye tissue in the laboratory, he and his 
colleagues have shown that vitamin C can slow the chemical reactions that make 
certain lens proteins clump together, causing cataracts. The group then 
demonstrated that giving animals the vitamin retarded cataract development.

 Now, in the October American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, the scientists 
describe evidence that the human eye derives similar benefits from vitamin C.

 The new study, headed by USDA epidemiologist Paul F. Jacques, recruited local 
women from the Nurses' Health Study. This Harvard University project has been 
charting diet and disease in more than 120,000 women since 1972.

 The researchers identified some 56- to 71-year-olds who in the early 1980s had 
taken vitamin C supplements and others who had not. Of the women, 165 
supplement users took eye tests, as did 136 women with no added vitamin C.

 Though none of the women had been diagnosed with cataracts, 188 showed at 
least early signs of the disease. Sixty percent of these early cataracts 
appeared in women who had never taken supplements; moreover, the risk of 
cataracts decreased as the duration of supplementation increased. The mean 
dietary intake of vitamin C for women not taking supplements was 130 milligrams 
per day -- about twice the recommended amount but less than one-third the 
average of women taking supplements.

 A few other studies have found signs that antioxidant supplements inhibit 
cataract formation, Jacques notes, but they suffered from potential bias 
because the women knew whether they had cataracts before answering questions 
about diet. Previous studies also tended to collect dietary data just once, 
rather than repeatedly over a decade.

 The new study suggests that the protective effect of long-term vitamin C 
supplements "could be quite strong," notes Julie A. Mares-Perlman of the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison Medical School in an accompanying editorial. 
However, she adds, with only about 25 women in the long-term supplement group, 
there were too few to establish the magnitude of benefits.

 A larger, planned follow-up of randomly selected participants in the nurses' 
study should resolve this issue, Jacques says, as well as whether other 
antioxidants -- such as vitamin E and carotenoids -- offer similar protection.


