Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 10/18/97

 October 18, 1997 

 Diet Drug Debacle

 How two federally approved weight-loss drugs crashed

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 It might have taken years for the medical establishment to recognize the heart 
damage caused by two diet drugs -- if it hadn't been for the astute 
observations of a cardiac sonographer in Fargo, N.D.

 In December 1994, Pam Ruff of MeritCare Medical Center noted two unusual cases 
of heart disease that had shown up on echocardiograms, or pictures of heart 
structures. In each case, a relatively young woman had leaky heart valves, a 
rare disorder in people under age 50.

 From the medical charts, Ruff realized that the women had something else in 
common: Both had taken a popular combination of appetite suppressants known as 
the fen-phen regimen. Ruff asked MeritCare cardiologists about a possible link 
between the medication and valvular heart disease. They dismissed the 
connection as chance. They noted, as did Ruff, that there had been no previous 
reports of heart valve trouble with the diet drugs.

 Subsequently, more young women with heart valve disease were referred to the 
echocardiography lab where Ruff worked. "We continued to see patients come 
through that had been on this combination of diet drugs," she says. "These 
patients had valves that were remarkably similar to the ones we'd [already] 
seen."

 Ruff created a database on the cases. During the next 2 years, she collected 
20 files. All were women, most of them in their thirties and forties, who had 
been taking fen-phen. None had a history of rheumatic fever, an infection that 
can damage the heart valves.

 Finally, MeritCare cardiologist Jack L. Crary became convinced that Ruff's 
suspicion should be investigated. He had begun treating a woman who was on the 
fen-phen regimen. He knew that she had been examined by other doctors, none of 
whom had noted a heart murmur. In the midst of the diet, she developed a heart 
murmur that everyone could hear. By the time Crary saw her, she had developed 
signs of heart failure.

"I became quite concerned as I was sitting there talking to her," Crary says 
now. He realized that if the connection between the drugs and valvular heart 
disease proved real, it could affect millions of people worldwide. "I went back 
and reviewed the cases that Pam had collected," he told Science News. "It was 
the same story over and over."

 The saga of fenfluramine (Pondimin) and dexfenfluramine (Redux) is now well 
known. On Sept. 15, 1997, the Food and Drug Administration urged the makers of 
these drugs to pull them off the market. Both companies agreed to do so. 
Officials of FDA took this unusual step after reviewing data showing that many 
people on the drugs had developed leaky heart valves.

"The data we have obtained indicate that fenfluramine, and the chemically 
closely related dexfenfluramine, present an unacceptable risk at this time to 
patients who take them," said FDA's Michael A. Friedman.

 FDA has now received three reports linking fen-phen to birth defects, 
including heart damage. There's no definitive data on whether the drugs can 
harm a fetus, however. The agency is now investigating these cases, says FDA's 
Lawrence Bachorik.

 People on the fen-phen regimen took either fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine in 
combination with phentermine, another drug used to combat obesity. The FDA 
action does not affect phentermine, which has not been associated with valvular 
heart disease and remains on the market.

 All three drugs had FDA's blessing as stand-alone treatments for obesity, but 
the agency had never approved the combination. The fen-phen regimen is an 
example of what is known as off-label use, in which doctors can legally 
prescribe approved drugs for new uses. The fen-phen mix, for example, has not 
been subjected to FDA safety testing.

 Off-label use of fenfluramine and phentermine soared after 1992 reports 
suggested that the combo helps people lose significant amounts of weight. Many 
diet clinics hired doctors who were willing to prescribe the fen-phen treatment 
not just for obese people, but for the mildly overweight as well.

 In 1996, U.S. prescriptions for the fenfluramine-phentermine combination 
exceeded 18 million. In that same year, FDA approved dexfenfluramine, and 
doctors rushed to combine it with phentermine.

 Individual health care providers observing individual patients triggered the 
events that eventually led to the drugs' being yanked off the market. In Fargo, 
Crary reviewed the cases collected by Ruff, then called researchers at the Mayo 
Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

 Mayo cardiologist Heidi M. Connolly remembered a 41-year-old woman who had 
been operated on for a severely leaking heart valve. The woman also had been 
taking fen-phen. Her surgeon had noted that her valves appeared glistening 
white, a telltale sign of injury by a migraine medication known as ergotamine. 
Yet the patient had never taken that drug.

 Ergotamine is similar to the brain chemical called serotonin. The Mayo 
researchers knew that fenfluramine and phentermine alter the way the body 
handles serotonin, and they wondered whether this could be the mechanism by 
which the diet drugs harmed the heart.

 Connolly, Crary, and their colleagues compiled 24 cases of women who had taken 
fenfluramine in combination with phentermine. Most were in their thirties and 
forties and had symptoms of heart valve disease, including shortness of breath, 
fatigue, and a heart murmur.

 Their echocardiograms showed they had leaky valves. Normally, heart valves 
allow blood to go in only one direction, but when damaged, they let some of the 
blood slosh backward into the heart. That backward flow forces the heart to 
work harder, Connolly notes. In severe cases, leaky heart valves can overwork 
the heart to the point of congestive heart failure, a chronic condition in 
which the heart fails to pump effectively.

 The researchers did not measure serotonin concentrations in the blood, 
Connolly says. Under the microscope, however, valve tissue from these patients 
looked virtually identical to valve tissue damaged by ergotamine poisoning or a 
rare cancer in which high concentrations of serotonin are thought to injure 
heart valves.

 The article detailing the findings in these 24 cases was published in the Aug. 
28 New England Journal of Medicine. Because the results would affect the health 
of many people, the journal allowed the researchers to announce their results 
on July 8.

 A cardiologist in Providence, R.I., heard a news report linking fenfluramine 
and phentermine to heart valve damage and made the connection to 
dexfenfluramine. Lauralyn B. Cannistra of the Brown University School of 
Medicine had seen a 32-year-old-woman with multiple damage to her heart valves. 
This woman had been taking dexfenfluramine to shed weight.

"I had a strong suspicion that it was related to the drug," Cannistra said. She 
contacted the New England Journal of Medicine, which published her case report 
linking dexfenfluramine and heart disease as a letter to the editor in the same 
issue as the fenfluramine report.

 That issue also contained a chilling report strengthening the link between 
pulmonary hypertension and the appetite suppressants (SN: 8/31/96, p. 134). It 
described a 29-year-old woman who died of this lung disease 8 months after 
taking fen-phen for just 23 days.

 In July, FDA sent a letter to the nation's physicians asking them to report 
any suspicious cases of heart valve disease in people taking diet drugs. As of 
Aug. 29, the agency had accumulated 101 reports, including the 24 initial ones, 
of people who have taken fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine, usually in 
combination with phentermine, and have experienced symptoms of valvular heart 
disease.

 Moreover, FDA requested information from echocardiograms of people who had 
taken these diet drugs but hadn't suffered any symptoms of heart trouble. Of 
the 291 cases collected, 30 percent had abnormal echocardiograms, says Janet 
Woodcock of FDA. If such abnormalities get worse, people could be faced with 
congestive heart failure.

 The agency recommends that diet drug users stop taking fenfluramine and 
dexfenfluramine immediately and consult their doctor about whether to get an 
echocardiogram.

 Doctors have no definitive advice, however. The FDA didn't check the 291 
asymptomatic people for heart murmurs. Thus a doctor examining such a person 
has no way of knowing whether he or she has heart damage. Should asymptomatic 
patients be sent for an echocardiogram, which costs several thousand dollars? 
Or should they wait and see whether symptoms develop?

 For diet drug users who have already developed symptoms of valvular heart 
disease, the outlook is also riddled with uncertainty. Doctors don't know 
whether their valve disease will improve or worsen. Crary notes that he has 
successfully used medication to improve the heart's pumping power in some 
fen-phen patients who have serious valve disease. Some people, however, may 
need surgery to repair or replace a leaking heart valve, Connolly says.

 Besides raising agonizing issues for individual patients, the fen-phen story 
highlights a serious public health danger, according to the Inter-University 
Committee for Drug Safety, a group of doctors, pharmacists, and other experts 
on drugs. Although FDA runs a MedWatch system that looks for complications 
caused by approved drugs, the committee contends that the system is fatally 
flawed.

"We are very concerned that this country does not have adequate monitoring and 
supervision of drugs after marketing," Brian L. Strom, an epidemiologist at the 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia, told Science 
News.

 MedWatch relies on physicians to notice and report unusual drug reactions. 
Ruff's experience, however, illustrates the reluctance of physicians to be the 
first to call attention to a complication.

 Moreover, patients and physicians alike need to take a more skeptical attitude 
toward the drug approval process, asserts committee member Raymond Woosley, a 
pharmacologist at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington, D.C.

 Everyone assumes that FDA "would never approve a drug that could cause lung or 
heart disease," Woosley says, but that's what happened in this case, he notes.

 The committee is calling for an independent body of scientists that would 
conduct postmarketing surveillance of adverse reactions to drugs. The drug 
companies can't be expected to act completely in the public's interest, Strom 
says. "Even FDA has a vested interest in looking to justify their original 
decision to approve a drug," he adds.

 For scientists, the fen-phen episode has left some troubling research 
questions dangling. Because patients hadn't been given echocardiograms before 
drug treatment, scientists cannot prove beyond any doubt that the drugs damaged 
the heart valves.

 Millions of people took these drugs, Strom says. If the link is real, "then we 
have a major disaster."


