Science News Online (10/11/97): Water link to frog deformities strengthened

 October 11, 1997 

 Water link to frog deformities strengthened

by C. Mlot

 In 1995, middle school students on a visit to a Minnesota wetland were 
startled to find frogs missing limbs or sprouting three and four hind legs. 
Significant numbers of deformed frogs soon turned up at other sites in the 
Midwest, as well as in the northeastern, southern, and western United States 
and in Canada. 

 Since then, numerous explanations for the deformities have sprouted, including 
parasites, pesticides, and ultraviolet radiation from ozone loss. Federal and 
Minnesota state researchers last week announced results from continuing studies 
that point back to the students' initial suspicion: Something in the water can 
induce deformities.

"We believe that we have shown there is something operating or active in the 
water," says Mark Gernes of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency in St. Paul. 
The next step is "to try in essence to pull that water apart."

 Results of chemical analyses of the water samples are expected within 2 
months. Researchers are looking for specific pesticides, metals, and 
chlorinated contaminants, while also considering all the chemicals present.

 Public interest and health concerns prompted the announcement of the early 
results, which have not yet been published or released in full. In what 
officials called a precautionary measure, the agency began providing bottled 
water to Minnesota residents who live near the sites.

 Water from several wetland sites had a pronounced effect in laboratory tests, 
says Gernes. Water samples were sent to toxicologists at the National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) in Research Triangle Park, N.C., who 
oversaw laboratory tests using African clawed frog (Xenopus) embryos. 
Researchers grew the embryos in different concentrations of the water samples 
for 96 hours, then recorded the numbers that died or developed abnormally.

 Undiluted pond water from two of the Minnesota sites caused abnormalities in 
100 percent of the embryos, James Burkhart of NIEHS told Science News. Pond 
sediments, groundwater, and tap water from nearby private wells also affected 
the embryos' development.

 Water from one site without deformed frogs did not harm the embryos. When 
water from another of the wetlands considered to be unaffected resulted in some 
abnormal embryos, researchers returned to the site and found deformities in 
about 7 percent of the frogs collected there.

"There's complete concordance with an increased incidence of abnormal frogs and 
the [frog embryo] assays," says Burkhart. 

 It's common to find a small number of malformed frogs at any site -- about 1 
percent -- the researchers say. The worrisome wetland sites have had much 
larger numbers, 10 percent or more. Such sites have been reported in 54 of 
Minnesota's 87 counties. In some hot spots, among species such as the mink 
frog, which spends 2 years developing in water, 75 percent of the frogs are 
deformed, says Gernes. 

 The widespread emergence of high numbers of deformed frogs (SN: 7/12/97, p. 
31) is probably contributing to the general decline of some frog populations, 
says David M. Gardiner of the University of California, Irvine. He held a 
workshop last week to brief developmental biologists about the phenomenon. 

 Because frogs live both in water and on land, they are generally considered to 
be accurate indicators of environmental health. The embryos' direct exposure to 
water during development makes them particularly vulnerable to defect-causing 
agents, says Gardiner. Although human embryos are protected from many 
environmental influences as they develop, the hormonal pathways controlling 
limb development in frogs and people can be affected by the same agents, he 
says.

"If it does it to frogs, it'll do it to people. There's no question about that."

 Although water is now the main focus of research, there are still many 
questions about other environmental influences on frogs in the wild. "To say 
that any one thing is the cause of all we've seen isn't viable," says Burkhart.

 For more information from the North American Reporting Center for Amphibian 
Malformations, visit .

 Raloff, J. 1997. Seen any deformed frogs? Science News 152(July 12):31.


