Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 10/25/97

 October 25, 1997 

 Immersion for analyzing complex software

by I. Peterson 

 Scanning the millions of lines of a computer program's instructions in order 
to find inconsistencies and other problems is a time-consuming, error-prone 
task -- even when the process is automated.

 Researchers are now developing a system that generates a three-dimensional 
representation of a computer program, letting programmers visualize, experiment 
with, and modify the software. In effect, the technique immerses a person in 
the software, says Thomas P. Caudell of the University of New Mexico in 
Albuquerque."It's like being inside a brain."

 At a high-integrity software conference last week in Albuquerque, Caudell 
described a prototype virtual reality system, running on a supercomputer, for 
analyzing complex computer systems.

 As a first step, he and his coworkers have used their approach to track what 
happens within a complicated computer program -- an artificial neural network 
-- that drives a simple robot resembling a roller skate. Called Encephalon, the 
neural network incorporates modules for processing sensor data, controlling the 
robot's actions, and performing other functions.

 In the virtual reality environment, each software component is represented by 
a three-dimensional block that flashes colors or makes sounds as the component 
functions. Paths along which data pass appear as links between blocks. Wearing 
special goggles, the researcher sees the robot sensor data as if they were 
projected on the walls of a computer-generated virtual room. The linked blocks 
float in the middle.

 Navigating around the room, the user can modify the software, set or adjust 
system parameters, monitor information flow, visualize intermediate 
computational results, view the raw input and output data, evaluate the 
system's overall performance, and observe the resulting behavior of the robot. 
The team's current focus on artificial neural networks is only one possible 
application, Caudell says. Similar schemes could be used for simulating 
industrial process control, visualizing enormous databases to facilitate 
pattern recognition, and improving engineering and software design.

"A large proportion of all computer problems is attributable to the initial, 
informal, subjective phase of conceptualizing how a system should or should not 
behave," says Larry J. Dalton of Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque. 
Virtual reality potentially offers a way of exploring such behavior.

 At present, however, many research questions remain unanswered, particularly 
the issue of how best to represent abstract entities in a three-dimensional 
environment. "We're trying to extend natural human capabilities of seeing 
patterns and organizing knowledge," Caudell says, "but we need to understand 
more about how people think and how the brain works."


