Science News Online (10/25/97): Population Diversity Crowds the Ark

 October 25, 1997 

 Population Diversity Crowds the Ark

by C. Mlot

 Next week, just before Halloween, scientists and policy makers are meeting at 
the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., to come to grips with a 
different sort of scare: the loss of global biodiversity. 

 At the time of the first landmark meeting on the subject more than a decade 
ago (SN: 9/27/86, p. 202), "biodiversity" was a fresh entry in the dictionary, 
and to many people it stood for endangered species. Two reports in the Oct. 24 
Science illustrate how thinking about biodiversity has changed since then -- 
and how complex the concept and conservation of biodiversity have become.

 Any species, endangered or otherwise, is made up of genetically or 
geographically distinct populations. Many studies have focused on the 
importance of populations within a species -- the Sumatran rhinoceros, for 
example -- for ecological, economic, or aesthetic reasons (SN: 2/8/97, p. 92; 
5/17/97, p. 303).

 Three Stanford University ecologists have developed a new measure of 
biodiversity drawn from such population studies. Jennifer B. Hughes, Gretchen 
C. Daily, and Paul R. Ehrlich calculate that each species has, on average, 220 
populations, totaling 1.1 billion to 6.6 billion populations globally.

 They go on to estimate that in tropical forests, some of Earth's richest 
habitats, 1,800 populations are lost every hour -- some 16 million annually. 
The ecologists will also present their analysis at the NAS meeting.

"This is the first real attempt to document either the overall diversity of 
populations or the rate of loss, so it's a pretty significant paper," says 
ecologist Walter Reid of the World Resources Institute in Washington, D.C. The 
numbers are "absolutely astronomical," says Stuart L. Pimm of the University of 
Tennessee in Knoxville.

 By combing through recent studies on the genetic differences between 
populations, Hughes and her colleagues came up with a measure of populations 
per unit area for 82 species, mostly vertebrates and plants. They also 
estimated each species' range. Averaging these numbers, they applied standard 
estimates of the annual loss of tropical forest to gauge population losses. 
Although crude,"the estimates of population extinction are far greater than 
[those of] species extinction," the common barometer of biodiversity loss, says 
Hughes.

"Species extinction has a huge ethical significance," says Reid, even though a 
species isn't providing much ecologically or economically by the time it's on 
the brink. "But losing populations gets to the economic importance." A case in 
point is the overfishing of local populations of fish, such as cod in the North 
Sea (SN: 2/22/97, p. 124).

 On the tree of life, if the branches represent broad groups of organisms, the 
enormously diverse populations are the twigs -- the source of "evolutionary 
innovation," says Pimm.

 In the second report, Sean Nee and Robert M. May of the University of Oxford 
in England take a broad look at the effects of mass extinctions and calculate 
that even if 95 percent of species are lost, most of the major branches of the 
tree of life will persist.

 Reviving biodiversity after such mass extinctions, however, depends on the 
evolutionary creativity of lots of locally adapted populations, says Pimm."The 
future is in the terminal twigs, particularly the species that are branching 
rapidly, the most evolutionarily creative."


