Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 10/25/97

 October 25, 1997 

 Must We Pull the Plug?

 New programs aim to cut the juice drawn by leaky appliances

 By JANET RALOFF

 Increasingly, on all but the largest U.S. consumer appliances today,"the 'off' 
switch is a lie," says Alan Meier of Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National 
Laboratory. The worst part, this energy analyst argues, is that the public is 
never told.

 Depressing the power switch may blacken the television screen, silence the 
jazz disc on the stereo, or stop the corn popping in the microwave oven, but 
these appliances continue to draw power -- to maintain memory of certain 
settings or to keep a remote-control sensor alert, for example. Many newer 
computers, cable TV boxes, video cassette recorders (VCRs), ceiling fans, 
cordless drills, and video games likewise stay on while ostensibly switched off.

 Says Meier, the rule seems to be more and more: If it's plugged in, it's on.

 Moreover, he argues, the "off" setting is not only a lie, but a costly one. A 
typical home uses about 50 watts (W) to power devices that supposedly aren't 
on, his data suggest, which accounts for 5 percent of the total electricity 
use. Such unseen consumption, commonly referred to as leaking current, 
constitutes the electric analog of heat seeping out of poorly insulated homes. 
In the United States, it adds up to more than $3 billion worth of electricity 
annually -- the output of four large generating stations. That figure includes 
only household products. Comparable estimates for electronics in the commercial 
and government sectors don't exist, Meier observes.

 A report prepared for the European Union in June finds that Europe's leaking 
household electricity equals the output of two additional large generating 
stations. Unless trends change, this demand could more than quadruple over the 
next 13 years, asserts Olof Molinder of OMvarden Konsult AB in Bromma, Sweden, 
an author of the report.

 Because people in developing nations "tend to buy [consumer] electronics even 
before they invest in refrigerators and other [more energy-intensive] 
appliances," Meier notes, these countries are"leaking even more electricity," 
proportionately, than industrial ones.

 This drain also poses a growing environmental problem. To supply the estimated 
amount of electricity demanded by leaking household appliances worldwide, power 
plants already spew some 18 million tons of carbon into the atmosphere 
annually, Meier calculates. Such emissions exacerbate the risk of global 
warming.

 To date, there has been little consumer demand for less leaky electronics. The 
potential savings per product has proved too small to influence purchasing. 
Consumers also lack a means of comparing the leakiness of competing goods.

 Hoping to change that, several organizations plan to launch initiatives in the 
coming months to raise public awareness of the problem and what can be done to 
limit it. A few will also target manufacturers and policy makers -- especially 
those bound for Kyoto, Japan, in December, where the United Nations will hold 
its final scheduled conference aimed at drafting a global climate change treaty.

 Most electricity leaks trace to power transformers that cannot be turned off 
-- either because a manufacturer found them less expensive to build that way or 
because it wanted to provide uninterrupted power to features that enhance a 
product's principal function.

 Wall packs fall into the first category. Essentially an electric cord attached 
to a small, black-box transformer that plugs into the wall, these units allow 
battery-powered radios, tape recorders, and other appliances to run off 
household current. A home may have 3 to 10 plugged in, studies have shown, each 
stepping the residential wiring's high-voltage alternating current down to the 
lower (typically 3- to 12-volt) direct current needed by some appliances. At 
the average U.S. residential rate of 9 cents per kilowatt-hour (kWh), each can 
use up to $1.50 in electricity per year.

 In most other consumer electronics, electricity leaks stem from a 
manufacturer's desire to make a product more versatile. In TVs and VCRs, for 
instance, the leaking current may power a clock, a digital display, and a 
memory chip that recalls what station the TV was last tuned to. In portable 
phones, rechargeable flashlights, and hand-held vacuum cleaners, it may 
continuously power a battery charger -- long after the appliance is fully 
charged. For products sold with remote controls, it powers the sensor that 
awaits the remote's call.

 This second category of intentional leaks arises because these appliances 
remain in a standby mode when switched off. Even though this state of readiness 
may draw only a fraction of the electricity consumed when the product is in 
active use, those leaking kilowatt-hours can add up.

 For instance, the increasingly popular compact audio units -- stereos that are 
bigger than a boom box but smaller than component systems -- consume about 9 W 
during standby, observes Jennifer Thorne of the American Council for an 
Energy-Efficient Economy, a public-interest group in Washington, D.C. Because 
owners listen to their stereo an average of only 1 hour per day, her new 
calculations indicate that 93 percent of compact audio energy use in the United 
States -- worth $369 million annually -- occurs when the units are turned off.

 Finally, there are some devices whose power draw never varies, such as the 
satellite receivers that, like cable boxes, can expand the range of stations 
available to a TV. Of five brands that Meier's team metered, all consumed 
roughly the same amount of power, 11 to 18 W, on or off. The only difference 
seems to be whether the red"on" light is powered.

 At least in the United States, Meier finds, how much a product leaks bears 
little relation to cost, function, or features. Instead,"it appears to reflect 
some arbitrary design as to which parts are kept 'hot.'"

 His team recently monitored new TVs. Noting that the average set is turned on 
only 4 hours per day, one of the tested units would use 180 kWh annually during 
active use and an additional 100 kWh while it was off. A competing model with 
comparable features would draw only 120 kWh per year while watched and a mere 5 
kWh the rest of the time.

 In Europe, some countries have begun devising a combination of carrots and 
sticks to make the designs a little less arbitrary.

 Two years ago, Switzerland's Federal Office of Energy, a leader in this 
effort, launched a program for TVs and VCRs.

"We give manufacturers target values to achieve in, perhaps, 3 years," explains 
Rolf Schmitz, who heads the program. If they easily meet the standby target,"we 
may decide it was too soft" and lower it."If we believe the manufacturers 
didn't put enough effort into making their machines better," he says,"the 
Parliament allows us to set a minimum business standard" formal limits.

 So far, Schmitz says, the program has been "very successful." Most TVs have 
met the current 3 W target for standby power consumption,"and a lot are already 
running at 0.1 W." In comparison, the average U.S. TV consumption while turned 
off is now 5 W, and older units can burn 20 W.

 With VCRs, Schmitz says,"although the industry had said it would not be 
possible to go below 6 W in standby, already many are now at 1 W."

 For most European appliances that don't rely on a wall pack, consumers get an 
additional option not available on the majority of U.S. appliances: a"hard off" 
switch."When we push a TV's [hard] "off" button, the unit [draws] zero watts," 
explains Schmitz. Indeed, Molinder told Science News, such an unequivocal"off" 
button"is the law" in Sweden.

 Because Europeans have a true "off" switch, explains Horace Herring of the 
Open University in Milton Keynes, England, most standby losses associated with 
their appliances, except for VCRs, trace to the growing popularity of remote 
controls. When consumer electronics are shut down with remotes, they do not 
turn off completely; rather, they enter a dormant standby that allows them to 
remain sensitive to the remote's command.

 In an analysis of standby electricity use last year, Herring surveyed data on 
the purchasing and use of consumer electronics in Europe. He cited one Finnish 
study showing that when remote controls were available, consumers ignored the 
switch that severs all power to a TV. Consumers proved more likely to fully 
shut off their VCRs and stereos.

 A Dutch survey found that consumers turn TVs completely off half of the time, 
and 85 percent of stereo owners unplugged their sets before going on vacation.

 Short of pulling the plug, what can U.S. consumers do?

. "When it comes to wall packs, not much," says Meier. There are new 
technologies entering the marketplace to reduce the power drained by such 
transformers, but they won't substitute directly for units now in use.

 Moreover, consumers shouldn't settle for units that shave merely 50 percent of 
the leakiness from current devices, argues Laurence F. Kinney of Synertech 
Systems Corp., a Syracuse, N.Y.-based consulting firm."We should look for 
designs that offer nearly zero leaks," he says. With millions of these 
transformers in use,"it's scandalous that we can't turn them off."

 He envisions a tiny, integrated circuit chip in the wall pack and another in 
the appliance's power switch. The resulting"smart transformer" would supply 
current if and only if it sensed an appliance had been turned on. The trick, he 
says, will be to make the change without adding more than 25 cents to the cost 
of generic wall packs.

 ASPRO Technology of Niederlenz, Switzerland, has developed something akin to 
this. Its transformer goes into a fitful sleep whenever the product to which 
it's attached is turned off. At programmed intervals (anywhere from 1 second to 
30 minutes), the transformer will wake up briefly to see if the appliance is 
back on. If so, the transformer supplies it with power. If not, it dozes off 
again.

 Though this transformer doesn't plug into a wall, there's no reason, in 
principle, why it couldn't be reconfigured as a wall pack, says Felix Kamer, 
the company's deputy director. It would probably add about $20 to the cost of 
an appliance, he says, making it potentially attractive for cellular phones or 
other relatively expensive devices. However, he says, it's too costly for 
products retailing at only $20 or $30, the market for many wall packs today.

 TVs, computers, and VCRs can significantly limit their standby power 
consumption if their transformers employ"switch mode" technology, explains Rob 
Frizzell of Power Integrations in Sunnyvale, Calif., a company that shipped 50 
million such transformer units over the past year for incorporation in 
products, such as TVs and VCRs, whose active power use runs at 10 W or higher. 
This technology essentially switches the power to a device on and off some 
100,000 times a second, sensing on each cycle whether power is required and 
supplying it only when necessary."This allows you to control how much power is 
delivered from your wall socket to the [appliance]," he says, keeping leakage 
rates low.

 Meier and Kinney, however, suspect that truly leakfree solutions may require 
more creative answers. One idea Meier has proposed would incorporate a 
rechargeable backup battery into VCRs and other products that need to keep some 
memory chips or other low-power devices energized. The battery could be 
recharged by the wall current whenever the appliance is in active use.

 The first hurdle, however, will be to build a constituency for such devices, 
Thorne says. Toward that end, she is drafting a report on leaking electricity 
for policy makers -- especially those who will be participating in the Kyoto 
conference.

 Meier is drawing up a "1 W Action Plan" that he intends to circulate at that 
meeting. It would call for nations to set a voluntary limit of 1 W on the 
standby electricity used by any electronics-based product.

 In January, at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, the Environmental 
Protection Agency plans to launch its own salvo against the two biggest 
contributors to leaks within the home products arena. Explains Stephan Sylvan, 
who is coordinating the effort, the new program will extend EPA's Energy Star 
program to TVs and VCRs. Any TV, for example, that consumes 3 W or less in its 
off/standby mode will earn the right to identify this feature by carrying the 
agency's Energy Star label on its packaging and advertising.

 Currently,"Americans spend around $1 billion a year to power televisions that 
are idling or shut off," Sylvan notes. The success of this new program could 
lead to similar programs for other consumer products, he says.

 Meier would like to see a complementary program embraced by Underwriters 
Laboratory, the Northbrook, Ill., center that certifies the safety of electric 
product designs. This month, he launched a campaign to get UL to limit how much 
electricity a product can leak -- preferably no more than 1 W --and still 
possess a switch purporting to turn the machine off.

 Manufacturers could continue to market leakier products, Meier says, but they 
would have to make it clear that any power button only switches the products 
between active and standby modes.

 As a matter of honesty, he argues, no manufacturer should be able to label a 
product that draws 40, 20, even 10 watts day and night as anything other than 
constantly on. He says,"We need to preserve the integrity of the word 'off.'"

.
