Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 1/11/97 January 11, 1997

 Weight control for bacterial plastic

by C. Wu

 In their quest for better ways to synthesize biodegradable plastics, 
scientists are looking to polymers produced naturally by certain bacteria. So 
far, most research has focused on increasing the polymer yield, but a new study 
takes a step toward influencing the plastic's final properties.

 Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have found that they 
can control the size of the polymer's molecules by genetically manipulating 
production of a key enzyme. The larger polymers made by these modified bacteria 
can weigh up to four times more than those synthesized naturally.

"I think we'd be able to go higher and lower by further manipulating the 
genetics," says MIT chemist Kristi D. Snell.

 A polymer's molecular size strongly influences the properties of the finished 
plastic. The MIT group's report, which appears in the January Nature 
Biotechnology, suggests that biodegradable plastics made by bacteria could be 
practical for a wide range of applications.

"What exactly controls the molecular weight of biopolymers of this kind is 
really not well understood," says Stephen Padgette of Monsanto Co. in St. 
Louis. "This research is probably a first step in trying to understand that."

 The MIT group studied a polymer called PHB, which the bacterium Alcaligenes 
eutrophus produces to store energy. The researchers genetically engineered 
Escherichia coli to produce PHB. Controlling enzyme activity is easier in a 
bacterium that doesn't normally manufacture PHB, Snell says.

 The researchers inserted additional genes in E. coli to make them produce 
different amounts of PHA synthase, an enzyme that links the individual polymer 
units into chains. In cells with lots of PHA synthase, the enzyme joined the 
polymer units into a larger number of shorter chains, whereas in cells with 
less synthase, the enzyme made longer chains.

 Altogether, bacteria make more than 100 polymers of the PHA type, many of 
which hold promise as components of biodegradable plastics. "We believe our 
method of controlling for molecular weight will apply to the whole class," 
Snell says.

 Researchers have also turned plants into plastics factories by giving them 
bacterial genes (SN: 12/24&31/94, p. 420). Because bacteria must be provided 
with organic molecules before they will synthesize polymers, "the ultimate goal 
is to have the plants take carbon dioxide, sunlight, and water and produce the 
material," Padgette says.


