Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 11/1/97

 November 1, 1997 

 Starting Over

 Some animals can regenerate limbs or even most of their bodies. How?

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 Last summer, on the city's hottest day in a century, a construction platform 
beneath a Washington, D.C., bridge collapsed, dropping a 15-ton steel beam that 
killed one man and pinned a second by his legs. With a blowtorch, rescue 
personnel eventually freed the injured man and rushed him to a hospital, where 
physicians had to amputate his left leg and transplant a back muscle into his 
right leg.

 Such misfortunes have long prompted physicians to dream of restoring damaged 
or amputated limbs by inducing them to regenerate. Other injuries have spurred 
doctors to imagine regrowing crushed spinal cords and dead heart tissue.

 These medical flights of fancy draw inspiration from the well-known ability of 
certain animals to perform precisely those feats. Consider the urodeles, a 
class of vertebrates that includes newts and salamanders. These animals possess 
an enviable talent for regrowing arms, legs, tails, heart muscle, jaws, spinal 
cords, and more. Some simpler organisms can even be sliced and diced, with each 
piece giving rise to a complete new animal.

 Surprisingly, given the obvious medical appeal of regeneration, scientists 
know relatively little about the process. Researchers have produced detailed 
descriptions of regeneration, but they don't understand the molecular signals 
driving this physiological tour de force.

 The problem lies largely in the animals that scientists have traditionally 
chosen to study, such as mice, frogs, fruit flies, and nematodes. Though 
investigators have amassed a wealth of knowledge about these common laboratory 
animals and have many ways to study and manipulate them genetically, the adults 
of these species don't come close to matching a urodele's regenerative powers.

 While most scientists have tried to overcome the mysterious barriers to 
regeneration that exist in the traditional laboratory animals, a few 
investigators have taken the road less traveled. They have decided that to 
unearth the genes and proteins vital to regeneration, they must study animals 
that can actually regenerate. 

"We're trying to understand the molecular basis of regeneration," says 
Alejandro Sanchez of the Carnegie Institution of Washington in Baltimore.

 The basics of limb regeneration have been evident for more than a century. 
First, the animal heals the wound at the site of the missing limb. Then, 
various specialized cells at the site, such as bone, skin, and blood cells, 
lose their identity in a process called dedifferentiation. The resulting 
blastema, a mass of unspecialized cells, proliferates rapidly to form a limb 
bud. The cells ultimately take on specialized roles as the new limb takes shape.

"Salamanders can turn back time," says David L. Stocum of Indiana 
University-Purdue University in Indianapolis. "The trick they have is 
dedifferentiation of mature cells. They regenerate a lot of tissues this way."

 For some reason, people and other non-urodele vertebrates lack this ability to 
create a blastema. They repair a wound and stop. Rather than rely on 
dedifferentiation, the few human tissues that can regenerate -- such as blood 
and the liver -- turn to a small number of unspecialized cells set aside during 
embryogenesis. These so-called stem cells maintain the ability to proliferate 
rapidly and indefinitely.

 In recent years, Susan V. Bryant and David M. Gardiner, both at the University 
of California, Irvine, have turned to salamanders called axolotls to study how 
a blastema transforms itself into a limb. The process depends on many of the 
same genes employed when an embryo originally creates a limb, but the blastema 
doesn't turn those genes on and off in exactly the same pattern.

 Take the HoxA genes. From developmental studies of many animals, scientists 
have shown that this cluster of genes helps pattern a growing limb. Which HoxA 
genes in a cell turn on ultimately determines the cell's position in the final 
appendage. 

 Remarkably, the order of the HoxA genes on their chromosome mirrors the genes' 
order of activation. In the developing limb bud of the arm, for example, HoxA 
genes at one end of the chromosome turn on first, marking cells intended for 
the upper arm. As the bud grows, successive HoxA genes become active, 
identifying cells destined to form the lower arm. Finally, the HoxA genes 
farthest down the chromosome take their turn, signaling which cells will become 
part of the hand.

 Bryant and Gardiner have found that this Hox code exists in regenerating 
axolotl limbs, but with a twist: The timing of gene activation does not follow 
the genes' order on the chromosome. For example, after a limb is amputated, 
both the HoxA-9 and HoxA-13 genes become active a day or two into the 3-week 
regenerative process. In the embryo, HoxA-13 follows HoxA-9 and isn't turned on 
until the very end of limb patterning.

 The blastema first specifies which cells will form the axolotl "hand," 
concludes Bryant. "Then, it's a process of filling in the gap. That allows you 
to make exactly what's missing." Studies of another developmental gene cluster, 
the HoxD genes, bolster this view, she adds.

 Axolotls have shed light on another curious difference between developing and 
regenerating limbs. In the embryo, limbs take shape well before nerves arise. 
Yet a denervated axolotl limb can't initiate the process of regeneration, says 
Bryant. Moreover, scientists can denervate a regrowing limb midway through 
regeneration without stopping it, suggesting that there's a window of time in 
which regeneration is dependent on the nerves.

 Investigators have speculated that nerves release some vital regeneration 
factor, but its identity has proved elusive. Recently, Bryant, Gardiner, and 
their colleagues found the axolotl version of a fruit fly gene called 
distalless, or dll. In flies, the gene is needed for proper leg development.

 This gene turns on in a regenerating axolotl limb just as the limb loses its 
dependence on nerves for regrowth, the investigators reported in the November 
1996 Development. 

 They also discovered that denervating a regenerating limb before this 
transition prevents dll from turning on, whereas later denervation does not 
turn off the gene. Suspecting that limb regeneration requires dll activity, the 
investigators sought to determine why the gene fails to turn on after early 
denervation. 

 They eventually hit upon a protein called FGF-2. When they implanted beads 
coated with FGF-2 into a regenerating limb, dll activity stayed normal after 
early denervation. The scientists further established that nerves indeed make 
FGF-2.

 While a limb blastema can produce its own FGF-2, the scientists believe it 
needs an initial supply from nerves before it becomes self-sufficient. "We 
think the nerves provide the FGF-2 to prime that transition," says Bryant.

 Consequently, an absence of nerve-derived FGF-2 may be one of the barriers to 
limb regeneration in most vertebrates. Triggering an amputated arm to regrow 
will not be simply a matter of providing this growth factor, but FGF-2 may 
provide part of the eventual recipe for regeneration in people.

"The hope is that there won't be too many things to replace and that you can 
get to the point where the [regeneration] cascade begins to roll," says Bryant.

 Sanchez loves axolotls. In fact, he keeps two as pets in an office aquarium. 
Yet Sanchez believes the salamanders will keep secret most of their 
regenerative tricks. 

 The inability to mutate specific genes in axolotls and other urodeles, or to 
add specific genes to the animals, hinders attempts to determine the 
significance of any new gene that researchers suspect of aiding regeneration. 

 Though the work of Bryant and her colleagues is "heroic," says Sanchez, "you 
reach a ceiling of how much you can do with the organisms."

"The genetics [of urodeles] is poor, their generation time is long, and there 
are no transgenics yet. That's why it's a struggle for people to keep working 
in the area," acknowledges Bryant.

 Consequently, Sanchez intends to pursue his regeneration studies primarily 
with planaria, simple worms that have their own legendary regenerative ability. 
Chop one of the inch-long creatures into 300 pieces, and in a matter of days 
300 planaria will be swimming around. Indeed, Sanchez' group occasionally uses 
that strategy to expand the worm colonies.

 Sanchez' plan is to identify the genes that enable planaria to regenerate. 
Why? "Most likely we have those genes as well," he says. 

 That statement would have sounded brash 20 years ago. Yet scientists studying 
worms, primarily those called Caenorhabditis elegans, have increasingly found 
that genes from these simple animals resemble genes in more complex creatures. 
In addition, the related genes are frequently used in a similar manner.

 As a result, Sanchez is operating on the assumption that the regeneration 
strategy used by planaria resembles the one employed by urodeles and may 
provide insight into the human failure to regenerate. There's some evidence 
supporting this contention. When cut in half, the worms form blastemas similar 
in architecture to those seen when researchers amputate the limbs of a urodele. 

 Planarian regeneration does have clear differences, however. The most 
significant seems to be that the worms do not dedifferentiate cells to create 
the blastema. Instead, planaria turn to cells called neoblasts. 

 Scattered within the planarian body, neoblasts apparently remain in an 
unspecialized, stem cell state, which enables them to differentiate into any 
cell type. Wherever planaria are cut, the neoblasts migrate to the site and 
form a blastema by themselves.

 Sanchez' colleague Phillip Newmark has kept planarian neoblasts alive in petri 
dishes for several weeks, an advance the researchers hope will allow them to 
genetically alter the animals. The investigators will try to slip genes into 
the neoblasts or mutate existing genes, then add the cells to worms whose own 
neoblasts have been destroyed with radiation. When such worms regenerate, any 
new cells should derive from the genetically engineered neoblasts, says Sanchez.

 Efforts to identify planarian regeneration genes have already offered some 
promising leads, Sanchez' group reported at last summer's International 
Congress for Developmental Biology in Snowbird, Utah. With a technique called 
subtractive hybridization, the researchers collected fragments of genes turned 
on in blastemas when a planarian regenerates its tail, its head, or both and 
compared them to genes normally active in the head and tail. Genes active only 
in the blastemas presumably participate in regeneration, notes Sanchez.

 The investigators detected dozens of DNA fragments specific to regenerating 
blastemas, some belonging to genes that become active in the initial hours of 
the process. In several cases, the researchers have found that the fragments 
are parts of genes found previously in other animals.

 One such gene encodes an enzyme that degrades the extracellular matrix, a mesh 
of proteins and other molecules that surrounds cells. This enzyme may trigger 
regeneration by releasing growth factors bound to the matrix or by eliminating 
obstacles to a cell's proliferation and movement, says Sanchez.

 Is the notion of regenerating human limbs or diseased tissue a pipe dream or a 
realistic expectation for the 21st century? It's far too early to know whether 
there are insurmountable differences between animals that can regenerate and 
those that cannot, says Jeremy P. Brockes of University College London.

 He and his colleagues have recently shown that some factor present in blood 
serum, newt or any other kind, can induce newt muscle cells to dedifferentiate. 
The muscle cells of nonregenerating vertebrates don't respond to the serum, 
however, indicating that they are not sensitive to this still unidentified 
factor.

 If feasible, overcoming this insensitivity might prove invaluable. Cardiac 
specialists might then learn to trigger damaged heart muscle to replace itself. 
Such an advance could be possible even if scientists never obtain sufficient 
expertise to regenerate complex structures like limbs, suggests Brockes.

 Given the potential value of regeneration in medicine, Stocum finds it 
puzzling that so many scientists choose to study cell and organ transplantation 
or work on building artificial hearts, livers, and limbs rather than 
investigate animals that can regrow parts of themselves.

"With regeneration, you don't have to worry about [finding] donor cells, and 
you don't have to worry about immune rejection," he says. "Regeneration is 
clearly superior to any kind of transplantation or artificial tissues."

 To link to an animated version of limb regeneration, visit .


