Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/15/97

 November 15, 1997 

 U.S. survey explores relationship styles

by B. Bower 

 An influential vein of psychological research suggests that the foundation of 
adult romantic love lies in childhood relationships with parents or other 
caretakers. Yet the implications for overall functioning of the so-called adult 
attachment styles had been masked because the studies had focused almost 
exclusively on college students and distressed individuals, such as incest 
survivors.

 Now, scientists have examined for the first time the forms of interpersonal 
attachment in a nationally representative sample of U.S. adults. Their findings 
underscore the pervasive influence of attachment orientations on adults' lives, 
contend Kristin D. Mickelson and Ronald C. Kessler, both of Harvard Medical 
School in Boston, and Phillip R. Shaver of the University of California, Davis.

"Attachment patterns appear to be central organizing factors in personality and 
social development," the researchers conclude.

 Three adult attachment orientations have garnered the most attention (SN: 
8/9/97, p. 94). Secure attachment fosters lasting relationships marked by trust 
and compromise; avoidant attachment results in dread of or disdain for 
emotional intimacy in relationships; and anxious (or ambivalent) attachment 
leads to insecurity about close relationships and manipulative attempts to 
control romantic partners.

 Mickelson and her coworkers assessed these interpersonal styles in 8,080 
adults age 15 to 54 who participated in a national survey that was designed 
primarily to examine rates of mental disorders and characteristics of people 
with various psychiatric diagnoses. During extensive interviews, volunteers 
responded to a brief series of questions about their close relationships; 
nearly all met the criteria for one of the three attachment categories.

 The national distributions of secure attachment style, 59 percent, and of 
avoidant style, 25 percent, correspond roughly to earlier estimates from 
studies of college students, the investigators report in the November Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology. However, the rate of anxious attachment 
in the national sample, 11 percent, was only half that previously observed 
among college students.

 On closer analysis, 17 percent of 15- to 24-year-olds in the new survey 
exhibit anxious attachment, compared to 8 percent of 45- to 54-year-olds. This 
pattern may reflect a greater propensity toward anxious attachment in the 
younger generation, the scientists observe. It could also mean that some 
anxious young adults gradually shift to a secure orientation (by forging a 
solid marriage, for example) or to a self-protective avoidance of any intimate 
bonds.

 The national results also suggest that neither of the insecure types of adult 
attachment stems simply from having had poor relations with one's parents. 
Rather, the styles exhibit a strong link to early traumas, such as physical 
abuse or serious neglect.

 Parental substance abuse, divorce, and financial adversity also frequently 
characterize the childhoods of participants reporting insecure adult attachment 
styles.

"Insecure attachment is really about the absence of emotional trust in others, 
so such findings make sense," comments Jay Belsky, a psychologist and 
attachment researcher at Pennsylvania State University in State College.

 For participants who grew up in two-parent families, mothers and fathers 
exerted comparable influences on adult attachment styles, the survey indicates.

 Mental disorders clustered among survey participants who were avoidant or 
anxious, Mickelson's group notes. Insecure attachment styles may predispose 
some people to develop psychological conditions, they suggest; conversely, 
having a mental disorder may hamper the ability to form secure relationships.

 A long-term study of attachment styles from childhood into adulthood should 
examine such possibilities, Belsky remarks. He knows of no such investigation 
now under way. 


