Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/15/97

 November 15, 1997 

 Prize offered for solving number conundrum

by I. Peterson

 For more than 300 years, the mathematical problem known as Fermat's last 
theorem attracted a plethora of would-be conquerors. The theorem was finally 
proved just a few years ago by Andrew Wiles of Princeton University as part of 
a larger effort that illuminates links between number theory and geometry (SN: 
11/5/94, p. 295).

 The complicated, lengthy proof that Wiles found hasn't satisfied everyone, 
however. Some still wonder whether a simpler proof could be found -- one that 
Pierre de Fermat himself may have had in mind but failed to write down 
centuries ago.

"The mystery remains: Is there an elementary proof?" asks Andrew Beal, a banker 
in Dallas and an amateur mathematician interested in number theory.

 In grappling with the problem, Beal has looked for solvable equations 
analogous to the one expressing Fermat's last theorem. "I would try to 
understand why the solutions of the new equation can't be converted to 
solutions of the Fermat equation," he says.

 As a result of those studies, Beal has formulated a conjecture involving 
equations of the form Ax + By = Cz. The six letters represent whole numbers, 
with x, y, and z greater than 2. Fermat's last theorem involves the special 
case in which the exponents x, y, and z are the same.

 Beal noticed that when a solution of the general equation existed, A, B, and C 
had a common factor. For example, in the equation 36 + 183 = 38, the numbers 3, 
18, and 3 all have the factor 3.

 Using computers at his bank, Beal checked equations with exponents up to 100. 
"I couldn't come up with a solution that didn't involve a common factor," he 
says. The question is whether that is always true.

 Beal has now offered a prize of $50,000 to anyone who can prove the conjecture 
or $10,000 to anyone who can find a counterexample.

 Interestingly, Beal's conjecture is closely related to questions of 
considerable concern to number theorists. "It is remarkable that occasionally 
someone working in isolation and with no connections to the mathematical 
[community] formulates a problem so close to current research activity," R. 
Daniel Mauldin of the University of North Texas in Denton comments in the 
December Notices of the American Mathematical Society, where the Beal prize 
problem is announced. Mauldin heads the prize committee and will handle all 
inquiries and proposed proofs.

 Whether a proof is likely to materialize anytime soon isn't evident at the 
moment. "It's not clear how you would go about solving it or whether the 
methods of Wiles could be extended this far," says Andrew J. Granville of the 
University of Georgia in Athens.

 Intriguingly, introducing a coefficient larger than 1, so that the equation 
reads, say, Ax + 31 By = Cz, allows all sorts of possible solutions when x, y, 
and z are greater than 2. In the Beal conjecture, the coefficients are all 1, 
which appears to put the resulting equations and their solutions in a special 
category.

 The deeper question is one of finding a general method of identifying all 
solutions to the equation, whether there are just a few or an infinite number 
of them, Granville says. "That would be a wonderful advance." 


