Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 1/11/97 January 11, 1997

 Banking on Blood Conversion New technology may change the character of the 
U.S. blood supply

 By CORINNA WU

 Eager donors arrive at a local blood drive, ready to give the gift of life. 
But before their blood is allowed to flow into a plastic bag through needles 
plunged into their forearms, they must sit down with a pen and take a test.

 The questionnaire--along with biochemical tests on the blood itself--is part 
of a rigorous screening process that has made the U.S. blood supply one of the 
safest in the world. As a result of this vigilance, the risks of contracting 
AIDS or other infectious diseases from a blood transfusion have dropped 
substantially.

 Once that blood reaches the hospital, however, even the most careful initial 
screening efforts can't protect a patient from getting a fatal transfusion of 
the wrong blood type--a situation that occurs more often than most people 
think, says Harvey Klein, who is chief of transfusion medicine at the National 
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. Sometimes, amid the chaos of an emergency 
room, or even in less hectic settings, a health care worker misreads a label or 
a chart and gives the wrong blood to a patient. If blood of type A or B is 
given to someone with type O blood, for example, the ensuing severe immune 
reaction can rapidly kill the person.

 Improving blood-handling procedures and worker training can forestall such 
deadly accidents. Some researchers, however, think they may have found a more 
foolproof solution by chemically converting types A and B red blood cells to 
the universal type O. That way, any unit of blood cells could be transfused 
into any patient, removing the need to match blood types.

 This innovation would have the added benefits of correcting imbalances in 
blood type inventories, reducing the amount of blood that gets outdated before 
it can be used, and cutting the costs of blood distribution. More than 15 years 
of research into this technique is reaching fruition; hospitals and blood 
centers may have blood conversion technology by next year.

 In any year, as many as 1 in 12,000 units of red blood cells meant for one 
person is mistakenly given to another, says Klein, but "most of the time, that 
won't cause any harm, just by luck." Type O blood can be given to anyone, and 
type A blood presents no problems for someone who happens to be A or AB.

 The real danger arises when, for example, a type O patient gets A or B blood 
or when a type A patient gets B blood. Unfamiliar molecules on the surface of 
the foreign blood cells trigger the immune system, which kicks into high gear 
and throws the patient into shock. The kidneys fail, and the depletion of 
blood-clotting factors causes bleeding "from the nose, ears--every orifice of 
the body," says Mark Popovsky, chief executive officer of the New England 
Region American Red Cross.

 About 1 in 100,000 people who receive a transfusion dies, including most 
people who get incompatible blood, Klein says. Although the risk of getting the 
wrong blood type is fairly low, it spells almost certain death when it happens. 
"It's sort of like a plane crash. One in 12,000, I've always thought, is a 
frightening statistic," he adds. Moreover, hospitals may underreport the 
problem.

 Some hospitals try to lessen the chance that a hurried doctor or nurse will 
make a fatal mistake by stocking only type O blood for emergency rooms and 
intensive care units, Klein says. This practice, however, can create a shortage 
of type O blood for the region.

 On the other hand, between 5 and 10 percent of A and B blood goes to waste, 
says Popovsky, simply because hospitals can't use those units within their 
42-day shelf life.

 To minimize the waste of usable blood, hospitals sometimes ship their surplus 
to other institutions in the region that need more than they anticipated. Blood 
also travels between neighboring regional blood centers.

"No one has good data on how frequently blood is moved around," Klein says, but 
"we know that there is a lot of movement."

 Conversion of all blood to type O can address these supply imbalances and 
reduce the amount of shipping necessary, says Jack Goldstein of the Kimball 
Research Institute at the New York Blood Center, who is one of the pioneers in 
the field.

 The idea explored by Goldstein and other researchers is to use an enzyme to 
alter the chemistry of the red cell surface. Chains of sugars, which cover the 
cell surfaces of the four human blood types--A, B, AB, and O--all have the same 
basic sequence, with fucose at the end and galactose next in line.

 The major distinction between types lies with the sugar that branches off from 
the galactose. On A cells, that sugar is N-acetylgalactosamine. On B cells, 
it's another galactose. O cells have no additional sugar at all, while AB blood 
cells bear a mix of A and B chains. In the United States, about 45 percent of 
the population has type O blood, 40 percent has type A, 11 percent has type B, 
and 4 percent has type AB.

 A and B cells cannot be transfused into people with O blood because the extra 
sugar branch stimulates the immune system's antibodies to attack the foreign 
cells. Clipping off that additional sugar branch from A and B cells transforms 
them into type O, averting the immune response.

 Goldstein found the right enzymes for the job in what might seem to be some 
unlikely places. He isolated the enzyme for B conversion, a-galactosidase, from 
coffee beans. "It's not so far-fetched," he says. Beans and seeds use the 
enzyme to break down large molecules into individual sugars, which provide 
energy.

 The enzyme for A conversion, a-N-acetylgalactosaminidase, came from chicken 
livers. These digestive enzymes, Goldstein says, are "ubiquitous in nature, but 
you have to use the right ones." In the beginning, he needed 50-pound batches 
of both coffee beans and chicken livers to get the necessary quantities of 
enzyme for experiments. "I think Mr. Perdue [the chicken magnate] was happy for 
a few years," Goldstein says. "We used a lot of chicken livers. [It was] so 
traumatic, I put them out of my mind."

 Researchers don't need to wallow in vats of chicken innards or mounds of 
coffee beans anymore. With the techniques of biotechnology, the enzymes have 
been cloned and are now synthesized in bulk.

 The large number of sugar chains and their different orientations on cell 
surfaces made finding the right conditions for conversion a real challenge, 
says Goldstein. Type B cells have over half a million sugar chains on their 
surface, while type A cells have twice that amount. Some are perpendicular to 
the surface; others lie parallel.

"This is what fascinated me," says Goldstein, "to get enzymes and conditions 
where the enzymes would work." For example, the enzyme for B conversion works 
best at a high acidity, but blood cells do their job of carrying oxygen in 
neutral conditions. Goldstein had to strike a balance that allowed the enzyme 
to efficiently clip off the extra galactose without destroying the red cell's 
function. Eventually, he determined that the reaction could take place at 26oC, 
rather than the higher temperature the blood cells are accustomed to, and at a 
slightly acidic pH of 5.5 or 5.6.

"When I started this work, no one had really treated red cells at such a low 
pH," he says. "It was thought that they would just become nonviable." That 
turned out not to be the case. Not every sugar chain on every cell gets 
changed, he says, but as long as enough are clipped, the body accepts the cells.

 A company called ZymeQuest in North Andover, Mass., is currently conducting 
clinical trials to determine whether converted B cells have the same medical 
utility as unconverted O cells. So far, studies have shown that converted B 
cells behave like normal O cells and don't trigger any immune reaction.

 ZymeQuest, which holds the license to develop Goldstein's technology, has 
designed an automated machine that performs the B-to-O conversion. Able to 
convert many units of blood with little human intervention, such machines could 
easily be incorporated into the daily routine of regional blood centers, says 
president Douglas Clibourn. He estimates that the company should have a salable 
product by the end of 1998, pending approval by the Food and Drug 
Administration.

 A similar technique could be used for A-to-O conversion, but that project is 
about a year behind. Effectively converting A cells is trickier than altering B 
cells, because about 75 percent of people with type A blood have two kinds of 
sugar chains on their cells. Out of the million or so structures on each A 
cell, about 50,000 have a second copy of the final three-sugar sequence, which 
includes an N-acetylgalactosamine. "It's not that far in, but it means that one 
has to use a different approach to remove it," Goldstein says. "We're very 
close to solving this problem."

 Starting experiments with type B blood turned out to be a good choice, he 
says. "If we had started with A, maybe I would have dropped this project 
earlier."

 Once conversion technology for A and B blood is established, altering the AB 
cells should be straightforward. "The cost of converting all the A, B, and AB 
blood to O," Clibourn says, "is less than the current cost of all of that blood 
shipping."

 Any technology that would convert blood to a true universal donor type must 
take another characteristic, Rh factor, into account. A cell surface protein 
first discovered in the blood of Rhesus monkeys, the Rh factor can provoke an 
immune reaction in people whose blood doesn't normally carry it. People who 
have the protein on their red blood cells are deemed Rh-positive; those who 
don't are Rh-negative.

 Rh incompatibility is less of a problem than ABO incompatibility, says Klein. 
A majority of people in the United States, about 84 percent, have Rh-positive 
blood.

 Moreover, an Rh-negative person can withstand one accidental transfusion of 
Rh-positive blood because the Rh-negative person doesn't develop anti-Rh 
antibodies until 3 or 4 months later, Klein says. "The second transfusion, 
after they already have that antibody they made as a result of the first 
transfusion, could be very serious." An Rh-negative woman who develops 
antibodies from bearing an Rh-positive child faces that risk if she conceives a 
second Rh-positive child or receives an Rh-positive blood transfusion.

 Several labs have cloned the Rh factor, Goldstein says, but no one fully 
understands its three-dimensional structure. Therefore, researchers are only 
beginning to explore techniques for Rh conversion. If researchers can identify 
which part of the protein stimulates the immune response, then perhaps they can 
alter that portion to make the blood cell effectively Rh-negative. Eventually 
they want to produce type O, Rh-negative blood--the kind any person can receive 
without fear.

 Despite the promise this technology holds, it doesn't produce a limitless 
supply of blood, Popovsky says. The key factor in maintaining the blood supply 
is still sufficient donation.

"Today, the demand for blood is very great," Popovsky says. "We need healthy 
people to donate so that they support the blood system of this country. Without 
them, it would collapse." Although there is talk about artificial blood 
substitutes, he adds, humans still cannot chemically synthesize molecules that 
can do everything a red blood cell does. "The human red cell is a fantastic 
structure--there's nothing like it."


