Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/1/97

 November 1, 1997 

 Relying on geology to jail nuclear waste

by R. Monastersky

 In 1957, the National Academy of Sciences recommended disposing of nuclear 
waste in special geologic formations underground. Deep rock deposits, according 
to its rationale, would contain the debris of the Atomic Age for millennia, 
keeping it isolated from society. Last week brought mixed news about the United 
States' efforts to carry out geologic disposal of nuclear waste.

 In the bad-news category, federal scientists reported potential problems at 
Yucca Mountain, Nev., where the Department of Energy is considering 
constructing an underground repository for 70,000 tons of spent fuel from 
nuclear power plants and other highly radioactive waste. In 1987, Congress 
chose Yucca Mountain as the only candidate site because its extremely arid rock 
layers would, in theory, keep water from dispersing the radioactive isotopes. 
Experiments conducted this year, however, indicate that rainwater is leaking 
through the mountain faster than previous studies had predicted.

 On the other hand, the Energy Department got some welcome news about an 
underground repository in southern New Mexico called the Waste Isolation Pilot 
Plant (WIPP). Excavated from a salt deposit, WIPP is designed to hold 
defense-related waste contaminated with radioactivity during the production of 
nuclear weapons. Last week, the Environmental Protection Agency gave 
provisional approval for opening WIPP.

 The Yucca Mountain data came to light at a meeting of the Geological Society 
of America in Salt Lake City. Donald S. Sweetkind of the U.S. Geological Survey 
in Denver reported on measurements made in an exploratory tunnel cutting 
through the mountain. His group detected elevated concentrations of chlorine-36 
-- a radioactive isotope -- in rock samples taken from several locations in the 
tunnel.

 The chlorine-36, says Sweetkind, comes from above-ground nuclear weapons tests 
conducted in the 1950s and 1960s. Its presence in the tunnel at four times the 
natural concentration indicates that rainwater has traveled through fractures 
in the rock, reaching several hundred meters into the mountain in 4 decades.

"It's certainly a bad sign. It's a new wrinkle that definitely has to be 
considered in terms of the rapidity of flow. But I can't say that this is a 
[finding] that will kill the performance of the repository," says Sweetkind.

 The available data do not tell how much water is flowing through the rock at 
the level of the planned repository, says June T. Fabryka-Martin of the Los 
Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory, who led the chlorine-36 study. The seepage 
rate is important because abundant water would corrode the waste canisters and 
carry the radioactive isotopes down to the water table, where they could spread 
and eventually contaminate drinking water. By law, the repository and the 
specially designed canisters must limit leakage for the next 10,000 years.

 The tunnel is currently dry: There are no places where water is trickling in. 
This indicates that little liquid is flowing through the rock today, says 
Fabryka-Martin. During the last ice age, however, the region received more rain 
than it does now. "Under a wetter climate in the future, the sites where we 
have found elevated chlorine-36 might be potential areas for seeps," says 
Fabryka-Martin. 

 Next year, the Department of Energy, which oversees the Yucca Mountain 
project, will issue a preliminary assessment of the site's suitability for 
storage. Opponents view the new measurements as a serious blow to the planned 
repository. "I think they're in a lot of trouble regarding the performance of 
this site," says Robert R. Loux of Nevada's Agency for Nuclear Projects in 
Carson City. 

 Russell L. Patterson, a hydrologist with the Energy Department, disagrees. 
Scientists had acknowledged the possibility that water could move through 
so-called fast pathways, so the new data were not totally unanticipated, he 
says. In fact, he views the movement of water through the rock as a potential 
benefit. "It prevents moisture from [pooling] at the level of the repository 
and limits the amount of moisture that comes in contact with the waste 
containers," he says.

 Last week's provisional EPA approval for WIPP brings the New Mexico repository 
one step closer to opening, which could take place as early as May 1998. "This 
is a very important action by EPA," says Lokesh Chaturvedi of the Environmental 
Evaluation Group in Albuquerque, an independent technical review panel. 

 He notes, however, that many potential roadblocks remain before canisters can 
enter WIPP. Because the defense waste includes hazardous chemicals as well as 
radioactive isotopes, New Mexico must grant a disposal permit for WIPP. The 
laws governing hazardous waste have been challenged often in court, and 
opponents of WIPP may follow legal paths to block the facility's opening. 


