Science News Online (11/22/97): Calming Bad Vibes -- From microscopes to 
skyscrapers, smart structures help control vibration

 November 22, 1997 

 Calming Bad Vibes

 From microscopes to skyscrapers, smart structures help control vibration

 By SID PERKINS

 Thanks to the transistor, computers are no longer basement-sized behemoths 
pursuing only the most arcane of tasks. Now, they sit atop desks or even fit in 
briefcases. Shrunk onto a few electronic chips, they can constantly adjust the 
fuel injection in cars and even nag the driver who forgets to buckle a seat 
belt or leaves a door ajar.

 More than ever before, engineers are using the brain power of computers in 
combination with new classes of exotic materials to create what they call 
"smart structures," or objects that can sense their environment, process the 
information, and then react appropriately. Designers are beginning to bestow 
upon bridges, buildings, and even sporting goods the same limited degree of 
self-awareness and perhaps intelligence currently given to cars and aircraft.

 Smart structures have many potential applications, but almost all of them 
involve controlling undesirable vibrations of various sizes, from annoying 
sound waves to building sway. Many engineers see smart structures as the wave 
-- or, perhaps more appropriately, the antiwave -- of the future.

 Vibrations are inescapable. Some may be pleasing -- the soft strum of a 
guitar, the gentle swing of a hammock, the soothing sound of a mother's voice 
-- but many vibrations cause problems. Consider bridges and tall buildings that 
sway excessively in a stiff gust of wind or a moderate earthquake, floors that 
flex or shimmy as people walk across them, and noisy aircraft cabins and 
whirring home appliances.

 Structural engineers use several methods to minimize unwanted vibrations, says 
B.F. Spencer Jr., professor of civil engineering at the University of Notre 
Dame (Ind.). They place buildings on large rubber pads to isolate them from 
ground vibrations and use large shock absorbers inside structures to calm 
movements more quickly. Often, aerospace engineers must add material to stiffen 
aircraft wings.

 These techniques have their downside, however, Spencer says. They typically 
add weight, and they work only for certain frequencies of vibrations. To help 
overcome these limitations, designers are increasingly turning to smart 
materials with controllable properties. 

 Piezoelectric materials, for example, change shape when an electric current 
passes through them and generate electric signals when they flex. These 
materials are therefore doubly useful for controlling small vibrations. 
Incorporated into a machine, piezoelectric components can monitor its flexing; 
stimulated by an electric signal, they can apply forces that initiate or resist 
movement. 

 In effect, these materials become the smart structure's nerve endings and 
muscles, while the computer control becomes its brain.

 Smart materials can reduce the weight of structures by allowing designers to 
incorporate extra stiffness without adding bulk. The weight-saving potential of 
smart materials drove their initial development for applications in space, 
where every ounce counts, says Mark S. Whorton, an aerospace engineer at NASA's 
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala. "As a general rule of thumb, 
it takes about $10,000 to put a pound of payload into orbit," he explains.

 The appeal of smart structures has spread from its aerospace roots to a 
variety of arenas. Possible applications range from controlling vibrations in 
microscopes to reducing the sway in bridges.

 Researchers at CSA Engineering in Palo Alto, Calif., and their colleagues are 
trying to commercialize several products developed in their laboratories, says 
Eric H. Anderson, an engineer at the company. One of the innovations is a 
programmable device that integrates sensors, piezoelectric components, and 
electronic circuitry into a single unit. 

 According to Anderson, this technology has reduced the noise in aircraft 
cabins by cutting down on vibration in the walls, which are typically made up 
of many large panels of thin, unstiffened metal. The same technique could, in 
theory, tame the noise from washing machines, clothes dryers, and 
refrigerators, he adds.

"Any degree of vibration causes blur, which means you can't etch extremely 
small circuit features," says Jim Redmond, an engineer at Sandia. The challenge 
is magnified even further, he says, because the platform must move and stop 
abruptly as the same pattern is etched repeatedly onto the wafer. After each 
sudden stop, the platform must settle and stop vibrating before a new portion 
of the silicon wafer can be exposed to the ultraviolet light.

 By embedding three small strips of smart material in the platform, the Sandia 
researchers reduced the magnitude of its vibrations from 240 nanometers to 4 nm 
and cut the platform's settling time after each movement from 15 milliseconds 
to 9 ms, Redmond says.

 Tackling the same problem on a much larger scale, researchers at the 
University of Miami can alleviate the symptoms of shaky floor syndrome by 
attacking the source of the problem -- the floor itself. Civil engineer Linda 
M. Hanagan developed a way to use an electromagnetic shaker to damp floor 
vibrations.

 In Hanagan's system, the shaker, which is mounted underneath the floor, 
consists of a 74-kg frame and a 30-kg movable mass and is smaller than a 
two-drawer filing cabinet. A personal computer takes readings from a nearby 
sensor 2,000 times each second. Whenever the floor moves, the computer sends 
signals that drive the movable mass back and forth to compensate for the 
vibration.

 The researchers have tested the system in two offices and a university 
chemistry laboratory. In all three cases, the system reduced the problem 
vibrations to less than a quarter of their previous magnitude, says Hanagan.

 Using computer feedback to control large structures is a daunting task. In 
bridges and buildings, each girder or I-beam can weigh a ton or more, and 
vibrations can arise from powerful forces such as gusts of wind and 
earthquakes. 

 Pushing and pulling on the building with powerful actuators may therefore not 
be the most effective way to control unwanted vibrations in tall buildings, 
says Spencer. Shifting masses back and forth to change the building's response 
to outside influences is often a better approach.

 In Nanjing, China, engineers are working on a newly constructed 341-meter 
tower that has a problem with wind-induced vibrations in one of its observation 
decks. They plan to turn the tower into a smart structure next year by 
installing a device called a hybrid mass damper, a combination of a large 
weight and actuators to move it back and forth. A 60-ton, ring-shaped weight 
will be mounted on bearings around the tower's waistline. When a sensor detects 
vibrations, three actuators will push and pull against the massive weight to 
cut down on the tower's overall movement.

 Japanese engineers leapt to embrace smart structures during a skyscraper 
construction boom that began about 10 years ago, Spencer says. Today, 20 hotels 
and office towers in Japan, 14 of them more than 26 stories tall, use hybrid 
mass dampers. The Yokohama Landmark Tower, the tallest building in Japan, uses 
two such dampers, each weighing 170 tons, to cut down on building sway.

"The Japanese are not ahead of us on research, but they've zoomed ahead of us 
in the implementation of this technology because they see its tremendous 
potential," Spencer says. 

 Smart dampers, which are essentially controllable versions of large shock 
absorbers, represent another effective way to counter large forces in massive 
structures, says Spencer. One type of smart damper contains a 
magnetorheological fluid, a material that can undergo considerable and almost 
immediate changes in its viscosity when subjected to a magnetic field. 

 These fluids can be transformed from the consistency of water to that of a 
thick pudding in a matter of milliseconds, Spencer says. Prototype dampers 
filled with the fluids can generate reactive forces of up to 20 tons with as 
little as 50 watts of power, which a modest battery can supply.

 Smart structures have enjoyed widespread use in university, corporate, and 
government research labs for the last decade, but they are only slowly making 
their way into commercial applications, says Anderson. At an American Society 
for Mechanical Engineering conference last week, he identified a few of the 
obstacles -- the complicated nature of the technology, its formerly high price, 
and a dearth of successes outside the lab environment.

 In one commercial arena, smart structures have succeeded in hurdling these 
barriers, following a path blazed by another aerospace product: graphite-epoxy 
composites. Composite materials once languished in the labs, but they captured 
widespread attention when sporting goods manufacturers used them to make tennis 
rackets and golf clubs. 

 With the recent surge of research and a number of successes both in the 
laboratory and in the field, smart structures are poised to solve a variety of 
problems, on small to grand scales. The infiltration of smart structures into 
mainstream design may come only slowly, Spencer says, but he has no doubt that 
it will come. 


