Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/1/97

 November 1, 1997 

 Electric cars . . . fueled by gasoline?

by S. Perkins 

 When you think about electric cars, the phrase "Fill 'er up!" doesn't 
immediately come to mind -- but early in the next century it might.

 A government-industry team has demonstrated a gasoline-fueled system that 
could form the heart of a clean, fuel-efficient electric car. The system 
consists of a fuel processor that partially oxidizes gasoline to create 
hydrogen gas, which is then sent to a fuel cell that generates electric power. 
Members of the partnership include the Department of Energy and Arthur D. 
Little of Cambridge, Mass.

 In tests conducted in mid-October, the prototype fuel processor generated 
hydrogen at a rate sufficient to produce 50 kilowatts of electric power -- 
enough to run a midsize car, says Robert S. Weber, a senior scientist for the 
project at Arthur D. Little.

 Although the laboratory tests used gasoline and ethanol as fuels, the system 
can also use methanol and natural gas as sources of hydrogen. A car equipped 
with the system would get about twice the gas mileage of a comparable car with 
an internal combustion engine, Weber says.

 Electric cars have faced two vexing problems -- the need for heavy batteries 
that must be recharged after a few hours' use, and the lack of an 
infrastructure to support the recharging. 

 One attempt to get around these difficulties has been the development of 
so-called hybrid electric vehicles, which use a combination of electric and 
gasoline power (SN: 10/7/95, p. 232). Another approach depends on fuel cells 
working off stored hydrogen. 

 In May 1996, Daimler-Benz unveiled a prototype minivan that carried tanks of 
compressed hydrogen gas. In October 1996, Toyota announced that it had 
developed a hydrogen-absorbing alloy, thereby averting the need for storing 
large amounts of the gas at ordinary temperatures and pressures.

 The new system, however, needs neither large batteries nor devices to store 
hydrogen and would take advantage of the gasoline distribution infrastructure 
already in place.

 Fuel cell technology is just one of the initiatives that the California Air 
Resources Board has encouraged the automobile industry to explore, says 
spokesman Richard W. Varenchik. The system announced on Oct. 21, although 
promising, needs to be demonstrated in an automobile, he adds.

"We're always looking for efficient, low-emission technologies, but when it 
gets down to it, we want to look at equipment in the automobile, in real-life 
conditions." 


