Science News Online (11/22/97):Compromise reached on census sampling

 November 22, 1997 

 Compromise reached on census sampling

by I. Peterson

 After months of wrangling, the Clinton administration and Republican 
congressional leaders agreed last week on a compromise plan to prepare for the 
year 2000 census.

 The agreement requires the Bureau of the Census to pursue a dual track. The 
bureau may experiment with the use of statistical sampling to supplement a 
traditional head count (SN: 10/11/97, p. 238), but at the same time it must 
test enumeration without sampling as part of its dress rehearsal, scheduled for 
early 1998.

 Republicans, meanwhile, will pursue an expedited review by the Supreme Court 
of the legality and constitutionality of using statistical sampling to adjust 
census numbers. 

 The measure also establishes an eight-person, bipartisan Census Monitoring 
Board to oversee preparation and implementation of the 2000 census.

 In effect, the compromise delays until 1999 a decision on whether nationwide 
sampling can be used to supplement and adjust a traditional enumeration. "We've 
come to an operational truce," says Martha Farnsworth Riche, Census Bureau 
director. The compromise lets the bureau move forward while judicial review 
occurs, she adds.

 The bureau will test its new procedures, which include sampling, in 
Sacramento, Calif., and on the Menominee Reservation in Wisconsin. As a 
contingency plan, it will conduct a more traditional enumeration in a number of 
rural counties in South Carolina.

 Members of Congress have expressed a variety of concerns about making 
statistical adjustments to census numbers, including the possibility of 
undermining public confidence in the decennial census and reducing 
participation. Several have noted the complexity of the statistical approach 
and the inherent uncertainties and assumptions in the chosen statistical 
methods.

"I'm concerned about how the sampling is actually implemented," says David W. 
Murray of the Statistical Assessment Service in Washington, D.C. Enumeration 
does not catch everyone, he concedes, but with a statistical approach, there is 
a danger of building in other sorts of errors because of the choice of sampling 
methodology.

 Moreover, such errors are much more difficult to pinpoint and understand than 
those associated with enumeration, Murray contends. "Is one type of error being 
replaced by another?"

"The fact is that traditional census operations give us an undercount," says 
Charles L. Schultze of the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C. Those most 
often missed include rural renters, migrant workers, elderly women living 
alone, minorities, mobile young men, and particularly children.

 Sampling offers a substantial improvement in accuracy, Schultze argues. 
Indeed, there may no longer be a realistic alternative to sampling because of 
the escalating costs and diminishing returns of conducting a conventional 
enumeration.

"It's an issue of trust," Riche says. "We want to make the process as 
transparent as possible." 


