Science News Online (11/29/97): Magnetic fields can diminish drug action

 November 29, 1997 

 Magnetic fields can diminish drug action

by J. Raloff

 The low-level electromagnetic fields present in some North American homes 
today can diminish or wipe out a widely prescribed drug's action, at least in 
test tubes. Researchers have found that when exposed to such fields, the drug 
tamoxifen lost its ability to halt the proliferation of cancer cells grown in 
the laboratory. Tamoxifen is a synthetic hormone used to prevent the recurrence 
of breast cancer. 

 These findings, reported last week at a Washington, D.C., meeting sponsored by 
the U.S. Public Health Service, also heighten concern that these 
electromagnetic fields may be triggering hitherto unrecognized biological 
changes in people.

 The new study is an extension of research that Robert P. Liburdy, a cell 
biologist at Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory, reported on 4 
years ago. At that time, he showed that while melatonin, a natural antioxidant 
hormone, would inhibit the growth of breast cancer cells exposed to 2 
milligauss (mG) magnetic fields, its activity was essentially erased when the 
cells were bathed in a 12 mG field (SN: 7/3/93, p. 10).

 Though the average magnetic field associated with the 60 hertz current in U.S. 
homes is 2 mG or lower, it can reach 12 mG in a small share of homes, such as 
those with unusual electric wiring. Values range as high as 1,000 mG in some 
occupational settings. People may also be exposed briefly to 12 mG or higher 
magnetic fields from electric razors and hair dryers, the sides of computer 
monitors, or appliances with large motors, such as refrigerators.

 Liburdy and Joan D. Harland, also at the national lab, have now incubated one 
type of breast cancer cell treated with tamoxifen -- at concentrations typical 
of those found in the breast cells of women taking the drug -- in the presence 
of the same two field strengths. 

 Untreated cells appeared to grow equally well in each field. The growth rate 
of cells treated with tamoxifen fell by 40 percent in the 2 mG environment but 
exhibited no drop-off in the 12 mG field. Liburdy told Science News, "We've 
shown that you can overcome this field's suppression of tamoxifen, but to do it 
you've got to increase the drug dose by up to 10-fold."

 Liburdy and Harland report their findings in Bioelectromagnetics (vol. 18, no. 
8).

 At last week's meeting, Liburdy also described follow-up research on a second 
type of breast cancer cell. Again, both melatonin and tamoxifen inhibited cell 
growth in a 2 mG environment but failed to do so under the influence of a 12 mG 
field.

 At a Bioelectromagnetics Society meeting earlier this year, Liburdy presented 
laboratory data indicating that 12 mG magnetic fields from a computer monitor, 
which have a slightly different waveform than those associated with home wiring 
or many appliances, also erase the antiproliferative action of a hormone -- in 
this case, melatonin.

"As basic science, this is very interesting stuff," notes Richard Stevens of 
the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Wash. Most of the new 
experiments were done with the most widely studied line of breast cancer cells, 
he notes. Moreover, "the [magnetic] field levels used are certainly relevant to 
humans." 

 While it's far too early to suggest that residential fields pose a risk to the 
efficacy of tamoxifen, Stevens does argue that "this study provides the 
rationale for wondering about and investigating such implications."

 Carl F. Blackman, a biophysicist with the Environmental Protection Agency in 
Research Triangle Park, N.C., has recently confirmed Liburdy's finding that 
magnetic fields can suppress melatonin's action and is now probing the ability 
of low-level fields to affect the action of tamoxifen. In other experiments, he 
finds that electromagnetic fields can affect the development of nerve cells 
when concentrations of nerve growth factor are too low.

 What all these studies suggest, he says, is that "in a system that is stable 
and unstressed, you may see no effect of these fields. But if you stimulate it 
or depress it a little bit" --  with drug treatment or insufficient growth 
factors, for example -- "the field may show an effect."


