Science News Online (11/29/97): Gene Creates Malaria Drug Resistance

 November 29, 1997 

 Gene Creates Malaria Drug Resistance

by J. Travis

 Ending a decade-long quest, scientists have now identified a gene that enables 
the malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum to mount resistance to 
chloroquine, a major antimalarial drug that has become increasingly ineffective 
around the world.

 Armed with the new information, investigators will try to develop versions of 
chloroquine that sidestep the parasite's resistance but still safely kill the 
blood-thirsty organism, says Thomas E. Wellems of the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.

 A number of complex variations in the newly discovered gene cg2 appear to 
bestow chloroquine resistance upon P. falciparum, Wellems and his colleagues 
report in the Nov. 28 Cell.

 Resistance to the drug emerged 40 years ago, notes Wellems, and appeared 
almost simultaneously in Southeast Asia and South America. Today, the problem 
has spread worldwide, fueling a resurgence of malaria that kills millions of 
people annually.

 Several years ago, Wellems and his colleagues took a crucial step toward 
unraveling chloroquine resistance when they bred a drug-resistant strain of P. 
falciparum from Indochina with a chloroquine-sensitive strain from Central 
America. 

 By examining the resulting progeny, some of which were resistant and others of 
which were not, the researchers narrowed the search for a resistance-conferring 
gene to a small portion of one of the parasite's chromosomes.

 The region harbors many genes, but Wellems' team eventually found that cg2's 
DNA sequence consistently shows more than a dozen differences between 
chloroquine-resistant and chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum strains .

 The elaborate changes observed in cg2 contrast with the simple gene mutations 
through which many microorganisms have thwarted other drugs and may therefore 
explain why chloroquine worked so well for so long. "It took over a decade for 
resistance to arise," says Wellems.

 Investigators believe that chloroquine functions by accumulating within the 
malaria parasite and that the drug prevents the parasite from sequestering 
toxic components created as it digests the hemoglobin it steals from blood 
cells.

 Some investigators have suggested that chloroquine-resistant strains have an 
increased ability to pump the drug from their bodies; others contend that 
resistance stems from changes that prevent chloroquine from entering the 
parasites in the first place. Also, there's evidence that resistant parasites 
specifically reduce the concentration of chloroquine in the internal 
compartments where they digest hemoglobin.

 Using antibodies that bind to the protein encoded by cg2, Wellems and his 
coworkers observed the protein in the complex of membranes that separates the 
parasite from its host blood cell and in the vicinity of the organism's 
hemoglobin-digesting compartments. 

 Both locations bolster the hypothesis that the protein plays a role in 
transporting chloroquine. "It's exactly where it should be, and it fits all the 
theories," says Wellems.

 His group plans to add the resistant version of cg2 to chloroquine-sensitive 
P. falciparum to confirm the gene's role in protecting the parasites from the 
drug.

 The investigators have found that in South American strains of 
chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum, cg2 has a significantly different DNA 
sequence than it does in either drug-sensitive or drug-resistant Asian strains. 

 That result "lends support to the hypothesis that there was a separate origin 
of resistance in the New World," says Daniel E. Goldberg of Washington 
University in St. Louis.

 While the identification of cg2 may help scientists search for new 
chloroquinelike drugs, Goldberg suggests it will also enable investigators to 
develop compounds that specifically block the resistance mechanism.

 When used with chloroquine, such agents could restore the drug's 
effectiveness, he says. First, however, Wellems and his colleagues must 
determine the function of cg2's protein.


