Science News Online (12/13/97): Beatin' those low-life blue-laser blues

 December 13, 1997 

 Beatin' those low-life blue-laser blues

by S. Perkins

 It took scientists decades to construct a solid-state laser that would shine a 
beam of blue light. Now, they may finally have built one robust enough to be 
useful commercially. 

 Last year, a team of Japanese researchers announced that it had developed 
gallium nitride (GaN) semiconductor laser diodes that provide a continuous 
output of blue light at room temperature. Those diodes had a distinct 
limitation, however: They had an operational lifetime of only 27 hours. 

 Now, the same team, led by Shuji Nakamura of Nichia Chemical Industries in 
Tokushima, reports in the Dec. 1 Japanese Journal of Applied Physics that it 
has produced GaN diodes that have already lasted over 100 times longer in tests 
conducted at room temperature. Tests at higher temperatures indicate that the 
diodes have an estimated life of over 10,000 hours.

 The most likely first use for these blue laser diodes will be in optical data 
storage, where the amount of information stored on a given area of a disk's 
surface could be three or four times higher than that written by the infrared 
laser beams used today. The diodes could also find uses in high-resolution 
laser printers, full-color electronic displays, and undersea optical 
communications, says Nakamura.

 The researchers used two different fabrication techniques to extend the life 
of the diodes. First, the new components include 120 layers of GaN, each 25 
nanometers thick, alternating with 2.5-nm-thick layers of GaN that also contain 
small amounts of aluminum. Previous versions of the diodes contained thicker 
layers of the aluminum gallium nitride material, which tended to crack under 
stresses induced by temperature changes during operation.

 Second, Nakamura's team formed the new laser diodes on top of a 
20-millimeter-thick base of GaN specially designed to constrain the growth of 
crystal defects. 

 The researchers built the GaN base atop a series of silicon dioxide strips 
separated by narrow gaps. These strips distort slightly the structure of the 
GaN base above them, creating physical stresses that steer the spread of any 
crystal defects. Instead of ascending to the surface, where they would affect 
the performance of the layered diodes, most of the defects remain confined to 
the bottom 5 mm of the 20-mm GaN base.

 The few crystal defects that eventually grow to the upper surface of the GaN 
base do so at predictable locations. By selecting other spots on the surface on 
which to fabricate the diodes, Nakamura's team dramatically improved the 
laser's useful lifetime.

 The laser operates at a wavelength of 401 nanometers, about half the 
wavelength of red and infrared lasers. Its color lies at the extreme blue end 
of the visible-light spectrum.

"Producing a blue laser diode is a great step, but you need to get the cost 
down, the power output up, and the right color to use this in [an electronic] 
display," says R.L. Melcher of IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center in 
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 


