Science News Online (12/13/97): Butterfly sparkle characterized for chips

 December 13, 1997 

 Butterfly sparkle characterized for chips

by C. Wu 

 Many tropical butterfly species are iridescent: Their wings flash bright, 
shimmery hues that arise not from pigments but from the way the wings reflect 
light. Although the insects use their striking colors to lure mates and confuse 
predators, their iridescence has also caught the attention of a group of 
engineers. 

 Researchers at Tufts University in Medford, Mass., are studying the optical 
properties of butterfly wings to determine how they collect and distribute 
heat. Ultimately, they hope to apply what they learn from the insects to 
computer chip manufacturing and the assembly of microelectromechanical systems 
(SN: 7/26/97, p. 62). Haruna Tada presented the group's latest results last 
week at a meeting of the Materials Research Society in Boston.

 The Tufts researchers compared the iridescent wings of two butterfly species, 
the Brazilian Morpho menelaus and the Indonesian Papilio blumei. The wings 
consist of overlapping scales made of chitin, a carbohydrate also found in 
crustacean shells and insect exoskeletons (SN: 7/31/93, p. 72). 

 The complex structure of the scales determines their color. Each scale 
contains thin layers of chitin and air, which reflect light in such a way that 
one wavelength emerges while the others are canceled out (SN: 11/4/95, p. 296). 

 M. menelaus scales consist of folded stacks of chitin lying side by side to 
form long, parallel ridges. The wings glitter an intense blue. In the vividly 
blue-green bands on P. blumei wings, the chitin layers are flat and separated 
by a raised, gridlike structure. 

 The researchers measured how much light individual wing scales reflect over a 
range of wavelengths. Although the reflectivity of butterfly wings has been 
well studied, says Peter Y. Wong, "what we're looking at is what's absorbed."

 As expected, the butterfly scales reflect light most strongly in the range of 
wavelengths corresponding to their observed colors. The scales reflect very 
little infrared light and must therefore absorb most of it as heat. 

 Knowledge of butterfly wings might help in understanding the optical and 
thermal properties of computer chips, which likewise consist of finely 
structured thin films. Chip manufacture demands reliable control of heating and 
cooling steps. 

"Hopefully, when we go to model microelectronics processing," Wong adds, "we'll 
have better insight into what are the important phenomena." 


