Science News Online (11/8/97): Climate Protection Saves Lives Now

 November 8, 1997 

 Climate Protection Saves Lives Now

by J. Raloff

 Diplomats who will be negotiating in Kyoto, Japan, next month for an 
aggressive new treaty to curb emissions of greenhouse gases received 
an unanticipated bargaining chip this week. An international analysis concludes 
that such climate protection policies could save hundreds of 
thousands of lives annually by 2020. 

 This preliminary study "shows that if sensible policies are taken on 
greenhouse gases, they will have benefits far beyond climate change 
prevention," says epidemiologist Tord Kjellstrom, director of the Office of 
Global and Integrated Environmental Health of the World Health 
Organization (WHO) in Geneva and an organizer of the team that conducted the 
analysis. Moreover, notes coauthor Devra Lee Davis of the World 
Resources Institute in Washington, D.C., "these health benefits show up 
immediately -- the year the policies are put in place."

 Any controls that limit fossil fuel combustion, the major source of carbon 
dioxide -- and the leading agent of global warming -- also limit 
emissions of the traditional combustion pollutants, such as microscopic 
particles. When inhaled, these dustlike particulates can aggravate 
respiratory and heart diseases. Indeed, as concentrations of airborne 
particulates rise, so do death rates from these diseases (SN: 7/1/95, p. 
5).

 Last year, WHO issued a 400-page report on projected health impacts of climate 
change. It focused on problems associated with heat (SN: 
4/6/96, p. 218) and only briefly acknowledged likely effects of particulates on 
health, Kjellstrom notes.

 To investigate this issue, he and Davis teamed up with colleagues from a host 
of institutions, including the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency and the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston. Their Working Group 
on Public Health and Fossil-Fuel Combustion analyzed how fossil 
fuel use would drop if the European Union's proposed restrictions take effect 
(SN: 11/1/97, p. 277). In that proposal, industrial nations 
would cut greenhouse gas releases by 2010 to a level 15 percent below their 
1990 emissions. The working group also assumed developing nations 
would slow their increase in greenhouse emissions to peak by 2010 at about 10 
percent below where they would be if current trends continue.

 The scientists plugged these estimates into computer programs that model how 
particulate concentrations change regionally and then tallied 
death rates, based on associations seen in several recent health studies.

 In the Nov. 8 Lancet, the working group predicts that "700,000 avoidable 
deaths will occur annually" from particulate exposures by 2020 
"under the business-as-usual forecasts, when compared with the climate-policy 
scenario." The cumulative impact between 2000 and 2020 of not 
adopting sharp climate protection policies could be some 8 million premature 
deaths, most of them in developing countries, they say.

 What makes this analysis special is its scope, says Richard Wilson, a 
physicist at Harvard University and adviser to the working group. "It's 
the first time that anybody has looked at this [particulates and health] issue 
globally."

 Economist Dallas Burtraw of the Washington, D.C.-based Resources for the 
Future has estimated the economic value of such health benefits for 
the United States. He finds that they could offset about 30 percent of the 
costs associated with new climate protection policies -- and an 
even greater proportion of the costs in developing countries.

 C. Arden Pope III of Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, who has 
conducted many of the particulates and health studies upon which the 
Lancet analysis is based, hopes that people will not place too much weight on 
its estimates of lives that can be saved by climate policies. 
Those numbers are still preliminary and rest on substantial uncertainties.

"The heart of that paper is the framework it offers for understanding how 
important a public health issue the reduction of 
combustion[-generated] particulates is," he says.



