Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 11/8/97

 November 8, 1997 

 New schizophrenia therapy shows promise

by B. Bower 

 Hopes for improving the treatment of schizophrenia, a debilitating mental 
disorder, rest mainly on continuing innovations in antipsychotic medications. 
Now, a new study suggests that over the long haul, individual psychotherapy 
tailored to strengthen interpersonal skills and control social stress markedly 
helps many people suffering from the disorder.

 This new form of schizophrenia treatment, dubbed "personal therapy," resulted 
in lower relapse rates and progressively better social functioning over 3 
years, at least for people able to live with family members and meet basic 
survival needs, contend social worker Gerard E. Hogarty of the University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine and his colleagues.

"If a new medication had treatment effects of the same magnitude as those 
reported by Hogarty's group [for personal therapy], it would be seen as a major 
advance and adopted as the main drug treatment for schizophrenia," remarks 
William T. Carpenter Jr., a psychiatrist and schizophrenia investigator at the 
Maryland Psychiatric Research Center in Baltimore. "Unfortunately, the 
influence of this new finding will be severely muted because it involves a 
psychosocial approach."

 Personal therapy operates on the theory that stress-related emotions worsen 
symptoms of schizophrenia, such as delusions, hallucinations, social 
withdrawal, and apathy (SN: 10/25/97, p. 261).

 In this approach, a therapist first helps a person to notice his or her 
physical and emotional reactions to stress and teaches various strategies for 
coping with and relaxing in the social arena. After a year or more of weekly 
sessions, the therapist encourages the person to more actively engage others at 
work and in the community and presents more advanced social skills, such as 
identifying and dealing with criticism from others.

 Hogarty's group recruited 151 people hospitalized for their first episode of 
schizophrenia. Upon leaving the hospital, each volunteer was maintained on some 
form of antipsychotic medication and assigned at random to 3 years of personal 
therapy, family therapy (which teaches all family members how to live with a 
mentally ill relative), or supportive meetings with a nurse who monitored drug 
effects and offered general encouragement.

 Among the 97 participants who lived with their families, those who received 
personal therapy experienced far fewer recurrences of severe schizophrenia 
symptoms and took their medication with greater regularity than those in the 
other two groups, the scientists report in the November American Journal of 
Psychiatry.

 Personal therapy recipients living with their families also displayed improved 
social adjustment over the entire 3-year period, whereas family and supportive 
approaches yielded more modest social improvements that occurred only in the 
first year of treatment.

 However, among the 54 individuals who lived alone or with nonfamily members, 
schizophrenia symptoms reappeared and worsened most often for those receiving 
personal therapy. People living independently of their families tended to start 
out with particularly severe symptoms and found it difficult to secure housing, 
food, and clothing on their own. As a result, the demands of personal therapy 
may have overwhelmed them, the researchers suggest.

 It remains unclear whether the new data on personal therapy will affect how 
clinicians treat schizophrenia, especially in light of current financial 
constraints. Moreover, future studies are needed to evaluate the method's 
effectiveness in combination with new antipsychotic drugs, assert psychiatrists 
Wayne S. Fenton of Chestnut Lodge Hospital in Rockville, Md., and Thomas H. 
McGlashan of Yale University in an accompanying comment.


