Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 1/18/97 January 18, 1997

 Galactic and stellar black holes get real

by R. Cowen

"In my entire scientific life . . . the most shattering experience has been the 
realization that an exact solution of Einstein's equations of general 
relativity . . . provides the absolutely exact representation of untold numbers 
of massive black holes in the universe."

 In 1975, when the late Nobel laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar wrote those 
words, the idea of black holes required a stretch of the imagination. Today, 
few astronomers doubt the existence of these invisible bodies, which exert the 
most extreme gravitational tug in the cosmos.

 Moreover, at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Toronto this 
week, researchers announced that three galaxies, all within 50 million 
light-years of Earth, have central black holes ranging from 50 million to 500 
million times the mass of the sun. Douglas O. Richstone of the University of 
Michigan in Ann Arbor and his colleagues also said that data, some of it 
previously reported, bring to 21 the number of nearby galaxies that harbor 
black holes.

 This evidence bolsters the argument that nearly every galaxy contains a black 
hole. Although Richstone said he would not yet stake his life on that 
assertion, "I'd bet my car on it, and it's a pretty good car." Researchers 
conclude that only the gravitational tug of a highly condensed central mass can 
account for the large velocities of stars at the centers of these galaxies.

 The census of black holes is expected to grow dramatically after the Hubble 
Space Telescope gets a new spectrograph next month and begins observing the 
motions of stars in dimmer galaxies. However, the data already suggest a trend: 
A galactic black hole's mass is proportional to the galaxy's mass, notes 
Richstone. Martin J. Rees of the University of Cambridge in England proposes 
that black holes formed simultaneously with the central bulge of galaxies as 
gas migrated to the core.

 Another team, studying lower-mass black holes, reported the first evidence of 
an event horizon, one of the weirdest properties of these unseen bodies. Ramesh 
Narayan and his colleagues at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
in Cambridge, Mass., examined a group of objects, called X-ray novas, that 
consist of a visible star locked in the gravitational embrace of an unseen 
companion. The X rays come from hot gas torn from the visible star and falling 
onto a disk surrounding the companion.

 That companion is sometimes a black hole and sometimes a neutron star, the 
collapsed remains of a dead star. Two years ago, Narayan and a colleague 
theorized that under special circumstances, the pattern of X-ray emission could 
reveal the companion's identity.

 When gas from the visible star transfers onto the disk extremely slowly, it 
grows as hot as 1 trillion kelvins but radiates only weakly. Gradually, the hot 
material spirals inward. If the companion is a neutron star, the material will 
radiate its energy as X rays when it hits the star's surface. If the companion 
is a black hole, however, the energy vanishes from sight, swallowed inside the 
event horizon -- the envelope thought to surround a black hole and from which 
not even radiation can escape.

 Narayan's team used the Japanese X-ray satellite ASCA to observe V404 Cygni, 
an X-ray nova known to contain a black hole (SN: 2/15/92, p. 101). The 
radiation pattern matched that predicted for an event horizon. "The evidence 
from our study says that these objects really do have event horizons," says 
Narayan.


