Science News Online (12/20/97): Small comet theory faces barrage from foes

 December 20, 1997 

 Small comet theory faces barrage from foes

by R. Monastersky

 Space physicist Louis A. Frank wowed the world in May with evidence that 
30,000 house-size snowballs bombard Earth each day. Now, skeptics are lobbing 
critiques at the space snowball concept.

 The harshest attack comes from scientists who argue that Frank and his 
colleagues have been fooled by meaningless static in his satellite camera. 
Frank counters with new data that, he says, prove the existence of the elusive, 
30-ton comets. The combatants squared off last week in San Francisco at a 
meeting of the American Geophysical Union. The critics also published their 
reports in the Dec. 15 Geophysical Research Letters.

 Their findings have eroded some of the support Frank garnered in the wake of 
his announcements earlier this year. "This certainly has raised the level of 
skepticism in the community. I think people are just playing wait-and-see for 
now," says Robert R. Meier of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C.

 The recent criticism represents only the latest downturn in a decade-long 
roller coaster ride for Frank, a researcher at the University of Iowa in Iowa 
City. He originally proposed the so-called small comet hypothesis in 1986 after 
finding dark spots in images from the Dynamics Explorer 1 satellite. 

 The satellite's camera took pictures of Earth's ultraviolet daytime glow, 
emitted by oxygen in the upper atmosphere. To explain the dark splotches in the 
images, Frank concluded that the satellite's view must be blocked by large 
clouds of water vapor high above Earth. He suggested that tiny comets were 
delivering water to the dry upper atmosphere.

 Most researchers dismissed the observations as instrumental noise that 
produced occasional dark pixels in the images. This year, however, Frank turned 
some former skeptics around with confirming evidence from a higher-resolution 
ultraviolet camera on NASA's Polar satellite (SN: 5/31/97, p. 332).

 Another team of Polar investigators questions those data. George K. Parks of 
the University of Washington in Seattle and his colleagues operate the 
Ultraviolet Imager (UVI) camera on Polar, which sits next to Frank's camera. 
When Parks ran the UVI camera in a special mode, he found dark spots in the 
dayglow images. However, the same spots turned up in calibration images taken 
by UVI in the laboratory before launch. 

"I don't think there were any comets in the lab, so these [spots] have to be 
instrumental," he says.

 In another test, Parks searched both cameras' images for evidence of blurring 
caused by a wobble in the Polar satellite. If Frank is correct, then the 
spacecraft's motion should smear the image of the dark spots, just as jiggling 
a camera will ruin a picture. Parks found no blurring. "Neither [camera] shows 
evidence for cosmic snowballs," he concludes.

 Frank agrees that smaller dark spots could be noise but says that the largest 
ones appear to be real because they are bigger than the calibration spots. 
Furthermore, he says, the wobble signature shows up in the data when the motion 
of the clouds is taken into account.

 At the meeting, Frank presented the results of what he calls "the ultimate 
test." If the dark spots were artifacts, then his camera should see equal 
numbers at all points in the satellite's orbit. Instead, the number of observed 
spots decreases as the satellite recedes from the planet, just as his theory 
predicted.

 Other scientists criticized elements of the small comet hypothesis. A team 
from the University of Arizona in Tucson concluded that small comets cannot 
exist in large numbers because each would equal the full moon in brightness. 
Another Arizona group failed to find craters on the moon matching the pattern 
they would expect if the snowballs were striking it. A third set of Arizona 
scientists showed that the atmospheres of Earth and Mars should contain far 
greater concentrations of noble gases if small comets were pelting these 
planets. Still other scientists proposed that meteoroids could account for some 
of the dark spots in the ultraviolet images.

 NASA is trying to enlist help to detect the hypothetical comets. The space 
agency is obtaining old data from Navy radar installations and is arranging for 
observation time on several telescopes. 

 
