Science News Online (12/20/97): Science Safari in Cyberspace

 December 20, 1997 

 Science Safari in Cyberspace

 The Internet offers scientific facts and fun

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 Marvel at the photos of Mars. View the interior of a human body. Join a 
cyberstudy. Tour a virtual dinosaur zoo. .

 How? By joining the Science News guided tour of the World Wide Web. Whether 
you are a tenderfoot or a seasoned explorer, you'll enjoy visiting a few of the 
writers' favorites among the many informative, unusual, and entertaining Web 
sites of science. 

 All it takes is a computer with Internet access. If you don't have your own, 
you can probably find one at a public library. Or you can stop by one of the 
cybercafes that are popping up in urban areas around the country and sip a 
steaming cup of java as you see the sights.

 Hold onto your mouse, here we go!

 The first stop on the tour is NASA's Humans in Space site. Designed to prepare 
visitors for the rigors of space travel, this site may give you a start. The 
good news is that microgravity allows you to turn somersaults in midair or lift 
a 300-pound weight with a pinkie. If you're ready for adventure, continue on to 
the next Web site.

 Next stop: Mars. At NASA's Planetary Photojournal Web site, you can take a 
quick jaunt to the Red Planet. Click on Mars to see the startling images of the 
Martian surface taken during the recent Pathfinder Mission. Take a look at 
Cabbage Patch, an area studded with small rounded objects that may have been 
left behind by a Martian flood. Don't forget to visit Twin Peaks or Poohbear 
Rock, attractions that have influenced scientists' view of ancient Mars' 
weather.

 After you've flipped through the snapshots of Mars, gaze at the icy moons of 
Saturn taken during the Voyager mission or pull over for a vista of the solar 
system.

 Along with inspiring pictures, NASA's Web site is a trove of detailed 
scientific information collected during a variety of space missions.

 Now take off your space suit and head to Earth for an online tour back in 
time, courtesy of the University of California Museum of Paleontology. Time 
travelers can click on dinosaur tracks to learn about Earth and the creatures 
that inhabited it millions of years ago. 

 Intrepid souls who thrilled to the story of Jurassic Park should check out the 
dinosaur pages on this site. Here you can meet giant herbivores, meat-eating 
dinosaurs, and the small-but-mean Velociraptor. Take a guided tour of an 
exhibit on the Dilophosaurus (one of the stars of Jurassic Park) with Sam 
Welles, who helped discover the first Dilophosaurus skeleton. Welles offers a 
fascinating description of this powerful reptile, which probably traveled in 
small herds.

 This site contains other virtual museum exhibits, including one on elephants, 
another on plate tectonics, and a gallery of fossil images. 

 Fast-forward to present-day Earth for a tour of ChemCenter, a site sponsored 
by the American Chemical Society. Head for National Chemistry Week to find out 
how to become a chemist for a day. Scientists are recruiting volunteers to 
collect and test natural water samples across the United States for hardness. 
As the data come in, this site will report on the results. 

 Need some chemical humor? The society has compiled a list of jokes sent in by 
Web surfers. Have you heard the one about the two atoms?

 If you want to learn more about argon, lead, and the other elements, go to the 
online Periodic Table of the Elements, a site hosted by the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory. Click on any element in the table to get an array of information 
about its history, properties, and uses. For example, here you'll learn that 
sodium is the fourth most abundant element on Earth.

 For more travel adventure, peer over the rim of a virtual volcano designed by 
the U.S. Geological Survey Volcano Hazards Program. This site includes detailed 
information about the hazards posed by volcanoes and reports on volcanic unrest 
around the world. It includes dramatic volcano footage, including a picture of 
a spatter cone, a steep hill of welded lava erupting on the Big Island of 
Hawaii. Don't get dizzy as you look down into the Aniakchak caldera in Alaska 
-- and watch out for the mud volcano!

 For an unparalleled view of forest fires and other natural disasters, head for 
the Geostationary Satellite site run by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration. It has data on cloud and surface conditions collected by 
satellites orbiting Earth. You can look at a satellite image of the forest 
fires in Brazil, showing fire, smoke, and clouds, as well as shots of forest 
fires in Indonesia. A film shows the Soufriere Hills volcano erupting on the 
island of Montserrat.

 The latest data on El Nino, the occasional warming of Pacific Ocean waters, 
are also available from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
Scientists at the agency have compiled detailed information on this weather 
pattern, as well as practical information on its effects on local weather 
conditions. For example, Californians visiting the site will learn that they 
can expect to don rain gear this winter. Color-coded maps of the United States 
show El Nino's predicted effects through next April.

 For a trip to the subatomic world, visit the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory Particle Data Group's site. Here, you can embark on the Particle 
Adventure. Learn about the inner workings of atoms, including a strange family 
of particles called quarks, which have names like up, down, and charm. If this 
introduction to physics sounds like a Dr. Seuss book, read on. During the 
adventure, you'll meet leptons and the elusive neutrinos.

 Math buffs will enjoy the Prime Page, a site devoted entirely to -- you 
guessed it -- prime numbers. Run by mathematician Chris K. Caldwell at the 
University of Tennessee at Martin, the site defines prime numbers and gives 
information on the largest known primes. It also includes a section on how to 
find primes and prove primality. For those wondering when the first 
million-digit megaprime number will be found, this page makes predictions. It 
also lists the 10 largest prime numbers identified so far.

 For the personal side of mathematics, visit a Web site sponsored by the 
University of St. Andrews in Fife, Scotland. With more than 1,000 biographies 
of famous mathematicians, this site includes both math facts and a fascinating 
glimpse of history. The site also carries articles on the development of 
mathematical ideas. You can peruse such topics as pi through the ages, prime 
numbers, Egyptian mathematics, and the quantum age.

http://www.reef.edu.au (No longer available.) Don your diving gear for a trip 
to an ocean reef. Developed by the University of Sydney, this site tells you 
all about the reef crest, the mangrove swamp, and the lagoon. You can take a 
virtual swim with a shark and learn all about this ancient group of predators, 
including the gory details of what they eat. Or ask a brain coral about sex in 
the sea -- this site provides a scintillating glimpse of the reproductive 
habits of sea creatures.

 Hop onto the shuttle bus for the Microbe Zoo, a site developed by the 
Communication Technology Laboratory at Michigan State University. Once you 
reach the home page, click on Dirtland to learn about tiny organisms that live 
in soil and rocks. This section includes the House of Horrors, which describes 
the life of a vampire bacterium or a strangler fungus. Move on to Home Sweet 
Home to find out what lives on the surface of your kitchen cutting board. Next, 
stop at the Animal Pavilion, where you'll learn that cows digest grass and hay 
with the help of billions of bacteria, fungi, and viruses.

 To catch up on the fast-paced field of genetics, tap into the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute's Web site. Blazing a Genetic Trail serves as an 
easy-to-understand guide to modern genetics research and its practical 
applications.

 Participate in a virtual scientific symposium at a Web site sponsored by the 
Center for Bioenvironmental Research of Tulane and Xavier Universities in New 
Orleans. At Environmental Concepts Made Easy, you can take in the highlights of 
a recent scientific meeting on lead in the environment. The site also offers 
detailed information on environmental estrogens and other synthetic chemicals 
in the environment. Don't forget to stop in at the Tulane Astrobiology Center, 
where researchers use space travel to study basic biological phenomena. 

 Policy junkies can take a quick trip to the nation's capital at Thomas 
Legislative Information on the Internet. You can search for a specific bill or 
troll for legislation on a variety of topics. A search for the word "ozone," 
for example, turns up 30 items, including a bill to amend the Clean Air Act. If 
you want to brush up on the legislative process, visit the section that 
explains how laws are made. This site also contains historical documents, 
including the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.

 The ultimate Web site for access to consumer-oriented medical information is 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Healthfinder. It includes 
information on diseases from A to Z with links to more than 1,250 other 
reliable sites. If you're looking for help with heart disease, for example, the 
tour provides clear explanations of the warning signs and a section on how to 
ward off this killer. Armed with the basics, you can then venture farther 
afield to a variety of other sites. (The American Heart Association site has a 
feature that lets you calculate your risk of developing heart disease.)

 The Health Information Page provides one-stop access to information from the 
National Institutes of Health. Here you can link to Medline, a database run by 
the National Library of Medicine which has more than 8.8 million references to 
articles published in medical journals around the world. Check out the National 
Cancer Institute or the Office of AIDS Research. The National Library of 
Medicine's images from the history of medicine include portraits, caricatures, 
and graphic art. Don't leave this site without stopping at the Visible Human 
Project -- digitized images of the human body. 

 At Shapeup America's site, you can calculate your body mass index, which 
researchers consider a better predictor of disease risk than body weight alone. 
After you've gotten the bad (or good) news, jog down to the Health and Fitness 
Center, where you can design your own exercise program. Then stop off at the 
Cyberkitchen to design an appetizing meal that helps you lose, gain, or 
maintain your weight.

 If you're the sort of traveler who has a lot of questions, turn to Washington 
University's Mad Scientist Network for answers. You can ask scientists about 
chemistry, physics, astronomy, engineering, earth science, and biology. This 
site also includes links to other science sites and resources on the Internet.

 For the inside scoop on any story in the news, try the Why? files, sponsored 
by the University of Wisconsin. This site provides the detailed science behind 
the stories that everyone is talking about. 

 Do you have an opinion of your own? Contribute to the Scientific Opinion 
Corner or join a discussion group on astronomy, geology, physics and math, or 
plants, animals, and people.

 That concludes the tour. See you on the byways of the Internet.

copyright 1997
