Science News Online (12/6/97): Estrogen's Emerging Manly Alter Ego

 December 6, 1997 

 Estrogen's Emerging Manly Alter Ego

by J. Raloff

 Estrogen is usually described as the animal kingdom's primary female sex 
hormone. That's a gross oversimplification, however. Even that quintessentially 
male preserve -- the sperm -- depends on estrogen, scientists report this week. 
Without estrogen, males are infertile.

 The new study, by Rex A. Hess at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign and his colleagues, focuses on estrogen's role in male 
reproductive function. Nevertheless, the researchers observe that their 
findings also suggest a mechanism by which DDT and other estrogen-mimicking 
pollutants (SN: 7/3/93, p. 10) could wreak havoc on fertility. If these weak 
estrogens displace the body's more potent natural ones, they might diminish 
estrogen exposure -- and sperm activity (SN: 1/22/94, p. 56).

 Hess and his colleagues study mutant mice. These animals were bred to produce 
estrogen normally, but they lack the gene for an estrogen receptor -- a protein 
that allows cells to take up the hormone. As a result, the mice cannot respond 
to the estrogen in their bodies.

 Since this hormone plays a pivotal feminizing role in development, the 
scientists expected that mutant females would develop abnormally. "The big 
surprise," notes Patricia M. Saling, a reproductive cell biologist at Duke 
University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., was the finding 4 years ago that the 
males were infertile. Since then, Hess and others have been probing why.

 Last year, Mitch Eddy of the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences (NIEHS) in Research Triangle Park, N.C., and his colleagues showed 
that although the mutant males initially make sperm, their testes quickly 
degenerate. They traced the problem to a backup of excess seminal fluid.

 In the Dec. 4 Nature, Hess and his colleagues uncover the cause of the backup. 
It's not overproduction of the secreted fluid, as many had suspected. Instead, 
it's a drainage problem: The tubes running from the testes to the epididymis, 
where sperm mature and acquire the ability to fertilize eggs, are unable to 
drain off the excess liquid. 

 Besides damaging the testes, this excess fluid "also results in a very dilute 
ejaculate," notes Hess' colleague Kenneth S. Korach of NIEHS, a developer of 
the mutant strain of mice. If sperm are not packed densely in seminal fluid, 
fertility is impaired.

 The tubes -- known as efferent ducts -- and the epididymis have never been 
considered "dominant in terms of making or breaking fertility," Saling says. 
The new study suggests otherwise. In fact, she says, "if manipulating the 
epididymal environment can lead to whopping amounts of infertility, this would 
suggest a new organ to target in the development of [male] contraceptives."

 Ineffective fluid removal may not explain all of the mutant males' fertility 
problems, however. Eddy's team found that any sperm produced fail to mature and 
become capable of fertilization. Yet excess fluid might play a role here, too, 
speculates Richard M. Sharpe of the Medical Research Council in Edinburgh. In a 
commentary accompanying the Nature report, he says that ". . . the abnormal 
amounts of fluid will effectively dilute [any maturing agents] secreted within 
the epididymis."

 What the new data clearly demonstrate, Korach states, is the essential role of 
estrogen in male reproductive health. Indeed, Sharpe adds, "Suddenly, the idea 
of 'male' and 'female' hormones begins to look thin."

 Hess' team argues that the new data also raise "further concern over the 
potential direct effects of environmental estrogens on male reproduction and 
reported declines in sperm counts."

 After analyzing 61 studies, Danish scientists reported an apparent downward 
trend in human sperm counts 5 years ago (SN: 1/22/94, p. 56). Since then, 
others have challenged their assessment, arguing that the data -- collected in 
different regions, over different times, and using different criteria -- are 
not comparable. 

 Not so, concludes a major reanalysis. 

"I think we were the only group that actually got all of the original data," 
says Shanna H. Swan of the California Department of Health Services in 
Emeryville. Her group analyzed the data using a series of alternative 
statistical techniques to see if the decline originally reported was an 
artifact of the way the data had been analyzed.

 In the just-published November Environmental Health Perspectives, Swan's team 
reports that all its analyses show a decline in sperm counts since 1970 for men 
in Western countries. Indeed, Swan observes, the statistical representations 
that best fit the data detected an even stronger drop than the Danes had 
reported. 

 The new declines average more than 1 percent annually -- or about 1.5 million 
sperm per milliliter per year in the United States and 3 million sperm per 
milliliter per year in Europe. 


