Science News Online (12/6/97): Chilled Brains: Hibernating animals may hold 
clues to novel stroke treatments

 December 6, 1997 

 Chilled Brains

 Hibernating animals may hold clues to novel stroke treatments

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 As the last leaves tumble slowly to the ground and snow begins to blanket much 
of the country, many animals have prepared for the winter's scarcity of food by 
falling into the long slumber called hibernation. Secure in their burrows, some 
of the animals undergo remarkable physiological changes, including dramatic 
reductions of body temperature and heart rate.

 Take the extraordinary case of a hibernating arctic ground squirrel. Its heart 
beats only a few times a minute, and its body temperature drops below the 
freezing point of water.

"It's hard to detect any kind of heartbeat in them. It's really difficult to 
tell if they're dead or alive. They're just cold little balls," says Kelly L. 
Drew of the Institute of Arctic Biology at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.

 How hibernating creatures induce and survive this near-death state, known as 
torpor, has long fascinated scientists studying animal physiology. More 
recently, biomedical investigators have also begun to take an interest. 

 In particular, two research groups hoping to unearth novel ways of treating 
stroke have started to examine how the brains of squirrels endure the rigors of 
hibernation. They described some of their initial results at the Society for 
Neuroscience meeting in New Orleans in October.

 The dearth of effective treatments for stroke is the motivation for this 
unusual research effort, explains John M. Hallenbeck, chief of the stroke 
branch at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) 
in Bethesda, Md.

 Sometimes called "brain attacks" to highlight their similarity to heart 
attacks, most strokes result when something, say a clot or a ruptured blood 
vessel, interrupts the flow of blood to the brain, creating a condition called 
ischemia. The only proven stroke therapy is prompt use of tissue plasminogen 
activator, a clot-busting agent, and even that may not help the majority of 
stroke patients.

 Strokes produce waves of brain cell destruction. The halting of the blood flow 
stems the brain's supply of oxygen and glucose, immediately slaying a core 
group of cells. Even after blood flow resumes, additional groups of nearby 
cells continue to succumb to the stressful event. "This is viewed as brain 
tissue that is potentially salvageable -- if you knew what to do," says 
Hallenbeck. 

 Several years ago, Hallenbeck and Kai U. Frerichs of Brigham and Women's 
Hospital in Boston wondered what happens to blood flow to the brain when 
squirrels hibernate. The amount of blood reaching the brain plummets by 90 
percent or more, the scientists discovered. 

"They have a very low blood flow, almost a trickle, through their brains, which 
they tolerate for a long time," marvels Hallenbeck.

 Consequently, hibernating brains face limited blood-borne supplies of glucose 
and oxygen, the primary molecules that cells use to generate energy. Unlike 
brains that have undergone a stroke, however, hibernating brains suffer no ill 
effects.

 These contrasting outcomes highlight the primary difference between 
hibernation and stroke. "Hypoxia [insufficient oxygen] is the number-one 
consequence of a stroke. It's not in hibernation," notes Larry C.H. Wang, a 
hibernation researcher at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.

 Hibernating animals reduce the biochemical activity of cells, including brain 
cells, to such low levels that even a dramatic reduction in blood flow does not 
create a shortage of oxygen, explains Wang. 

 As part of this shutdown, protein production is severely restricted in the 
brains of hibernating animals, scientists have recently discovered. 
"Biosynthesis of proteins is virtually arrested for weeks," says Frerichs.

 Curious as to whether this phenomenon stems merely from the brain cells' being 
colder than normal, Frerichs and his colleagues removed slices of tissue from 
the hippocampal region of hibernating squirrels' brains. Kept alive in test 
tubes, the tissue continued to exhibit suppressed protein synthesis, even when 
warmed to 37@C. Yet when ribosomes, the protein-making factories in cells, were 
isolated from the hippocampal tissue, they created proteins at a normal rate.

 Something inside the brain cells of a hibernating animal may actively suppress 
the creation of proteins, perhaps to conserve the limited energy available, 
suggests Frerichs. Or, he adds, cells may simply divert the energy normally 
devoted to protein assembly to more immediate needs, such as maintaining 
appropriate concentrations of ions within the cells. If ions aren't properly 
balanced, cells will swell and die.

 The researchers are now looking for the molecular mechanisms by which a 
hibernating animal lowers its brain's need for oxygen and glucose. With such 
knowledge, propose Frerichs and Hallenbeck, physicians may someday be able to 
prevent cell death from stroke, and perhaps from other head injuries, by 
inducing a hibernationlike state in the human brain. 

"It's conceivable that if you knew how hibernators switch themselves off 
without dissolving their brains, that might be a tool to prevent ischemic 
damage in other species," says Frerichs.

 The second research team exploring the relevance of hibernation to stroke took 
shape last year, when Margaret E. Rice of New York University Medical Center 
visited a colleague in Fairbanks. During the trip, Rice met Drew, who had been 
studying the brain chemistry of hibernating squirrels. 

 Rice's research has centered on how animals use antioxidants, molecules that 
defuse free radicals, the destructive molecules generated when cells metabolize 
oxygen to produce energy. One such defender is ascorbic acid, better known as 
vitamin C. While people and all nonhuman primates must obtain ascorbic acid 
from their food, most other animals synthesize the vitamin in their liver.

 In earlier work, Rice had examined the amount of ascorbic acid in the brains 
of turtles. These animals can accumulate a striking amount of vitamin C -- five 
times that observed in the human brain. Rice suspects that this antioxidant 
bounty protects turtles when they surface after long periods underwater and 
ravenously consume oxygen to supply their brains and bodies with energy.

 Merging their interests, Rice and Drew decided to investigate antioxidant 
concentrations in hibernating arctic ground squirrels. They've now found that 
the amount of ascorbic acid in the blood of hibernating animals rockets to four 
times that measured during nonhibernating periods. Moreover, the amount of 
ascorbic acid in the cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the central nervous system 
doubles during hibernation. "It seems an important strategy to build up this 
extracellular store of ascorbic acid," says Rice.

 The researchers also noticed that when a squirrel roused temporarily from its 
torpor, a periodic occurrence for most hibernators, its vitamin C supply 
returned to normal within hours. 

"When they go down into hibernation, ascorbic acid goes up. And as soon as they 
warm up, it goes away really fast," says Drew.

 The investigators believe that the increased supply of vitamin C protects the 
squirrel's brain from the rush of free radicals that occurs when torpor ends, 
blood flow to the brain resumes, and cells begin vigorously generating energy. 
To confirm this hypothesis, the scientists plan to reduce the amount of 
ascorbic acid in the blood of hibernating squirrels and observe whether that 
induces any brain damage.

 They hope that such experiments will ultimately lead to a way to curtail the 
brain cell death that follows a stroke's initial wave of destruction. "Some of 
the damage [from a stroke] is caused by the lack of oxygen and glucose during 
the reduced blood flow. Other damage is caused once the blood flow starts 
again," notes Drew.

 This resumption of blood flow, known as reperfusion, apparently exerts fatal 
stress on some cells as they try to recover from the stroke. To combat this 
reperfusion-induced damage, physicians might infuse ascorbic acid or another 
antioxidant into a patient's blood, suggests Rice.

 Seeking further clues to how squirrels withstand torpor and their periodic 
emergence from it, Drew also plans to examine another curiosity concerning 
hibernation: Reports dating back to the 1950s have noted that the blood of 
hibernating animals clots slowly.

 Drew has confirmed those observations with her arctic ground squirrels. "Their 
blood didn't clot in 24 hours," she says.

 She is now trying to identify the anticlotting factor, or missing clotting 
factor, that would explain this unusual phenomenon.

 The investigators conducting this hibernation research can offer no guarantees 
that their results will one day help stroke patients, yet they note that the 
frustrating history of stroke treatment research argues that no potential line 
of inquiry should be ignored. 

"My main interest is clinical. I want to see something end up in an IV bottle 
and dripping into patients. That's the ultimate goal," says Frerichs. 


