Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 1/25/97 January 25, 1997

 Alcoholics Synonymous Heavy drinkers of all stripes may get comparable help 
from a variety of therapies

 By BRUCE BOWER

 Psychotherapy studies rarely generate as much anticipation as Project MATCH 
did. Mental health clinicians and addiction researchers anxiously awaited the 
results of this 8-year, $27-million investigation that asked whether certain 
types of alcoholics respond best to specific forms of treatment. The federally 
funded investigation promised to yield insights that would bring badly needed 
guidelines to alcoholism treatment and perhaps allow clinicians to tailor the 
current hodgepodge of approaches to the particular needs of each excessive 
imbiber.

 The coordinators of Project MATCH have finally served up their findings, but 
with a shot of disappointment and a twist of irony. At a press conference held 
last December in Washington, D.C., they announced that alcoholics reduce their 
drinking sharply and to roughly the same degree after completing any of three 
randomly assigned treatments.

 Trained psychotherapists administered the three programs. In 12-step 
facilitation therapy, the therapist familiarizes the client with the philosophy 
of Alcoholics Anonymous (which treats alcoholism as an illness treatable only 
through abstinence, support from other addicts, and personal surrender to God's 
spiritual authority) and encourages attendance at AA meetings. 
Cognitive-behavioral coping skills therapy focuses on formulating strategies 
for avoiding or dealing with situations that tempt one to drink. Motivational 
enhancement therapy helps clients to identify and mobilize personal strengths 
and resources that can reduce alcohol consumption.

 Treatment matching has operated on the assumption that alcoholics fall into 
categories best served by particular strategies. For instance, 12-step 
facilitation therapy and AA might work best with alcoholics searching for 
spiritual and religious meaning in their lives, cognitive-behavioral therapy 
may suit alcoholics who display serious psychiatric symptoms and thinking 
difficulties, and motivational enhancement could act as a tonic for heavy 
drinkers who express little desire or hope for improvement.

 The new findings, however, "challenge the notion that patient-treatment 
matching is necessary in alcoholism treatment," states Enoch Gordis, director 
of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) in Bethesda, 
Md. "The good news is that treatment works. All three treatments evaluated in 
Project MATCH produced excellent overall outcomes."

 Despite Gordis' optimism, opinions diverge sharply regarding the study's 
implications and the adequacy of its design. Some alcoholism researchers agree 
with the NIAAA director. They view Project MATCH as a critical step toward the 
ultimate goal of developing sophisticated therapeutic approaches that thwart 
the suspected biological causes of uncontrolled alcohol use.

 Others dub the federal effort an expensive dud. The absence of a control group 
of alcoholics who received no specific intervention raises the likelihood that 
volunteers improved because of intensive personal attention and encouragement 
rather than any specific treatment techniques, these investigators argue. At 
best, they contend, the data suggest that AA and other free self-help groups 
prove effective enough to replace professionally administered alcoholism 
treatments that command big insurance bucks.

 A third perspective holds that flaws in the design of Project MATCH leave open 
the possibility that many alcoholics benefit from treatment matching or could 
abandon their addiction on their own, outside the world of clinical 
interventions and AA.

 Scientific interest in developing treatments attuned to alcoholics' individual 
characteristics goes back at least 50 years. More than 30 small-scale studies 
published during the 1980s reported that treatment matching based on a number 
of individual characteristics held promise for alleviating alcoholism. In 1989, 
the NIAAA initiated Project MATCH (which stands for matching alcoholism 
treatments to client heterogeneity) to examine closely the most promising of 
those leads.

 A total of 1,726 people diagnosed as alcohol-dependent (a condition marked by 
daily intoxication or extended drinking binges that disrupt home and work 
activities) were recruited from outpatient clinics or facilities that provide 
care following hospital stays. The volunteers were randomly assigned to one of 
the three designated treatments, which were delivered over 12 weeks at 30 
locations by 80 psychotherapists.

 Individuals also dependent on drugs other than alcohol were excluded from the 
study, although more than one in three volunteers reported having recently used 
an illicit substance.

 Alcohol use was monitored for 1 year after treatment ended, with particular 
attention paid to the influence of the following individual characteristics on 
recovery: sex, extent of prior alcohol consumption, the presence of psychiatric 
symptoms, aggressive and criminal tendencies, difficulties in thinking and 
reasoning, motivation to change, desire to find meaning in life, and number of 
family members and friends likely to promote continued alcohol abuse.

 Comparably large drops in alcohol consumption occurred for participants after 
courses of either 12-step facilitation, cognitive-behavioral, or motivational 
therapy, according to the NIAAA investigation, which appears in the January 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol. Before treatment, volunteers, on average, drank 
on 25 out of 30 days, a number that fell to 6 days of drinking per month by the 
end of the follow-up. The amount imbibed on drinking days also dropped markedly 
after treatment.

 In the year of follow-up, 35 percent of volunteers reported not drinking but 
40 percent still had periods of heavy drinking on at least 3 consecutive days.

 Only one individual characteristic affected treatment responses, notes 
psychologist Gerard Connors of the Research Institute on Addictions in Buffalo, 
N.Y., a Project MATCH investigator. Alcoholics exhibiting few or no signs of 
psychological disturbance achieved abstinence through 12-step facilitation 
therapy more often than those with pronounced mental symptoms.

 It remains possible that treatment methods not included in Project MATCH, such 
as group or marital therapy, work especially well for certain types of 
alcoholics, Connors notes.

 For now, Gordis contends, it appears that individual therapies based on a 
variety of philosophies make approximately the same dent in alcohol use. The 
development of new drugs that diminish alcohol cravings (SN: 3/16/96, p. 167) 
will add to the impact of current psychosocial approaches, he holds.

"Treatment matches may become apparent when we get to the core of the 
physiological and brain mechanisms underlying addiction and alcoholism," Gordis 
asserts.

 Since the Project MATCH results were first openly discussed at a meeting of 
alcoholism researchers in Washington, D.C., last June, a dissenting 
interpretation of their significance has been advanced. Because encouragement 
to attend AA meetings achieves as much as the two professionally administered 
treatments under study, according to this view, free self-help groups for heavy 
drinkers may pack enough punch to justify abolishing insurance coverage for 
paid treatments. The self-help groups are organized by volunteers and supported 
through donations.

"The Project MATCH findings support the idea that selling treatment for heavy 
drinking alongside free self-help programs such as AA is like selling water by 
the river, to coin a Zen saying," contends psychologist Jeffrey A. Schaler of 
American University in Washington, D.C. "Why buy when the river gives it for 
free?"

 Moreover, the lack of a nontreatment control group that received as much 
regular attention and support during the 1-year follow-up as the group given 
treatment makes it impossible to tell whether any of the Project MATCH 
interventions had a specific impact, asserts psychologist Stanton Peele, a 
clinician and writer in Morristown, N.J.

 Even if the interventions did work, the findings apply only to the minority of 
alcoholics who voluntarily enter treatment in clinical settings, Peele argues. 
A majority of those who seek professional or AA-type treatment for substance 
abuse in the United States do so on the orders of judges (following arrests for 
drunk driving or other offenses) or employers, according to federal data.

 Recovery from alcohol dependence or milder alcohol abuse most often occurs 
outside the confines of hospitals, psychotherapists' offices, or self-help 
groups, further undermining confidence in such treatments, Peele adds.

 For instance, a pair of Canadian telephone surveys -- one nationwide and one 
in Ontario -- find that of the randomly selected adults, three in four who had 
recovered from an alcohol problem 1 year or more previously did so without any 
outside help or treatment. About one in three of those who recovered in the 
national sample continued to drink in moderation, a figure that rose to two in 
three in Ontario, report psychologist Linda C. Sobell of Nova Southeastern 
University in Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., and her coworkers in the July 1996 American 
Journal of Public Health.

 Similar results emerged from an analysis of interviews conducted in 1992 with 
4,585 U.S. adults who had at some time been diagnosed as alcohol-dependent. In 
the year before the interviews, about one in four still had mild to severe 
alcohol problems, a similar proportion had drunk no alcohol, and the rest had 
imbibed in moderation, asserts NIAAA epidemiologist Deborah A. Dawson.

 Those who had received some sort of treatment were slightly more likely than 
their untreated counterparts to have had alcohol problems in the past year, 
Dawson reports in the June 1996 Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 
For those whose recovery lasted 5 years or more, prior treatment raised the 
likelihood of abstinence, whereas lack of treatment upped the chances of 
drinking in moderation.

"Treatment studies may not be generalizable to alcoholics who do not seek 
treatment," Dawson concludes.

 Peele, who views alcoholism not as a medical disease but as a learned behavior 
employed to cope with life's challenges, goes further. Such evidence, combined 
with the fact that the expansion of treatment rolls during the past 20 years 
has failed to reduce substance abuse rates, indicates that professional and 
AA-type approaches often present more risks than advantages to alcoholics, 
particularly those coerced into treatment, he contends.

 George E. Vaillant, a psychiatrist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston 
and director of a 50-year study of male alcoholics (SN: 6/5/93, p. 356), takes 
a much less radical stance than Peele, although he still has reservations about 
the design of Project MATCH.

 Alcoholics Anonymous and behavioral interventions such as those in the NIAAA 
investigation provide more help over the long haul than any other forms of 
treatment, without regard to the personal characteristics of alcoholics, 
Vaillant argues.

"The Project MATCH findings are exactly what I would have predicted," the 
Boston researcher says.

 In his opinion, researchers need to examine differences between alcoholics who 
succeed in recovering and those who fail, rather than limiting themselves to a 
search for contrasts among professionally run treatments.

 Sustained recovery requires at least two of the following experiences, 
Vaillant theorizes: some sort of compulsory supervision (such as parole) or a 
painful alcohol-related event (such as a bleeding ulcer or a spouse's 
departure); finding a substitute dependency, such as meditation or AA meeting 
attendance; forming new, stable relationships that diminish addictive 
behaviors; and reformulating personal identity and the meaning of one's life 
through religious conversion or self-help group participation.

 Such factors went unexamined in Project MATCH, according to Vaillant. Most 
notably, large segments of all three treatment groups attended AA meetings (and 
were not discouraged by researchers from doing so), thus obscuring the role 
played by AA in successful recoveries, he argues.

"Project MATCH was poorly designed, to say the least," asserts psychologist G. 
Alan Marlatt of the University of Washington in Seattle, a pioneer in the 
development of behavioral treatments for alcoholism. "Everybody can now project 
their own views about alcoholism onto this study."

 Aside from the lack of a control group, the federal study also failed to 
evaluate directly the practice of patient matching, Marlatt holds. Volunteers 
were assigned to certain treatments not according to specific personal 
characteristics but at random; researchers tried to ferret out traits linked to 
improvement after therapy began.

 In addition, the relatively "pure" alcoholics recruited for Project MATCH may 
respond to treatment differently than the majority of alcohol abusers, who 
regularly use one or more illicit drugs as well, Marlatt says.

 While many questions remain about the effectiveness of alcoholism treatments, 
several psychotherapy studies -- including a large federal study of depression 
treatments (SN: 1/11/97, p. 21) -- find that some therapists are far better 
than others at fostering improvement in their clients. The quality of the 
relationship between a therapist and an alcoholic client probably exerts a 
major influence on how well a particular treatment works, Marlatt suggests.

 To put it another way, therapist-client matching may turn out to hold at least 
as much research promise as patient-treatment matching -- especially since the 
value of patient-treatment matching, at least for now, remains unclear.


