Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 1/25/97 January 25, 1997

 Religious schools inspire math reasoning

by B. Bower

 In Israel, as in other technological societies, public elementary and high 
schools expose students to a range of mathematics and science classes. Yet 
ironically, ultraorthodox Jewish schools -- which focus on learning to 
interpret holy texts, along with a smattering of basic arithmetic -- provide a 
better training ground for solving tricky geometry problems than the mainstream 
facilities do, according to a new study.

 Orthodox education's emphasis on examining texts from different perspectives, 
achieving insights through independent learning, and using strict 
problem-solving procedures may nurture reasoning skills that apply to novel 
realms of knowledge, such as geometry, propose Yoram Dembo and Iris Levin, both 
of Tel Aviv University, and Robert S. Siegler of Carnegie Mellon University in 
Pittsburgh.

 The early years of mainstream education in Israel may actually harm students' 
geometric reasoning skills, the psychologists argue. Classes typically stress 
solving geometry problems quickly and accurately without delving into the 
underlying logic of those operations, a pattern also found in many U.S. 
schools. Geometric understanding in mainstream students blooms only for those 
who take advanced math instruction in high school, the scientists say.

"These findings will displease Israel's mainstream education system, which sees 
itself as enlightened compared to the ultraorthodox approach," remarks 
psychologist Nathan A. Fox of the University of Maryland at College Park.

 Levin's husband used his ultraorthodox education to prepare for and pass 
Israel's medical school entrance tests, thus inspiring the study.

 The researchers examined geometric reasoning in 240 students: 60 12- to 
14-year-olds and 60 16- to 18-year-olds in mainstream schools and equal numbers 
of students in the same age groups in ultraorthodox schools.

 Only boys took part, since ultraorthodox girls receive less intensive 
instruction.

 Volunteers first viewed demonstrations in which a flexible, three-dimensional 
shape was changed from one form to another -- say, from a circle to an ellipse. 
Students judged whether a shape's total volume increased, decreased, or stayed 
the same after each transformation.

 A majority of students in each group then received training to clarify how 
shapes with the same circumference can have different volumes. They either 
observed whether beads that filled an initial shape also filled its transformed 
shape, or they imagined what would happen to a shape's volume if the actions 
that transformed it were taken to their extreme -- approaching a straight line.

 Finally, students attempted to solve new questions about the relation between 
the volume and the circumference of shapes.

 Most strikingly, 12- to 14-year-old ultraorthodox students performed better on 
all geometric reasoning tasks than their mainstream peers, the researchers 
report in the January Developmental Psychology. Among 16- to 18-year-olds, only 
mainstream students taking advanced math courses scored higher than 
ultraorthodox students. Moreover, ultraorthodox and mainstream students 
benefited equally from training sessions.

 Ultraorthodox youngsters pondered geometry problems much longer than their 
mainstream peers did, signifying a more reflective and analytical style of 
thought, Siegler asserts.

 Japanese math teachers go into great depth on only a few problems in each 
class meeting, notes psychologist Nora Newcombe of Temple University in 
Philadelphia. That approach may spur general reasoning skills like those 
observed in ultraorthodox students and help to explain Japanese students' 
overall math superiority, she says.

 Adds Siegler, "Mainstream educators have much to learn from ultraorthodox 
schools."


