Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 1/25/97 January 25, 1997

 Identifying Chaos in Heart Quakes

by I. Peterson

 Every year, more than 350,000 people in the United States die suddenly of 
heart attacks, most caused by an abrupt shift from rhythmic pumping to 
spasmodic convulsions of the heart.

 Now, researchers report evidence suggesting that an ailing heart's erratic 
shivering, known as cardiac fibrillation, is a form of chaos. In other words, 
the irregular beating is not completely random but results from a specific type 
of deterioration in the organization of the heart's electric activity.

 Alan Garfinkel, a cardiology professor at the University of California, Los 
Angeles, and his colleagues describe their findings in the Jan. 15 Journal of 
Clinical Investigation.

 The observations represent the "best evidence to date implicating chaotic 
behavior in fibrillation in human and canine hearts," says Richard L. Verrier 
of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston.

 The discovery of a specific pathway to chaos in cardiac fibrillation also 
opens up the possibility of new therapeutic strategies that may help prevent 
fibrillation, Garfinkel suggests.

 Normally, with each successive heartbeat, an electric wave front propagates 
across the interconnected muscle fibers of the heart, causing them to contract. 
However, such a wave can occasionally get stuck -- perhaps because of some 
abnormality in the tissue -- and begin rotating as a spiral wave (SN: 9/5/92, 
p. 156). Scientists have predicted that this rotating disturbance can break 
free and begin to circulate as a unit in the heart tissue. It may also break up 
into a small number of additional spiral waves, all rotating and meandering at 
different rates.

 Garfinkel and his group looked for evidence of this pattern of behavior in 
cardiac recordings of five patients who suffer from chronic atrial 
fibrillation, in multi-electrode recordings of electric activity during 
ventricular fibrillation in the excised, intact heart of a dog, and in maps of 
electric activity across thin slices of human and canine cardiac tissue in the 
lab.

 Their measurements showed waves of electric activity consistent with a 
scenario in which a meandering spiral wave breaks up into additional spiral 
waves, causing the system to destabilize and become chaotic.

"The data suggest that fibrillation is a form of . . . chaos," Garfinkel says. 
"Characteristic oscillations precede and precipitate fibrillation."

 The chaotic behavior appears to arise because of interactions among distinct 
spiral waves meandering at different rates. A computer simulation of the 
process in a sheet of cardiac tissue supports the findings. The effect 
resembles the way in which a smoothly flowing liquid breaks up into vortices, 
becoming turbulent.

"They've made a very strong case that, at least in some situations, the 
transition to fibrillation involves spiral waves," says physicist William L. 
Ditto of the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, who studies cardiac 
excitations.

"There's a lot of interest in understanding the stability of spiral waves in 
the heart," notes physiologist Leon M. Glass of McGill University in Montreal. 
Identifying the instabilities involved in fibrillation is difficult both 
theoretically and experimentally. "It's important to try to document them," he 
says.

 Garfinkel and his colleagues attribute spiral wave instabilities to a 
characteristic known as restitution, which governs how quickly a heart cell 
recovers from one beat to the next. Changes in the recovery rate of a subset of 
cells can trigger spiral wave meandering, the researchers say.

 The UCLA study offers clues as to what kinds of electrocardiogram signals 
might serve as predictors of cardiac fibrillation, Verrier remarks. "The 
chances are quite reasonable that this kind of an approach will work."

"With these kinds of studies," Ditto adds, "we have a real chance to make a 
major breakthrough."


