Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 2/15/97 February 15, 1997

 Fish oil gets a garlic chaser for the heart

by J. Raloff

 Fish oil is a dietary wonder. It appears to lower the chances not only of 
developing breast cancer and autoimmune disease but of having heart attacks. 
It's one of the few substances known to lower concentrations of triglycerides, 
or fatty substances that pose a cardiovascular risk, in the blood.

 Yet many physicians have been reluctant to advocate consuming fish oil in 
large quantities because this natural fat has the drawback of increasing the 
proportion of cholesterol shuttled through the blood in low-density 
lipoproteins (LDLs), another major risk factor for heart disease.

 Now, a Canadian study appears to have found a way to redeem fish oil's 
therapeutic promise -- by marrying it to garlic, a food previously shown to 
possess a mild propensity for lowering LDL cholesterol.

 Bruce J. Holub and Adam J. Adler of the University of Guelph in Ontario 
randomly assigned a dozen men each to three daily treatments: 900 milligrams of 
garlic (in the form of three sugar-coated pills), 12 grams of fish oil (in 
1-gram capsules), or a combination of the two. A fourth group received 
garlicfree sugar pills and capsules of a vegetable oil.

 The volunteers, each about 45 years old, appeared healthy. However, Holub 
observes, on the basis of their blood lipids -- principally their 
concentrations of triglycerides and LDL cholesterol -- each man faced a 
moderately high risk of heart disease.

 Over the 12-week trial, LDL cholesterol concentrations dropped, as expected, 
by about 14 percent in men taking garlic only, the researchers report in the 
February American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Similarly, fish oil capsules 
reduced a man's triglycerides by some 37 percent, but at the expense of 
increasing LDL cholesterol concentrations by 8.5 percent.

 However, among men getting both fish oil and garlic, triglyceride 
concentrations fell some 34 percent and LDL cholesterol dropped 9.5 percent.

 Currently, Holub says, people at risk of heart disease often receive advice to 
modify their diet -- specifically to lower their consumption of saturated fats 
and cholesterol and increase their intake of vegetables and fiber. If this 
doesn't reduce their blood lipids sufficiently, the next step is usually 
prescription drugs.

"We'd like to change that approach," he says. Before switching patients to 
expensive drugs, he thinks, physicians "should consider nutritional supplements 
that have been shown effective and safe," like this garlic-fish oil combination.

"I find this pairing really exciting," says nutrition scientist Penny M. 
Kris-Etherton of Pennsylvania State University in State College. Not only does 
it erase the LDL concern that has dimmed fish oil's cardiovascular prospects, 
she says, it indicates that even for people who follow today's conventional 
dietary guidelines, "there is more that can be done."

 Indeed, she argues, this study ushers in the prospect that other foods 
beneficial to the heart -- such as tofu, oat bran , or insoluble fiber -- might 
be added to fish oil and garlic or taken in new combos as improved, natural 
strategies to fight heart disease.

 David G. Robertson of Emory University in Atlanta expresses more tempered 
enthusiasm. An endocrinologist whose research focuses on cutting heart disease 
risks, he notes that the magnitude of changes seen in this fairly short trial 
is "impressive" for nondrug therapies but still leaves lipid concentrations "at 
least 15 percent above where they ought to be." Such nutritional supplements 
may still need to be coupled with some drug therapy, he cautions.

 Moreover, says Robertson, fish oil and garlic supplements can be as costly as 
prescription drugs.


