Science News Online (12/6/97): Corroded planes turn paint pink

 December 6, 1997 

 Corroded planes turn paint pink

by C. Wu

 Airplanes get rained on, baked in the sun, and attacked by the wind -- 
onslaughts that corrode metal and ultimately compromise safety. Detecting 
corrosion can be a tedious job for maintenance crews, since many imaging 
techniques work only on one small area of a large aircraft at a time. 

 Now, researchers are developing a way for airplanes to signal to their crews 
when it's time for repairs. At a meeting of the Materials Research Society in 
Boston this week, Gerald S. Frankel of Ohio State University in Columbus 
described paints that change color if the underlying metal becomes corroded. 

 The paints, created by Frankel and his colleague, Jian Zhang, detect changes 
in acidity and alkalinity, measured as pH. When water and air attack some 
metals, the resulting electrochemical reaction produces ions that increase pH. 

 One of the paints consists of a clear acrylic coating mixed with 
phenolphthalein, a chemical that turns from colorless to red above a given pH. 
Frankel and Zhang made test samples by covering pieces of an aluminum alloy 
with the special coating and a top layer of plain acrylic. 

 Passing a current through the samples stimulated the electrochemical reaction, 
and visible pink spots popped up. Later, Frankel says, "we will probe with 
electrochemical and other techniques to prove there is corrosion happening 
locally." From these measurements, the researchers calculate that the 
phenolphthalein coating could detect pits less than 15 micrometers deep. 

 The team has also looked at acrylic mixed with a compound that fluoresces 
under ultraviolet light when above a particular pH. By measuring the emitted 
light with a spectrophotometer, Frankel says, the researchers may be able to 
quantify the color change and thus the extent of corrosion. 

 The color change method, says William M. Mullins of Technical Management 
Concepts at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio, is a "very clever idea. 
You could walk down the vehicle and see there's a pink spot. It would be very 
nice to be able to do that without actively going in with an instrument." 

 The new method would be especially useful for detecting the most troublesome 
corrosion, which is concealed around rivets and in the joints where sheets of 
metal overlap, says Mullins, who uses ultrasound to map out and model corrosion 
on the surface of materials. 

 Only clear coatings will work, but that limitation on airplane appearance may 
not matter if the coatings are used in hidden places, Frankel says. 


