Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 2/15/97 February 15, 1997

 Tallying Nitrogen's Increasing Impact

by C. Mlot

 For most of agricultural history, nitrogen has been a precious commodity. Only 
specialized bacteria and lightning could convert atmospheric nitrogen into 
biologically usable forms. Today, however, fertilizers and fossil fuels have 
made nitrogen so freely available that it has become too much of a good thing.

 In a review of nitrogen's effects across the environmental spectrum, a team of 
ecologists headed by Peter M. Vitousek of Stanford University has concluded in 
no uncertain terms that human activities have dramatically increased the flow 
of nitrogen into the biological world -- doubling the natural rate at which it 
is made available on land -- with "serious and long-term" consequences.

"We are now the dominant force in the nitrogen cycle," says ecologist G. David 
Tilman of the University of Minnesota in St. Paul, one of the report's eight 
authors. "Humans are controlling more nitrogen than all natural processes."

 The Ecological Society of America is releasing a version of the report this 
week at the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in 
Seattle. The full report is slated to appear in the August Ecological 
Applications.

 Although none of the data or processes summarized in the report is new, a 
synthesis was needed, says John M. Blair. "When people think of global change, 
they usually think of climate change and increasing carbon dioxide," says 
Blair, a soil ecologist at Kansas State University in Manhattan. But the growth 
and reach of human population has a global impact in other ways. "The nitrogen 
cycle is a terrific example of that."

 The ecologists trace most of the new nitrogen in the system to three human 
activities. The use of commercial fertilizer is the biggest source, and it is 
increasing sharply, especially in developing countries. Of all the manufactured 
fertilizer used through 1990, half was applied to crops in the 1980s.

 Increased global cultivation of legumes and other crops that harbor 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria also adds to the influx. The burning of fossil fuels 
provides the third major source of newly available nitrogen compounds. These 
activities funnel about 140 million metric tons of nitrogen into the 
environment each year, the ecologists estimate -- an amount roughly equivalent 
to 10 million semi trucks of dry nitrogen fertilizer, says Tilman.

 The clearing of wildlands liberates perhaps another 70 million metric tons of 
nitrogen that had been stored in biomass.

 The nitrogen glut is evident throughout the biogeochemical cycle, according to 
the report. Nitrous oxide, a potent greenhouse gas (SN: 9/18/93, p. 180), is 
accumulating in the atmosphere and can eat away at the stratospheric ozone 
layer. Other nitrogen compounds contribute to smog and acid deposition. They 
alter the pH and nutrient balance of soils and waters, triggering a cascade of 
effects (SN: 2/11/95, p. 90; 7/22/89, p. 56).

 Researchers now think that the excess nitrogen is diminishing biological 
diversity in some areas. European heathlands, long adapted to nitrogen-poor 
conditions, are giving way to Eurasian grasses under the fertilizing effects of 
nitrogen. Such changes in species composition (SN: 12/7/96, p. 356) may be the 
newest and most surprising of nitrogen's consequences, says Vitousek.

 The trends are likely to continue, in step with the growing, urbanizing world 
population, the ecologists say. They see a need for more efficient fertilizer 
use and greater control of nitrogen emissions.


