Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 1/4/97 January 4, 1997

 Spacecraft spies hills and valleys of sun

by D. Vergano

 To the ancient Greeks, the sun represented perfection--a notion finally put to 
rest by Galileo's discovery of sunspots in 1611. However, anyone still looking 
to Sol for some constancy may be pleased by new findings indicating that a 
rigid, regular landscape adorns the boiling surface of Earth's star.

"It's pretty surprising. We see hills and valleys," says Jeffrey R. Kuhn of the 
National Solar Observatory in Tucson, who discussed his group's discovery at 
last month's meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco.

 Using the Michelson Doppler Imager aboard the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft, the researchers measured motions of gases at the 
sun's edge to within an accuracy of 3 meters (SN: 5/4/96, p. 277). Kuhn 
compares this resolution to an Earthbound observer spotting a quarter on the 
moon. SOHO rests in an orbit where the gravitational force between Earth and 
the sun is equal.

 By observing the sun as it rotates, Kuhn and his colleagues built up a picture 
of its entire surface. They saw bumps of bright gas fixed in place on the 
bubbling outer layer of solar gas. The hills of superheated gas measure 40,000 
kilometers across but only half a kilometer high. "They are, more or less, 
rotating in unison [with the sun]," says Kuhn.

 The astronomers believe that fixed magnetic fields inside the sun guide heated 
gases from the interior to the surface where they continually renew the hills. 
In the 7 months of SOHO's operation, the solar landscape has changed little, 
Kuhn reports.

"It looks like a dimpled golf ball," says Juri Toomre of the University of 
Colorado at Boulder, who calls the finding part of a renaissance of discovery 
that has recently been reshaping helioseismography ().

 By tracking the motion of powerful sound waves through the sun, the 
researchers hope to discover the source of its magnetic fields, sunspots, and 
11-year sunspot cycle. "We're at the high-adventure stage of the field," says 
Toomre.

 Despite its dimples, the sun can still stake a claim to excellence. According 
to Kuhn, it is a perfect orb to within 0.001 percent tolerance, orders of 
magnitude more spherical than Earth.


