Science News Online (2/22/97): Radical Prostates

 February 22, 1997 

 Radical Prostates Female hormones may play a pivotal role in a distinctly male 
epidemic

 By JANET RALOFF

 Estrogen remains one of the strongest and best-characterized risk factors for 
breast cancer, the second leading cause of cancer deaths in U.S. women. The 
greater a woman's lifetime exposure to this quintessential female sex hormone, 
the greater her chance of developing the disease.

 Fewer details have emerged to explain breast cancer's counterpart in men -- 
prostate cancer, the most prevalent male malignancy and second leading cause of 
cancer deaths in men. Prostate cancer afflicts some 50 to 70 percent of men in 
Western countries by age 70, and the incidence of the disease is on the rise. 
Each year now, in the United States alone, some 244,000 new cases are diagnosed 
and 44,000 men die from the cancer.

 While physicians have yet to find an effective prevention strategy for 
prostate cancer, one is "desperately needed," says William G. Nelson of the 
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.

 Ironically, one of the newer avenues in breast cancer research may offer some 
unanticipated payoffs here. Growing evidence suggests that both malignancies 
trace to a common mechanism -- damage to DNA. Such damage can be triggered, at 
least in part, by estrogen.

 One observation unites researchers attempting to flesh out this provocative 
theory: a consistent finding of extensive oxidation in the tissue where 
prostate cancers form. This oxidation is caused by free radicals -- short-lived 
molecular fragments that damage cellular proteins and DNA by chemically 
altering them. The magnitude of this oxidative damage increases with age, as 
does the incidence of prostate cancer.

 This free radical model "is a very neglected area in prostate cancer 
research," according to Shuk-mei Ho, an endocrine oncologist at Tufts 
University in Medford, Mass. To date, she says, the search for the mechanisms 
behind this cancer has focused primarily on male sex hormones and their effects 
on genes.

 Yet Ho and others have recently begun demonstrating that hormones can play 
unexpected roles in this tissue. Indeed, the hostile, free-radical-laden 
environment that hormones might foster in the prostate could go a long way 
toward explaining cancer's development there.

 The association of free radicals with aging in prostate tissue has already 
spurred the development of a new, more precise technique not only for 
diagnosing prostate cancer, but also for finding evidence of the DNA damage 
that may precede it. New findings in this area suggest that dietary and other 
antioxidant therapies may hold great promise for curbing this scourge.

 Critical to reproduction, the prostate produces the seminal fluid that carries 
sperm cells. Wrapped around a man's urethra, the tube that carries urine from 
the bladder, this walnut-sized, muscular gland grows under the influence of 
testosterone and other male sex hormones, or androgens. Indeed, cancer does not 
develop in this tissue unless it has access to androgens.

 However, the notion that androgens alone are responsible for most prostate 
cancers does not make sense, argues Joachim G. Liehr, a pharmacologist at the 
University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston. "If they were," he says, 
"young men at 18 or 20 -- the peak of androgen production -- should be getting 
the disease." In fact, he notes, the cancer tends to strike in middle to old 
age, when testosterone concentrations are waning.

 Men's estrogen production, in contrast, does not fall in old age. Indeed, 
Liehr notes, it may even creep up a bit. Together, these changes cause a 
dramatic shift in the ratio of testosterone to estrogen, a turn he believes may 
foster this cancer.

 That suspicion is shared by Maarten Bosland at the New York University Medical 
Center in Tuxedo. Though estrogens have been used to treat prostate cancer, he 
notes that recent animal studies indicate that these hormones may actually 
enhance testosterone's threat to the prostate.

 For instance, Bosland gave young, castrated male rats enough estrogen to 
produce concentrations equivalent to those naturally present in females. These 
male rats, which could no longer produce testosterone, developed no prostate 
cancers. When he replaced the missing testosterone in another group of young, 
castrated males, some 20 to 30 percent eventually developed malignant prostate 
tumors. When he administered both hormones, however, up to "100 percent got 
prostate cancer -- a remarkable increase."

 What was the estrogen doing? According to Liehr, it was probably damaging the 
prostate by bathing it in chemicals produced by the breakdown of estrogen, a 
process that can unleash free radicals.

 As the body uses, or breaks down, estrogen, a host of related compounds is 
formed. Working both with animals and with cells grown in test tubes, Liehr has 
shown that in certain female reproductive tissues, such as the breast and 
uterus, estrogen can be transformed into 4-hydroxy estradiol (4-HE). This 
compound is a potent source of free radicals, he points out. Moreover, unlike 
other estrogen breakdown products, this one resists further degradation, so it 
can reach high concentrations.

 Liehr suspects that the prostate also converts estrogen to 4-HE. If so, that 
could explain much of the free radical damage seen in aging prostates.

 Though Ho agrees, she notes that other processes can also foster the buildup 
of oxidative damage in the prostate. For instance, as cells grow and use 
energy, they take in oxygen -- and generate free radicals. Enzymes in the cells 
normally produce antioxidants that limit damage by these radicals. Ho notes 
that these enzymes tend to malfunction in cancerous prostates.

 Nelson and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins, for instance, have found that the 
gene responsible for activating one family of enzymes that detoxify free 
radicals is turned off in every sample of cancerous prostate tissue they've 
studied. Ho's team has examined five other antioxidant enzymes in the prostates 
of elderly rats. In every case, she says, enzymatic activity drops with age, 
rendering these animals more vulnerable to injury by free radicals.

 That injury is extensive. Indirect measurements show that the prostates of 
male rats approaching late middle age, for instance, exhibit 500 to 700 times 
as much free radical damage as those of young animals.

 What makes this particularly worrisome, notes Donald C. Malins of the Pacific 
Northwest Research Foundation in Seattle, is that much of the damage involves 
DNA as well as nonreplicating cell structures.

 The damage goes beyond rodents. Malins has found extensive DNA damage induced 
by free radicals in the prostates of men. The severity of that damage depended 
on whether a man's tissue had been normal, abnormal though benign, or malignant 
(see ).

 Further linking free radical damage to disease, Bosland's animal studies show 
that "tumors in the prostate develop only in that region where you find 
elevated levels of oxidative damage."

 Estrogen may or may not be a primary source of the free radicals in the 
prostate. In either case, Ho sees a pivotal role for this hormone in cancers 
that develop there.

 In many other tissues of the body, old cells are constantly replaced. If a 
cell scheduled for replacement is damaged, the body often shuts down that 
cell's regenerative cycle before a defective copy is made.

 Ho says that two factors work against the prostate in this regard. First, its 
cells go into a quiescent, nonreproducing phase that lasts decades. In men, it 
begins shortly after the organ reaches adult size and continues to about age 50 
or 60. Throughout this period, its cells are continuously -- and increasingly 
-- bombarded by free radicals.

 The accumulating damage "is like a time bomb," Ho says. "But to set the time 
bomb off, you have to reactivate cell proliferation in the prostate." She 
believes that the increased estrogen-to-testosterone ratio that develops in old 
age somehow triggers a resumption of prostate growth.

 Yet even that might not be so bad if the prostate identified the damaged cells 
and chose not to copy them. In prostate cancer, this decision-making apparatus 
"appears messed up," Ho says. "So these cells copy their faulty DNA, allowing 
their progeny to carry the wrong information." That misinformation can lead to 
malignancy.

 The free radical theory of prostate cancer may explain recent dietary 
observations. Several studies have found that men taking vitamin E, a potent 
antioxidant, are far less likely to develop prostate cancer than men who don't 
supplement their diets with the vitamin, Ho notes. She also cites several 
studies showing that diets rich in tomatoes appear to confer some protection 
against the cancer. Lycopene, one of the carotenoid pigments in tomatoes, is a 
well-known antioxidant.

 Another recent study suggests that selenium -- an antioxidant present in 
seafood, certain organ meats, and grain -- may also reduce a man's risk of 
developing this cancer.

 Taken together, Malins says, "the possibility exists to either retard or 
possibly roll back radical-induced DNA damage by the administration of 
antioxidants," either through diet or drugs.

 Bosland intends to explore another dietary approach. He and others have shown 
that genistein, a compound in soy protein that blocks much of estrogen's 
activity in people, inhibits the growth of prostate cancer cells. During the 
next few weeks, he plans to begin a human trial with surgically treated 
patients who had had advanced prostate cancer. The men will eat soy to see if 
it prevents the return of the cancer or slows the progression of any recurrent 
disease.


