Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 2/22/97 February 22, 1997

 Unraveling the inner structure of a nucleus

by J. Travis

 The cells of plants and animals are superb packers. Each cell must jam large 
quantities of DNA, parceled into threadlike structures called chromosomes, into 
a microscopic sac known as the nucleus. The 46 chromosomes in the nucleus of a 
human cell would extend several feet if stretched out.

 One of the continuing mysteries of cell biology is how a cell folds, wraps, 
and organizes these chromosomes inside its nuclear sac. For a long time, 
biologists thought that chromosomes floated at random around the fluid interior 
of the nucleus, without any specific organization. That view is slowly changing.

"There's remarkable organization within the nucleus," argues John W. Sedat of 
the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF). "People have started to 
appreciate that the nucleus is a gold mine and vastly understudied."

 At the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Seattle 
this week, Sedat described some of the prized nuggets his research group has 
recently extracted from that mine.

 In one series of experiments, Sedat, UCSF colleague David A. Agard, and their 
coworkers studied the nuclei of fruit fly cells. They used fluorescent tags, 
probes made of DNA that bind to specific DNA sequences on one of the fly 
chromosomes.

 The researchers found that about 18 percent of the DNA probes they tested 
consistently lit up parts of the nucleus' outer membrane, or envelope. "We can 
find specific chromosome regions clearly stuck to the nuclear envelope," 
concludes Sedat.

 Moreover, certain DNA sequences tagged by some of the other DNA probes are 
consistently found at particular sites in the interior of the nucleus. From 
this evidence, Sedat draws a picture in which a chromosome regularly threads 
its way toward and away from the nuclear envelope.

 Sedat's coworkers and their collaborators have also begun to study the 
movement of chromosomes within the nuclei of living cells from yeast and fruit 
flies. They have used proteins that both bind to specific DNA sequences and 
carry a fluorescent marker.

 These probes show that some regions of chromosomes meander slowly around the 
nucleus, apparently in a random manner similar to the Brownian motion of smoke 
particles in the air. Yet the movement of any particular region seems to be 
confined to a small portion of the nucleus, says Sedat.

"These are the first measurements of how fast and how far a DNA sequence . . . 
roams around the relatively crowded nuclear volume," says Barbara Trask of the 
University of Washington in Seattle.

 Sedat's group has further used its probes to study how chromosome pairs come 
together. In a nucleus, there are usually two copies of each chromosome, one 
inherited from the mother and one from the father.

 During the cell cycle, these pairs split apart, then rejoin. Sedat's group has 
found that some chromosome regions align with their partner sequences long 
before the other regions follow suit. The union of maternal and paternal copies 
is apparently not a seamless process; rather, it leaves temporary gaps. "It's 
not a zippering. It's more like a buttoning," says Sedat.

 By comparing their data to computer simulations of how chromosome pairs might 
join, he and his colleagues find support for a model in which each chromosome 
copy moves at random and eventually bumps into its counterpart. Another theory 
had held that the nucleus has some specific mechanism to bring the chromosome 
pairs together.

 This examination of nuclear architecture remains in its early stages, Sedat 
notes. In the future, his team plans to study whether the organization of 
chromosomes varies among an organism's cell types. Trask also wonders whether 
it differs from one organism to the next.

 Once scientists have a handle on that structure, says Sedat, they can try to 
explain how it aids a cell in its myriad functions. For example, nuclear 
organization may help determine which genes on a chromosome are turned on or 
off in a cell.


