Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 3/15/97 March 15, 1997

 Running on One-Third Empty Primates on a low-cal diet are in a metabolic slow 
lane, perhaps to longer life

 By CHRIS MLOT

 Franz, a 17-year-old rhesus monkey, is busy moving hand to mouth, stuffing his 
cheek pouches full of the pellets of food that have just been poured into his 
feeder. In minutes, it's empty. Only then does he begin to chew, pausing 
occasionally to take a drink of water, play with the metal gizmos clipped to 
his cage, or bare his teeth in a mild threat to the strangers who today showed 
up with the chow.

 Across the room, Damion is having a more leisurely meal, picking through the 
pellets with pencil-thin fingers, occasionally dropping one out of reach. "He 
really wastes a lot," says his caretaker.

 It's the morning feeding at the Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center in 
Madison. Franz and Damion are among the 75 rhesus monkeys taking part in an 
extensive, long-term study designed to get to the crux of an astonishing 
physiological phenomenon: Substantial undernutrition without malnutrition keeps 
a body living longer and in better condition.

 For the past 8 years, Franz has been getting 30 percent less than the amount 
he'd take for himself; Damion has been getting about the amount he'd normally 
eat. Franz is also getting supplemental vitamins and minerals to prevent 
deficiencies. The diets differ only in total carbohydrates, proteins, and fats.

 Since rhesus monkeys in captivity live for 30 to 40 years, it will be a couple 
of decades before any life extension can be documented. Nevertheless, the 
animals are now entering middle age, when age- and diet-related diseases start 
to crop up in humans and other primates. The two rhesus groups represented by 
Franz and Damion are beginning to diverge in health and physiology -- in both 
predicted and unexpected ways.

"It's an important time," says Joseph W. Kemnitz, one of the animal 
physiologists who started the Wisconsin study in 1989 with funding from the 
National Institute on Aging. Altogether, the NIA is spending an estimated $6.5 
million annually to study the effects of calorie-restriction on about 250 
primates, including groups at the National Institutes of Health animal center 
in Poolesville, Md. (SN: 8/27/88, p. 142), and the University of Maryland at 
Baltimore.

 It's well known that reducing calories extends by 30 percent or more the life 
span of organisms ranging from spiders and water fleas to mice and rats (SN: 
10/5/91, p. 215). Yet these animals live at most for years, not decades. The 
primatologists hope their study, besides testing for longevity in a 
longer-lived species, will suggest points of dietary or drug intervention for 
age-related diseases like cancer and diabetes. They are also seeking insight 
into the still inscrutable mechanism of aging.

 Results from the primate studies so far fall in with theories that point to 
metabolism, or energy use -- glucose use in particular -- as central to the 
aging process. As in earlier work, total energy consumption is the key. 
Reducing fat alone does not extend life. The increased longevity goes beyond 
the effects of avoiding diseases associated with obesity.

 Each day, the researchers put one of the animals through a biannual battery of 
bone scans, blood tests, and measurements. Monkey by monkey, they are putting 
together a picture of aging slowed down. Perhaps learning how to read the 
functional age of an individual, the researchers say, will help in the care of 
the aging human population.

 By standard clinical measures, the calorie-restricted animals are the picture 
of health. They have low blood pressure and low cholesterol, and their 
triglyceride concentrations -- another risk factor for heart disease -- are 
less than half those in nonrestricted animals. The concentrations of 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL), the heart-healthy form of cholesterol, are 
especially good.

 Some of the calorie-restricted monkeys could be called scrawny, although most 
look sleek and taut, not gaunt. They weigh, on average, one-third less than 
normal monkeys, carrying 10 percent body fat rather than 25 percent. Their 
bones are less dense, probably from bearing a lighter load, says Kemnitz. When 
the diet is started at an early age, the bones remain shorter and smaller in 
diameter.

 Calorie-restricted monkeys are noticeably miniaturized. "Everything is 
smaller," says Kemnitz.

 Their body temperature is down as well, by about half a degree. Just as 
calorie-restricted animals like Franz have become ultra-efficient at getting 
food inside themselves, their metabolic rates seem to have geared down, 
generating less heat to balance the reduced fuel intake.

"Metabolism is reset from a growth and reproductive strategy to a survival 
strategy," says NIA molecular physiologist George S. Roth. Roth spoke during a 
symposium on the biology of aging at last month's meeting of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in Seattle.

 In the May American Journal of Physiology: Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
Kemnitz's group describes the metabolic rate of adult monkeys over the first 30 
months of calorie restriction. Metabolism seems to be reset after about 18 
months on the diet, during which period the animals experience the biggest drop 
in weight.

"There's a response to try to conserve energy," says Kemnitz. "When they 
stabilize at a lower weight, there's a continued reduction in energy 
expenditure, which would have to be the case because they're eating less."

 The researchers now plan to compare how different organs respond to the 
calorie restriction to see whether some reduce their metabolism more than 
others.

 The lower the metabolism, the less oxygen is consumed and the fewer free 
radicals from oxygen are available to damage cells. Many researchers suspect 
that damage by free radicals plays a role in the aging process. To pinpoint 
this mechanism in the monkeys, the researchers plan to examine the membranes of 
mitochondria, where cellular energy and free radicals are produced.

 The basic fuel molecule that gets burned in metabolism is the sugar glucose. 
If the body doesn't respond correctly to glucose circulating in the 
bloodstream, the result can be type II diabetes, a diet-related disease in 
adults that has reached near-epidemic proportions in the United States. The 
calorie-restricted monkeys seem to be avoiding diabetes, one of the clearest 
health benefits of the primate study so far, says Kemnitz.

 At the start of the Wisconsin study, insulin concentrations after fasting 
indicated that four of the monkeys had a genetic risk of diabetes. Two of them 
were put on the restricted diet. Four years later, four monkeys in the control 
group, but none in the restricted group, had signs of an impaired response to 
blood sugar. The impaired group included the two at-risk animals. Last year, 
one of them developed full diabetes; that monkey is now on insulin.

 In animals, including people, the body's response to insulin falls off with 
age. Cells take up less glucose, leaving too much in the bloodstream. The 
calorie-restricted animals have so far maintained tight regulation of glucose 
and insulin. Their glucose concentrations are about three-quarters of those in 
the control animals, and their insulin concentrations are about one-third.

 With less glucose circulating in the system, there seems to be less of another 
problem. In glycation, glucose molecules stick to proteins and other essential 
molecules, gumming up a cell's smooth functioning and possibly contributing to 
aging. Cataracts are one result of the process. Restricted monkeys show less 
glycation of hemoglobin and collagen. This glycation may turn out to be a 
useful measure of health or functional age.

 Another intriguing, but more uncertain, marker may be the concentration of 
DHEAS, the sulfated form of the steroid dehydroepiandrosterone, which typically 
declines with age. Calorie-restricted monkeys experience a drop in DHEAS, but 
in one group of male monkeys started on calorie restriction as juveniles, DHEAS 
remained slightly higher than in control monkeys, according to NIA researcher 
Mark A. Lane. Other studies have not found a difference in DHEAS concentrations 
in calorie-restricted and nonrestricted animals.

 Although diet books and magazines have begun to recommend calorie restriction 
as a key to a longer and healthier human life, Roth and other primate 
researchers do not. "It would be premature to make any dietary 
recommendations," Roth said at the AAAS meeting.

 Even given the dramatic health benefits, it's hard to imagine many people 
adopting a daily diet that would be the caloric and nutritional equivalent of a 
couple of cans of Slimfast, when more palatable health-promoting advice, such 
as eating five fruits or vegetables a day, has had relatively few takers in the 
United States. There are other important impacts of the calorie-restricted 
regimen that haven't been thoroughly studied -- behavior, cognition, and 
reproductive health.

 Calorie restriction started at an early age seems to delay the onset of sexual 
maturity by about a year, although once the monkeys mature, their hormone 
cycles seem to be normal. None of the calorie-restricted monkeys has been bred. 
In other calorie-restricted species, female reproduction seems to shut down.

 Behavioral and cognitive studies have only recently been started. In a report 
slated for publication in Physiology and Behavior, James L. Weed and the NIA 
group confirm with ultrasonic monitors and video what caretakers and casual 
observers have noticed: The restricted monkeys are more active, especially 
around feedings. Unlike stature and metabolism, appetite doesn't seem to 
diminish with calorie restriction.

 There are clues from other work that the impact of diet, especially the fats 
consumed, can affect the brain and, consequently, behavior. Some provocative 
epidemiological studies have found associations between criminality or 
psychiatric problems and low cholesterol, for example (SN: 3/11/95, p. 157).

 At Wake Forest University's Bowman Gray School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, 
N.C., researchers have looked at the behavior of primates in a study of heart 
disease and diet. Behavioral scientist Jay R. Kaplan and his colleagues have 
reported in several recent papers that cynomolgus monkeys with low 
concentrations of cholesterol in their blood are more aggressive and antisocial 
than monkeys with high cholesterol.

 The researchers suspect the mood-mediator serotonin may be involved, since the 
low-cholesterol monkeys also have significantly lower concentrations of a 
serotonin by-product in their spinal fluid. No one is sure of a mechanism or 
how much of the finding is relevant to calorie-restricted monkeys or to people. 
"Nutritional effects on behavior is a rich area," says Kaplan, "and we know 
almost nothing about it."

 The next few years should further illuminate the behavior and physiology of 
the calorie-restricted monkeys. If they keep to the patterns of other studies, 
many will eventually die of the proverbial old age, with no signs of a specific 
disease.

 For Kemnitz and other researchers, the goal is not necessarily to extend the 
end point of human life but to improve the quality of it by finding ways to 
avoid or delay the debilitating diseases of old age. Good health in old age 
will only become more important -- and to more people. Life expectancy in the 
United States has already risen in this century -- to 79 for women and 73 for 
men -- and it continues to rise. According to this trend, one-fourth of the 
U.S. population will be older than 60 by the year 2020.

 At the rate they're going, Franz and his calorie-restricted cohort could still 
be around then, too.


