Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 2/22/97 February 22, 1997

 New drugs zap cancer cells with radiation

by C. Wu

 Radiation and chemotherapy have long been the most potent anticancer weapons. 
Now, researchers are testing drugs that combine the two techniques and may one 
day act as smart bullets for treating certain kinds of cancer.

 At the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Seattle 
this week, scientists discussed these drugs -- radioactive atoms chemically 
attached to antibodies. The antibodies seek out and bind to specific proteins 
on the surface of cancer cells.

 Unlike total body irradiation, the drugs bring radiation to bear directly on 
cancerous areas, reducing healthy tissue's exposure. The drugs might 
effectively treat cancers like leukemia, in which diseased cells are dispersed 
throughout the bloodstream, with fewer side effects than traditional remedies.

 Janet F. Eary of the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle 
described her team's studies of a treatment for leukemia and lymphoma that uses 
an antibody carrying iodine-131. These atoms emit highly penetrating gamma 
rays, which destroy tumor cells but also damage healthy tissue.

 Taking a newer approach, a team at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center 
in New York focuses on the isotope bismuth-213, which gives off alpha particles 
when it decays. The researchers attach single atoms of Bi-213 to antibodies 
that target CD33, a protein on the surface of myeloid leukemia cells.

 Alpha particles are helium nuclei, which are much heavier than other forms of 
radiation and don't travel very far. "One of the appealing features is that the 
radiation is confined to one or two cell diameters," says David A. Scheinberg, 
chief of the leukemia service at Sloan-Kettering. Because many antibodies can 
attach to a single cancer cell, the new drug delivers an estimated 50,000 times 
more radiation to the leukemia cells than to noncancerous tissues.

 The short range of effectiveness, however, may limit the types of cancer that 
can be treated with the method. The alpha particles probably won't penetrate 
large, solid tumors. The technique could work on cancers that have spread 
throughout the body or those characterized by many small clusters of cells, 
such as ovarian cancer.

 In choosing a particular radioactive atom to use, says Joel M. Tingey, a 
chemist at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Wash., "you 
have to look at several different effects: its half-life, what type of 
radiation [it emits], how long it stays in the body, and where it goes. You 
have to look at what it's going to decay into and the effect of those things on 
the body."

 Half of the Bi-213 decays in just 47 minutes; most of it is gone in a few 
hours.

 Part of the challenge in developing these drugs is chemically binding the 
radioactive atoms to the antibodies. Bi-213 is "attached through a [linker 
molecule] known as DTPA, which is like a little cage that holds it in place," 
Scheinberg says. The Bi-213 can be linked to the antibody in as little as 6 
minutes and can be done where patients are being treated -- essential factors 
when using an isotope with such a short half-life. Waiting too long to inject 
the drug into a patient would render most of it ineffective.

 A clinical trial for the Bi-213 antibody has just begun, so the researchers 
don't yet know how effective the method is or whether patients will suffer 
significant side effects. So far, the study has shown that the drug is not 
acutely toxic and that it reaches the cancer cells in a few minutes.


