Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 2/8/97 February 8, 1997

 Hidden Worlds Collide How one deadly epidemic flushed another from hiding

 By STEVE STERNBERG

 Veteran trainer Vic Rail had never seen so many horses so sick. Fourteen of 
the 21 thoroughbreds in his Brisbane, Australia, stable could scarcely breathe. 
A pregnant mare had died, blood spouting from her nostrils.

 Rail invited government veterinarians to examine the horses, but they were as 
perplexed about the ailment as he. Moreover, the 49-year-old trainer and one of 
his stable hands -- a 40-year-old who had comforted the dying mare -- had some 
of the initial symptoms of the horses' disease.

 Rail died of pneumonia after spending 6 days in Brisbane Royal Hospital's 
intensive-care ward. His stable hand was more fortunate. He recovered, slowly.

 The outbreak in September 1994 prompted researchers at the Australian Animal 
Health Laboratory (AAHL) in East Geelong to investigate the mysterious illness. 
In the horses' tissues, they found bloated cells clinging to the interior walls 
of blood vessels in all the major organs. Within these cells, they found 
viruses they had never seen before. The viruses also turned up in tissue from 
Rail's kidneys.

 The researchers named the microbe Equine Morbillivirus (EMV) and published 
their results in the April 7, 1995 Science. Their next challenge was to find 
out where the virus normally resides. Researchers soon identified its host as 
the fruit bat, also known as the flying fox.

 Then, while testing a bat for EMV, they apparently found something else, one 
of the most dread viruses known to man -- rabies.

 At that moment in the spring of 1996, Australia and Antarctica were considered 
the only two rabiesfree continents in the world. Australia had had a few 
brushes with the virus in animals and people who had been infected elsewhere; 
the only possible exception was a Tasmanian child thought to have been bitten 
by a rabid dog in 1867.

 Rabies strikes with the stealth of a practiced assassin, lying dormant in the 
body for weeks, even years before any symptoms appear. Victims typically become 
depressed, restless, and feverish. Soon, their malaise turns to aggressiveness. 
A powerful thirst sets in, yet drinking even a swallow of water becomes a 
torment, causing inflamed nerves in the throat to constrict in painful spasms. 
Sufferers recoil from water, a reaction so pronounced the disease has been 
called hydrophobia.

 Although the lethality of rabies seems self-defeating, since any virus that 
kills its host ultimately destroys its own environment as well, the course of 
the disease is part of the microbe's survival strategy. The rabies virus can 
infect someone only through a break in the skin -- the kind that occurs with a 
bite. Insane, aggressive individuals are more inclined to bite, which suits the 
virus perfectly.

"No other disease so completely manipulates its stricken host, while barely 
leaving a trace of its presence," veterinarian Cynthia Mills asserts in the 
January-February The Sciences.

 The stage of the rabies life cycle in which the virus hides in the victim's 
tissues is known as the eclipse phase. Where the virus goes and what it does 
during this phase remain uncertain, says Charles E. Rupprecht of the rabies 
laboratory at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

 Ultimately, Rupprecht says, the virus sheds its outer layers and injects its 
genetic material -- five genes made of ribonucleic acid (RNA) bound with 
protein -- into the host's nerve cells.

 The virus then creeps from nerve cell to nerve cell toward the brain at a pace 
of 10 millimeters a day, Mills reports. Once it arrives, it begins to 
replicate. The exploding population of viruses causes encephalitis, an 
inflammation of the brain marked by swollen, leaky blood vessels. The virus 
makes its way back down the nerves to the salivary glands, where it awaits 
entry into a new host.

 For many people, rabies conjures up an image of snarling, slavering, insanely 
vicious dogs. Packs of abandoned dogs are ideal hosts for the rabies virus. In 
developed nations, however, the required vaccination of pets has virtually 
eliminated this threat.

 On the weight of this evidence, many people think the human disease has ceased 
to be a problem. In the United States, fewer than two people, on average, die 
of rabies each year. Yet this benign picture is incomplete. Worldwide, 40,000 
to 100,000 people, most of them in developing nations, die of rabies annually.

 Deprived of its canine hosts, the rabies virus takes up residence in coyotes, 
skunks, raccoons, and bats. One recent study linked 15 of the 17 U.S. rabies 
deaths in the last 15 years to insect-eating bats. Among the victims was a 
4-year-old girl in Washington whose parents found a bat clinging to the ceiling 
of her bedroom. The girl insisted she had had no contact with the bat, so 
doctors did not treat her -- with tragic consequences.

 Bats are wide-ranging travelers. North American species regularly visit 
Bermuda, 600 miles away. If a rabies virus entered the bat population in 
Indonesia or Southeast Asia, it could easily turn up in Australia.

 Several weeks after Rail's death from EMV, an Australian wildlife enthusiast 
found a 5-month-old black fruit bat lying under a fig tree. She took it to the 
New South Wales Department of Agriculture in Wollongbar to find out whether the 
creature had a contagious disease. There, veterinary pathologist Graeme C. 
Fraser killed the bat and sliced it open. The bat had encephalitis.

 Fraser knew that a 35-year-old farmer named Mark Preston and two horses had 
recently died in the only other known outbreak of EMV. Preston lived near the 
woman who had brought in the bat. Moreover, unlike Rail and the other victims 
of EMV, Preston had encephalitis.

 Intrigued, Fraser asked Peter T. Hooper, a veterinary pathologist at AAHL, to 
test the bat's brain tissue for EMV. A positive test would suggest that 
encephalitis is a typical complication of EMV.

 The EMV test was negative.

 Then, because the bat had encephalitis, the two men decided to test it for 
rabies. "We knew bats were important animals insofar as rabies and rabieslike 
diseases were concerned," Hooper says, "but we also knew a positive result was 
highly unlikely."

 The test for rabies, like the test for EMV, relies on antibodies. The first 
antibody seeks out the rabies virus; the second bears a chemical, biotin, that 
attaches to the first and turns brown when the enzyme peroxidase is added. If 
tissues don't contain the rabies virus, the antibodies won't stick and the 
tissue keeps its normal color.

 When Hooper put his eye to the microscope and saw the brown stain, he felt the 
hairs on the back of his neck prickle. "I was excited and horrified at the same 
time," he says. "Rabies is a terrifying disease, and this was the first 
recognition of rabies or rabieslike disease in Australia."

 Keith Murray, head of the AAHL and a member of the team that isolated EMV, 
contacted CDC to learn how to conduct surveillance for the rabieslike virus and 
how to protect people from being exposed to it. Murray also asked what the 
outcome might be if someone were exposed.

 The answer came all too soon.

 Patricia Paget, a 39-year-old mother of four, liked caring for wild animals 
and often plucked sick bats from the bush to nurse them back to health. She 
knew that sick animals could be dangerous, but the risks did not deter her.

 In the 2 months before her death on Nov. 15, 1996, Paget was bitten by animals 
several times -- twice by a brushtailed possum, once by a yellow-bellied 
sheathtail bat, and at least twice by flying foxes. Her first symptoms were 
fever, headaches, muscle aches, dizziness, vomiting, and agitation. Her vision 
doubled, and her eyes lost their focus. Doctors found her spinal fluid flooded 
with white blood cells, a sign of central nervous system infection.

 On the sixth day of her illness, paralysis set in. Doctors treated her with 
rabies vaccine, but it was too late. Paget could no longer breathe without the 
aid of a ventilator. She lapsed into a coma from which she never recovered.

 Rabies belongs to a branch of the Rhabdovirus family known as Lyssavirus. 
Until the AAHL researchers conducted their test, the classic rabies virus was 
thought to have just four close relatives: Lagos bat virus, Mokola virus, 
Duvenhage virus, and European bat virus.

 The AAHL researchers wanted to add to the Lyssavirus family tree both Fraser's 
virus and a virus from a bat dissected in 1995 and recently proffered for 
testing by a Townsville wildlife biologist.

 Allan R. Gould of AAHL sequenced the genes of the two viruses and compared 
them. The 1995 and 1996 viruses were identical, indicating that the virus had 
been in Australia for at least a year. The virus differed from classic rabies 
by only 8 percent.

 The researchers considered this good news because rabies vaccines, given after 
exposure but before symptoms appear, might prevent infection by the new virus. 
They published their findings in the October-December 1996 Emerging Infectious 
Diseases.

 Fraser named the new rabieslike virus Pteropid lyssavirus, after the species 
of bat in which it was found. It has since been identified in three other 
species living along more than 2,000 miles of Australia's east coast. 
Researchers still don't know where the virus came from, when it arrived, or how 
it reached Australia.

 Nevertheless, Chief Australian Veterinarian Gardner Murray told the World 
Health Organization that since the new lyssavirus differs slightly from 
classical rabies, "Australia should continue to be regarded as a rabiesfree 
country."

 Paget is the only person who has died of Pteropid lyssavirus. Another woman 
exposed to the virus was treated in time to save her life.

 Likewise, EMV has not developed into an epidemic, as was feared. All 14 of 
Rail's horses, which were found to be infected with the virus, died or were put 
to death. Tests of 150 men and about 5,000 horses -- including 90 from 
Preston's farm -- have turned up no other infections.


