Science News Online - Solar Cloud Hits Earth's Magnetosphere - 2/1/97

 February 1, 1997 

 Solar Cloud Hits Earth's Magnetosphere

by R. Cowen

 In early January, the sun hurled a billion-ton cloud of gas toward Earth. A 
few days later, the ballooning cloud landed a one-two punch on the planet's 
magnetic field, jacking up the intensity of high-energy electrons in Earth's 
radiation belts. The cloud probably caused the demise of a $200 million 
communications satellite, researchers say.

 This wasn't the largest solar disturbance ever recorded. Nor are such events 
uncommon. Last month's magnetic storm, however, proved a standout on several 
counts.

 With surprising efficiency, the cloud pumped energy into the magnetosphere, 
the region of space dominated by Earth's magnetic field. Researchers suggest 
that the storm is a harbinger of many more that will erupt as the sun 
approaches the peak of its 11-year activity cycle around the year 2000.

 For the first time, an armada of spacecraft was in place to monitor the 
fireworks, enabling researchers to capture this solar event "from cradle to 
grave," says astronomer Stephen P. Maran of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center 
in Greenbelt, Md. He coordinated a Goddard briefing last week at which space 
physicists described the cloud's progress from sun to Earth.

 The SOHO spacecraft, which stares at the sun continuously from a vantage point 
1 million kilometers in front of Earth, had a ringside seat for the solar 
display. It first spied a vast bubble of gas billowing out from the sun's outer 
atmosphere, or corona, at 11 a.m. eastern standard time on Jan. 6. The images 
thrilled a group of space physicists who had gathered at Goddard for a 
workshop. SOHO investigators estimated that the cloud was moving toward Earth 
at 450 km per second and would reach the magnetosphere 4 days later.

 That prediction was soon borne out. On Jan. 10, SOHO observed the solar wind 
-- the stream of charged particles blown out by the sun -- abruptly increase 
speed from 350 to 430 km per second. This signified a magnetic disturbance 
passing by the craft. Closer to Earth, but still well outside the 
magnetosphere, a satellite called Wind confirmed the presence of a traveling 
magnetic cloud.

 The expanding cloud didn't just slam into Earth's magnetosphere. For 12 hours, 
it kept the interplanetary magnetic field near Earth pointing southward, the 
opposite direction of Earth's own field. The two fields canceled each other 
out, says space scientist Mauricio Peredo of Hughes STX Corp. in Greenbelt, 
dumping energy into the magnetosphere.

 Jazzed and buffeted, the sunward side of the magnetosphere, which typically 
extends 64,000 km from Earth, shrank by 20 percent. Two satellites, Geotail and 
Interball-Tail, which normally orbit inside the magnetosphere, found themselves 
intermittently on the outside as the magnetosphere's outer edge flapped back 
and forth, says Peredo.

 SAMPEX, a low-altitude satellite 600 km above Earth, recorded a boost in the 
intensity of fast electrons -- those with energies greater than 1 million 
electronvolts -- to more than 10,000 times the typical value in the radiation 
belts, reports Daniel Baker of the University of Colorado at Boulder. The high 
intensity lasted for at least a week.

 Early on Jan. 11, the cloud delivered a parting blow. Its trailing edge, the 
densest part of the cloud, hammered into the magnetosphere, compressing it even 
more and leaving it ringing like a bell. The intensity of high-energy electrons 
near Earth climbed higher yet, and the total amount of energy dissipated in 
auroras over the North and South Poles reached 1,400 gigawatts, nearly double 
the electric power generated in the United States.

 At Halley Bay Station in Antarctica, failed radio contact prevented an 
airplane from taking off on Jan. 11. That same day, an AT&T communications 
satellite, Telstar 401, fell silent, and network broadcasts were switched to 
another satellite. Although Louis J. Lanzerotti of Lucent Technologies in 
Murray Hill, N.J., cautions that the satellite may have failed for other 
reasons, "the coincidence [with the magnetic storm] is uncanny."

 George Gloeckler of the University of Maryland at College Park marvels over 
the ability of this medium-sized storm to wallop the magnetosphere. He 
theorizes that the cloud's density and its large magnetic field kept this 
parcel of solar gas intact and relatively unscathed as it passed through the 
sun's hot corona and out into space.

 Data from Wind show that the atomic elements in the cloud had been ionized -- 
stripped of their outermost electrons -- by different amounts before leaving 
the sun's corona. This variation suggests that each element may serve as a 
thermometer for a different part of the corona, he adds.


