Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 2/1/97

 February 1, 1997

 FDA allows heart health claims for oats

by J. Raloff

 Last week, the Food and Drug Administration announced that makers of low-fat, 
oat-rich cereals and other foods will be permitted to tout the ability of their 
products to lower serum cholesterol, a risk factor for heart disease.

 Previously, the agency had allowed health claims for individual food 
components, such as calcium, or for natural food classes, such as "fruits and 
vegetables." The new ruling marks the first federally sanctioned health claim 
for a manufactured food.

 In the gut, oat's soluble fiber -- beta-glucan -- forms a viscous gel that 
surrounds cholesterol-rich bile acids, limiting their reabsorption by the 
blood. The liver responds by making more bile acids and pulling more 
cholesterol from the blood. This explanation of oats' cholesterol-lowering 
ability, which has been documented in many studies (SN: 5/26/90, p. 330), 
spurred the Chicago-based Quaker Oats Co. to petition for the new health claim.

 Yet even Quaker was surprised by the scope of FDA's ruling. Though studies by 
the company and others showed that foods rich in oats or oat bran can lower 
cholesterol -- even in people on a low-fat diet -- oat flour's ability to do 
that remains unproved, says Steven L. Ink, Quaker's nutrition director.

 Because "we didn't have any data to specifically address the question," he 
says, FDA indicated last fall that it would not allow the health claim on 
products made with whole-oat flour. Yet when the ruling emerged last week, oat 
flour products, such as Cheerios by General Mills in Minneapolis, were included 
-- apparently, Ink points out, in response to unpublished data submitted to the 
agency by researchers at the University of Minnesota some 8 months after the 
formal comment period. Ink says that Quaker will work to confirm oat flour's 
anticipated effects -- "to make sure that all we've done thus far is not 
undermined by a question that was not thoroughly addressed."

 In fact, data from David Jenkins of the University of Toronto have shown that 
beta-glucans are not all equal. Each fiber consists of a long chain of 
identical units; both the length of the chain and the number of cross-links it 
contains contribute to its viscosity -- and to its biological effects. Because 
milling into flour, cooking, pressure extrusion, and other food-processing 
techniques may shorten the chain, Jenkins says he encouraged FDA to endorse 
health claims "only for materials shown to be effective."

 Jur Strobos, a Washington, D.C.-based consultant and former policy director at 
FDA, believes "the health claim system will rise or fall on the success of this 
particular health claim." If consumers believe it and eat accordingly, he 
expects the next petition to seek a health claim for soy protein, "which also 
has a strong cholesterol-lowering effect."


