Science News Online (2/8/97): Long-Awaited Bacterial Genome Debuts

 February 8, 1997 

 Long-Awaited Bacterial Genome Debuts

by J. Travis

 Last week, Frederick R. Blattner of the University of Wisconsin-Madison made 
the announcement that the microbiology community had been anxiously 
anticipating: He and his colleagues have finished sequencing the genome of 
Escherichia coli, the bacterium studied for decades by biologists.

"It's the most important bacterium there is," says Eric C. Lander of the 
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass. " E. coli is 
the bacterium of choice for studying how bacteria work. It's an invaluable 
sequence."

 Blattner broke the news publicly at a meeting on small genomes in Hilton Head, 
S.C. He revealed that the bacterium's genome consists of 4,638,858 nucleotide 
base pairs, the chemical subunits of DNA, and appears to contain 4,300 genes. 
The exact number of genes remains "fluid" as rigorous analysis of the sequence 
continues, says Blattner.

 The first full sequencing of a bacterial genome was announced in 1995, and 
completion of several other small genomes followed quickly (SN: 6/10/95, p. 
367;  At the South Carolina meeting, scientists from the Institute for Genome 
Research (TIGR) in Rockville, Md., reported that they were putting the final 
touches on four more sequences: the bacteria that cause syphilis, ulcers, and 
Lyme disease, as well as an archaea, one of the unusual microorganisms that 
form the so-called third branch of life 

 Yet microbiologists have looked forward to having E. coli's genome more than 
any other. "The main advantage of E. coli is that there's an enormous biology 
literature on this organism. That means when you have a gene and a gene 
product, you can fit them into the vast understanding of its biology," says 
Monica Riley of the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Mass., who 
called news of the genome's completion "exhilarating."

" E. coli also provides a reference point for all the other small genomes being 
sequenced, because for many of those organisms there's very little known about 
their biology," she adds.

 As with the other recently unveiled genomes, E. coli's offers a bounty of 
novel genes. Almost 2,500 of them bear no strong resemblance to any known 
genes, leaving scientists with few clues to their roles.

"All this is going to take a while to analyze. It's a massive amount of data," 
says Riley, who maintains an online encyclopedia of E. coli genes.

 That more than half of the bacterium's genome remains a complete mystery may 
seem a surprise, considering how extensively investigators have utilized E. 
coli. Yet petri dishes and test tubes aren't normal environments for the 
bacterium, so many of its genes may never have made their presence known to 
scientists. "I think a lot of the genes in E. coli function in niches other 
than the laboratory," observes Blattner.

 Blattner's group, which started the E. coli project in 1991, deposited the 
last few sequences of the genome into public databases on Jan. 16, narrowly 
beating a Japanese group led by Hirotada Mori of the Nara Institute of Science 
and Technology. Mori's team, using previously published data from Blattner's 
group, actually produced a composite sequence of more than one E. coli strain. 
"It was kind of a race at the finish," admits Blattner.

 Researchers have just begun to compare the two genomes to see what genes 
distinguish the strains. Blattner notes that an important project will be to 
compare these genomes with those of E. coli strains that can cause fatal food 
poisoning. With reference genome sequences in hand, it should become relatively 
easy to make such comparisons, he says.

 The full E. coli sequence may even help researchers clean up their growing 
wealth of data on the human genome, adds Blattner. Some studies suggest that 
because of laboratory contamination, 15 percent of the human gene sequences now 
in databases contain parts of the E. coli genome.


