Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 3/22/97 March 22, 1997

 Shedding light on a gamma-ray mystery

by R. Cowen

 In a matter of seconds, gamma-ray bursts generate some of the most energetic 
fireworks in the universe, then vanish without a trace. In the 3 decades since 
the first burst was observed, several satellites have detected about 2,000 of 
these high-energy flashes, which occur uniformly throughout the sky. Yet 
astronomers still don't know whether the bursts originate within our home 
galaxy or far beyond (SN: 12/21&28/96, p. 389).

 This enduring puzzle may soon be solved. For the first time, researchers 
believe they have spied the visible-light afterglow of a gamma-ray burst. 
Within a week, that ember had faded, but astronomers subsequently identified a 
faint galaxy in the same position. "It may turn out that a breakthrough is in 
the making," says theorist Bohdan Paczynski of Princeton University.

 The saga began Feb. 28, when the Dutch-Italian satellite BeppoSAX detected a 
bright gamma-ray burst. The satellite, launched last April, has X-ray 
telescopes that immediately home in on the lower-energy tail of a burst to 
provide an accurate position for astronomers attempting to observe the flash at 
other wavelengths.

 Eight hours later, while directed toward the patch of sky that contained the 
burst, a group of higher-resolution telescopes aboard BeppoSAX glimpsed a 
rapidly fading X-ray source thought to represent the burst as it cooled. Enrico 
Costa of the Space Astrophysics Institute in Frascati, Italy, and his 
colleagues reported the finding in a March 1 circular of the International 
Astronomical Union (IAU).

 That announcement sparked a flurry of activity. On March 1, astronomers using 
two telescopes in the Canary Islands, Spain, discovered a visible-light object 
that coincided with the fading X-ray source. Intriguingly, observations 7 days 
later revealed that the object had faded from view, Jan van Paradijs of the 
University of Amsterdam and the University of Alabama, Huntsville and his 
collaborators report in a March 12 IAU circular.

 Using the New Technology Telescope in La Silla, Chile, the researchers found a 
galaxy at the same position, they report in a March 14 circular.

 Mark R. Metzger of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena and his 
colleagues report also finding a galaxy in that place during observations with 
the Keck II Telescope atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea.

 Researchers must still consider the possibility that the burst actually 
occurred in our own galaxy and just happened to coincide with a faint, distant 
galaxy. Fortunately, says Abraham Loeb of Harvard University, "we don't need to 
speculate for long on this matter. BeppoSAX is expected to find such a [burst] 
event every month." If subsequent events show associations with other galaxies, 
he notes, it may clinch the case for the extragalactic origin of bursts.


