Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 3/1/97

 March 1, 1997 

 Ewe Again? Cloning from Adult DNA

by J. Travis

 Udderly amazing. Scientists have for the first time used DNA from an adult 
mammal -- specifically, genetic material from cells in the mammary glands of a 
6-year-old ewe -- to create a genetic duplicate. This clone, a healthy lamb 
named Dolly, was born last July, Ian Wilmut of the Roslin Institute in 
Edinburgh, Scotland, and his colleagues announce in the Feb. 27 Nature.

 The spectacular feat builds upon cloning research dating back to the early 
1980s. At that time, scientists developed a procedure called nuclear transfer 
that enables them to replace the DNA-containing nucleus of an egg cell with a 
nucleus from another cell. Researchers soon found that the altered egg could 
develop into a clone of the animal that provided the nucleus -- but only if the 
nucleus came from a cell of a barely developed embryo. Cloning attempts using 
nuclei from adult animals invariably failed.

 Last year, Wilmut and his coworkers described a modified nuclear transfer 
method that allowed them to clone sheep from older embryonic cells . By 
maintaining the intended donor cells in a nutrient-deprived medium, the 
scientists forced the cells out of their normal growth cycle and into a 
quiescent stage called G0. For reasons still under study, nuclei from these 
cells are more readily accepted by eggs.

 With the birth of Dolly, Wilmut's group has now proved that at least some 
adult cells prepared in the same manner can generate a viable clone when their 
nuclei are transferred to eggs.

 Many biologists had concluded that this was impossible, speculating that the 
DNA inside the nuclei of adult cells undergoes irreversible changes as the 
cells mature into the specialized roles they perform -- secreting milk, for 
example. Yet Dolly's birth shows that the DNA in an adult nucleus either 
reprograms itself or is open to reprogramming by factors in the egg.

 Exactly how the adult DNA changes once inside the egg is one of many 
fundamental biology questions raised by the birth of Dolly. The clone may also 
provide insight into whether a nucleus harbors a genetic clock that determines 
how old an organism is.

"Our 7-month-old lamb actually has a 6-year, 7-month-old nucleus in all her 
cells. It's going to be interesting to see what happens with the aging of this 
animal," notes Grahame Bulfield, director of the Roslin Institute.

 More immediate research priorities, he says, are to determine whether other 
types of adult cells -- liver, muscle, or brain cells, for example -- can also 
generate clones, whether the same cloning process works in cattle and pigs, and 
whether researchers can add or delete genes from the donor cells before 
generating clones from them.

 The latter issue will be key to the scientists' goals of using cloning to 
create animals that produce valuable pharmaceuticals in their milk or whose 
organs can be transplanted into people without being rejected.

 Dolly's birth has also generated a predictable debate about the feasibility 
and morality of cloning humans. In response, President Bill Clinton has 
directed the new National Bioethics Advisory Commission to prepare a report 
examining the ramifications of the Scottish cloning technology.

"It's a pretty shocking change in the way we have to think about biology," 
observes Jeffrey Kahn, director of the Center for Bioethics at the University 
of Minnesota in Minneapolis.


