Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 3/15/97 March 15, 1997

 Top 10 winners in top science contest

by C. Mlot

 It's the other March Madness: the week-long judging of the annual Westinghouse 
Science Talent Search, the Super Bowl of high school science competitions. So 
it was only fitting when the smart and smartly dressed students huddled in 
embrace -- or butted chests -- after the winners were announced at the National 
Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., this week.

 The first-place winner shot his arms up in triumph and hugged the nearest 
judge. Adam Ezra Cohen, 17, of Hunter College H.S. in New York, received a 
$40,000 scholarship for developing a new method of photolithography, the means 
by which information-packed patterns are electrochemically etched onto 
microchips.

 His high technology was homegrown. Working in his bedroom, the prospective 
physicist started experimenting on his mother's gold jewelry with parts from a 
$1.49 speaker. He used Legos to build the housing for his "electrochemical 
paintbrush," a modified scanning tunneling microscope.

 In contrast, second-place winner Carrie Shilyansky, 15, of San Marino (Calif.) 
H.S., worked in a university laboratory on her neurobiology project. She 
received a $30,000 scholarship for her study of a neuronal pathway controlling 
habituation, a simple form of learning, in the sea hare Aplysia.

 Third-place winner Nicholas Karl Eriksson, 18, of Sentinel H.S. in Missoula, 
Mont., used algebra and number theory to explore the partition function, which 
counts the ways a whole number can be split into other integers. He received a 
$20,000 scholarship.

 Davesh Maulik, 17, of Roslyn (N.Y.) H.S., also wrote a mathematics paper. His 
delved into symmetries of polynomial equations and took fourth place. Maulik 
received a $15,000 award, as did Emily Beth Levy, 17, of North Miami Beach 
(Fla.) Senior H.S., and Dev Edward Kumar, 17, of the Texas Academy of Math & 
Science in Denton. For her fifth-place project, Levy devised a method to 
improve reading comprehension in dyslexic children. In sixth place, Kumar 
invented an electronic monitor to measure the power efficiency of pagers and 
similar devices.

 Ann Clair Seiferle-Valencia, 17, of Farmington (N.M.) H.S. and Dylan Micah 
Schwindt, 18, of Montezuma-Cortez H.S. in Cortez, Colo., took inspiration from 
their artifact-rich surroundings. Seiferle-Valencia reconstructed population 
trends of the Chacoan Anasazi. Schwindt analyzed trace elements in trees for a 
study of 13th-century Pueblo construction. They earned seventh and eighth 
places, respectively, and $10,000 awards.

 Also winning $10,000 were Rose J. Payyapilli, 18, of Midwood H.S. at Brooklyn 
College in Brooklyn, N.Y., and Whitney Paige Bowe, 18, of Lawrence H.S. in 
Cedarhurst, N.Y. Payyapilli reached ninth place by identifying a factor 
affecting blood platelet aggregation. Bowe took tenth place with a study using 
jellyfish and algae to examine how symbiosis can be established.

 The remaining 30 finalists of the original 1,652 entrants (SN: 2/1/97, p. 69) 
received $1,000 each and this reminder from Princeton University astrophysicist 
J. Richard Gott, head of the judges' panel: Only one of the competition's five 
Nobel laureates also ranked in the top 10. "Not winning one of the top 
scholarships increases your chances of winning a Nobel," he quipped.

"To be in it is to win it," commented finalist Long Cai, 16, of Ward Melville 
H.S. in Setauket, N.Y. Many of the student projects will be turned into patent 
applications or publications. An article by Erikkson on the partition function 
has been accepted by the International Journal of Mathematics and Mathematical 
Sciences. Cohen, whom the students chose as their spokesperson before the 
awards ceremony, says his technique has already generated commercial interest.

 The competition, now in its 56th year, is administered by Science Service, 
which publishes Science News.


