Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 3/29/97 March 29, 1997

 Conscience grows on temperamental ground

by B. Bower

 Pundits and policy makers frequently call on parents to instill morality in 
their children, often implying that this trait can be learned by rote, like the 
multiplication tables. A long-term study of preschoolers now indicates that, to 
the contrary, the moral beacon known as a conscience develops in different 
ways, with critical contributions from both a child's natural approach to the 
world and specific parental practices.

 A good fit between a youngster's temperament and a mother's child-rearing 
style fosters the ability to tell right from wrong and to act accordingly, at 
least from ages 2 to 5 1/2, argues psychologist Grazyna Kochanska of the 
University of Iowa in Iowa City.

 In fearful children, who display considerable caution, shyness, and anxiety, 
conscience establishes a beachhead if they receive gentle discipline that puts 
encouragement over threats, Kochanska says. The overall quality of their 
relationship with their mother does not appear to play a role.

 In fearless kids, who exhibit an outgoing, curious approach to the world, 
conscience takes root in the presence of a cooperative, emotionally secure 
relationship with their mother. The child will then heed the mother's direct 
suggestions for improving behavior, Kochanska explains. When these children do 
not have a close relationship with their mother, they show less conscience.

"As they move through the preschool period, [fearful children] may internalize 
rules and norms more rapidly than fearless children," the Iowa scientist 
remarks. "If replicated in another sample, this [research] approach may help to 
elucidate some of the central questions of socialization."

 Kochanska's study, published in the March Developmental Psychology, consists 
of 43 girls and 47 boys observed at ages 2 1/2, 4, and 5, give or take several 
months. Children and their mothers were mostly white and came from families 
with a wide range of incomes.

 At the youngest age, temperament was assessed through mothers' reports and the 
child's responses to an experimenter's suggestions to play with various lab 
toys.

 Maternal responsiveness and disciplinary style, as well as the child's sense 
of security and dependence on her, were also rated after observations of their 
interactions in laboratory sessions.

 At the two older ages, Kochanska assessed each child's conscience level in 
part on his or her ability to resist temptations to cheat during several 
laboratory games. For instance, children had 3 minutes by themselves to guess 
which three animals were hidden under pieces of cloth by touching them with one 
finger, without peeking. An experimenter first explained to each child what 
cheating means and stressed the importance of not cheating.

 Conscience ratings also rested on kids' solutions to hypothetical moral 
dilemmas, such as whether to ignore a bully or to aid his victim.

 Fearful children may spontaneously feel anxious at even the thought of 
wrongdoing, making them relatively quick to develop a conscience, Kochanska 
suggests. Fearless youngsters ignore gentle discipline but develop a strong 
conscience if they have a close relationship with a responsive mother, a 
tendency the Iowa researcher plans to examine more closely in future research.

 Peer and teacher influences on conscience undoubtedly start to grow in 
strength at about age 5, she notes.

"This study is a nice demonstration of an interaction between childhood 
temperament and socialization," says psychologist Avshalom Caspi of the 
Institute of Psychiatry in London.

 In the same journal, Caspi and his coworkers report that extremely inhibited 
or impulsive 3-year-olds encounter many more interpersonal problems as young 
adults than do somewhat reserved or moderately outgoing 3-year-olds, perhaps 
indicating that personality development diverges among both fearful and 
fearless kids depending on how well they mesh with a variety of social 
influences.


