Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 3/22/97 March 22, 1997

 A Doughboy's Lungs Yield 1918 Flu Virus

by S. Sternberg

 On Sept. 19, 1918, an Army private destined for the trenches of World War I 
France reported to the base hospital at Camp Jackson, S.C. Although otherwise 
healthy, the 21-year-old complained of chills, fever, headache, backache, and a 
cough. "Opinion: Influenza," a doctor noted in the medical record.

 Within a week, he was dead -- 1 of 21 million people worldwide who would 
succumb to the influenza pandemic of 1918. For almost a century, samples of the 
doughboy's lungs sat in a warehouse run by the Armed Forces Institute of 
Pathology (AFIP) in Washington, D.C. Hidden in his tissues lay RNA bearing the 
solution to an enduring mystery, the genetic code for the worst pandemic in 
human history.

 Now, for the first time, the killer has been exhumed and fragments of its 
genes deciphered, say Jeffery K. Taubenberger and his colleagues at AFIP.

"This is not just a medical detective story," Taubenberger says. "This could 
happen again. It would be really useful to find out what happened in 1918 and 
apply that knowledge to protect us against future outbreaks."

"This is a tremendous advance," says virologist Robert Webster of St. Jude 
Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn. "The 1918 virus represents the 
ultimate disease-causing agent -- in a sense it's like ebola gone mad. We need 
to understand as much as possible about this virus because the world will get 
another pandemic, maybe late in this century or early in the next."

 One pandemic was one too many. In the 1918 outbreak, nearly 700,000 people 
died in the United States. Historian Alfred Crosby has written that Washington, 
D.C., seized two train cars of coffins headed for Pittsburgh so that the 
capital's undertakers could bury the dead.

 Taubenberger and his colleagues began their search for the virus' genes by 
selecting at random 28 of the 70 pandemic victims whose lung samples are stored 
at AFIP. Autopsy reports from 1918 disclosed that seven of these servicemen 
died soon after becoming ill, enhancing the likelihood that lung tissues might 
contain intact bits of RNA from the virus' unusual eight-strand genome.

 People who live longer are less likely to harbor the virus, because the body's 
defenses eradicate the microbes, Taubenberger says. In such cases, bacterial 
pneumonia delivers the fatal blow. But in the seven servicemen who died 
quickly, the immune counterattack might not have had time to wipe out the virus.

 The researchers drew a blank in six cases. The private from Camp Jackson, 
however, was unusual. His left lung had suffered extensive bacterial pneumonia, 
but his right lung had not. This raised the possibility that the right lung 
might still harbor the virus. To find out, the researchers removed some tissue 
from the paraffin in which it was stored. Step by step, they broke it down 
until only RNA remained.

"The people who preserved this tissue never imagined what might be possible 
down the road," says team member Ann H. Reid.

 Reid made millions of copies of nine RNA fragments of five flu genes. Thomas 
G. Fanning of AFIP then deciphered the sequences of the fragments and compared 
them to every other known sequence of the flu gene.

"It's unique," Taubenberger says. The team has also confirmed prior evidence 
suggesting that the sequences most closely resemble those from swine flu. Their 
report appears in the March 21 Science.

 Researchers disagree on whether it will be possible to rebuild the entire 
genome of the virus, perhaps yielding clues to its spectacular virulence. Most 
agree that the work might permit the making of a vaccine, if needed. "If this 
fossil were to reemerge," says Webster, "we could use this information to get a 
best-match vaccine that would probably protect us quite well."


