Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 3/22/97 March 22, 1997

 Marijuana on Trial Is marijuana a dangerous drug or a valuable medicine?

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 For decades, the debate over marijuana's role as a medicinal drug has waxed 
and waned. The conflict intensified recently, when voters in California and 
Arizona passed measures allowing seriously ill people to obtain marijuana, with 
a doctor's OK, for medical purposes.

 Lined up on one side of the debate are retired Army General Barry R. 
McCaffrey, President Clinton's drug policy advisor, and others who believe that 
marijuana is first and foremost a hazardous, illegal drug. Joseph A. Califano 
Jr., president of the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at 
Columbia University and former Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, 
summed up that viewpoint in an op-ed piece published in the Feb. 17 Washington 
Post. Noting marijuana's reputation as a drug that can lead to hard-core drug 
addiction, he writes that "teens who smoke pot are 85 times likelier to use 
drugs such as cocaine than those who have never done so."

 Squaring off against the zero-drug-tolerance crowd is a mix of people, 
including some scientists and patients, who believe marijuana has proven 
medicinal properties. Jerome P. Kassirer, editor-in-chief of the New England 
Journal of Medicine, joined this side with an impassioned editorial in the Jan. 
30 issue. "Thousands of patients with cancer, AIDS, and other diseases report 
they have obtained striking relief from these devastating symptoms by smoking 
marijuana," he writes. "The alleviation of distress can be so striking that 
some patients and their families have been willing to risk a jail term to 
obtain or grow the marijuana."

 The passage of the medicinal marijuana laws late last year prompted federal 
officials to hold a press conference at which Attorney General Janet Reno 
warned that physicians who prescribe marijuana could be prosecuted under 
federal law.

 Kassirer says in his editorial, "I believe that a federal policy that 
prohibits physicians from alleviating suffering by prescribing marijuana for 
seriously ill patients is misguided, heavy-handed, and inhumane."

 At present, marijuana is classified under the Controlled Substances Act as a 
schedule I drug, one that has no medical value and may prove addictive. 
Kassirer and other advocates want the federal government to reclassify 
marijuana as a schedule II drug, one that physicians can legally prescribe, 
despite its potential for addiction. Morphine is an example of a schedule II 
drug.

 Last month, the National Institutes of Health stepped squarely into the vortex 
of this maelstrom. Its National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) had assembled an 
advisory panel to review the scientific evidence on the medical use of 
marijuana. The 2-day meeting, held on the NIH campus in Bethesda, Md., was 
marked by scientific presentations, bomb-sniffing dogs, security guards, and 
outspoken activists.

 After hearing the reports, the eight-member panel of scientists concluded that 
marijuana does show promise as a treatment for certain conditions. The panel 
singled out marijuana's role as a treatment for the nausea and vomiting that 
accompany chemotherapy for cancer; the loss of appetite and weight that strikes 
some people with AIDS; and the high ocular pressures that characterize 
glaucoma, an eye disease that, if untreated, can cause blindness.

 Panel chairman William T. Beaver of the Georgetown University School of 
Medicine in Washington, D.C., says the panel hopes to deliver a report to NIH 
this month or next.

 The federal government and the advocates agree that one component of marijuana 
has an accepted medical use.

 In 1985, the Food and Drug Administration approved a synthetic version of the 
active ingredient in marijuana, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). This 
schedule II drug is marketed by Roxane Laboratories of Columbus, Ohio, under 
the trade name of Marinol (dronabinol). It was approved to combat the nausea 
and vomiting that can accompany chemotherapy.

 There's a substantial body of published research on THC's ability to ward off 
such queasiness. "THC clearly has [antinausea] effects in cancer chemotherapy," 
says Richard J. Gralla, director of the Ochsner Cancer Institute in New 
Orleans. Gralla gave a presentation at the NIH meeting.

 In contrast, "there's not a great deal of data on inhaled marijuana," he 
notes. The marijuana studies that have been done often contain flaws, he 
states. For example, a 1988 study of 56 chemotherapy patients revealed that 78 
percent received some relief with marijuana. Yet this study didn't include a 
control group, Gralla says.

 It is difficult to design a double-blind, controlled marijuana study, 
researchers say. Most patients realize that they've received a dummy cigarette 
and so know they're in the placebo group.

 Overall, Gralla says, the data suggest that marijuana, which contains THC, 
does offer a hedge against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy. Is it as 
effective as the conventional drugs prescribed by cancer specialists? Gralla's 
answer is no.

 He says that drugs available today offer many cancer patients complete freedom 
from nausea and vomiting. That's an efficacy marijuana would have a hard time 
beating, he suggests.

 Kevin B. Zeese, an attorney and president of Common Sense for Drug Policy, 
says Gralla has previously testified on behalf of the Drug Enforcement Agency 
(DEA), which opposes changing marijuana's status. DEA says the push to legalize 
marijuana for medical purposes will lead to a greater acceptance of it as a 
recreational drug.

 Zeese says it's true that other drugs are available for cancer patients 
receiving chemotherapy, but he and other advocates contend that some patients 
can't take those drugs -- or any drug, including Marinol, that must be 
swallowed. In such cases, unrelenting vomiting may lead patients to drop out of 
a potentially lifesaving chemotherapy regimen, he says.

 Advocates also contend that marijuana cigarettes are more effective than the 
government-approved pills. They say, and some pharmacologists agree, that 
inhalation delivers a therapeutic dose almost immediately, enabling patients to 
regulate the amount of the substance they receive and to stop before they 
experience any psychoactive effects.

 Pills, on the other hand, deliver a standard dose of THC. That means some 
patients get too much, which creates anxiety, fearful imaginings, and other 
undesirable side effects, and other patients don't receive enough of the active 
ingredient to alleviate their symptoms.

 In 1992, FDA approved Marinol for a second medical use. The agency gave the 
nod to physicians who prescribe THC in pill form for AIDS patients who suffer 
from a wasting syndrome.

 Some people with AIDS lose 5 to 10 percent of their body weight, a drop that 
intensifies HIV's assault on the body's infection-fighting abilities, says 
Kathleen Mulligan of the University of California, San Francisco.

 The weight loss often occurs after an AIDS patient suffers from an infection, 
such as pneumocystis pneumonia. The accompanying feeling of malaise takes away 
the pleasure of eating, Mulligan said at the NIH meeting. In fact, the patient 
may never regain his or her appetite. The next time an infection strikes, the 
person's weight plummets again. Such a loss can prove deadly for an AIDS 
patient. "People who lose weight die faster, particularly people with depleted 
levels of lean tissue," Mulligan says.

 There's no doubt that THC can revive a flagging appetite.

 A study detailed in the Physicians' Desk Reference (1994, Montvale, N.J.: 
Medical Economics Data Production Co.) concludes that Marinol is effective. 
Researchers enrolled 139 AIDS patients with wasting in a double-blind, 
controlled study of dronabinol. Half got dronabinol capsules, and the remainder 
received dummy pills. The researchers found that, compared to the placebo, 
dronabinol significantly improved appetite in AIDS patients. The study also 
noted a trend toward weight gain. Unfortunately, researchers don't know whether 
the spark in appetite is enough to result in a long-term weight gain for AIDS 
patients.

 There have been no studies of marijuana's safety or efficacy in the treatment 
of AIDS-associated wasting, Mulligan points out.

 Glaucoma is a disorder caused by excessive pressure in the eye. Paul Palmberg 
of the University of Miami School of Medicine, one of the NIH panel members, 
described a patient with glaucoma who has been using marijuana for 21 years. 
"There's no question that it's worked," he said at the NIH meeting. With 
regular use of marijuana and a conventional glaucoma drug, the woman reduced 
the dangerous pressure in her eyes. Neither approach worked effectively by 
itself, Palmberg says.

 That woman is one of eight patients in the United States who have permission 
to smoke marijuana legally. Starting in 1976, the government gave a few 
glaucoma patients, who had not benefited from conventional therapy, permission 
to use marijuana. No patients have been accepted since 1992, when the program 
was discontinued.

 Despite several favorable testimonials, the scheduled speaker on glaucoma at 
the NIH meeting presented a negative view of marijuana's role in this disease. 
Paul Kaufman of the University of Wisconsin Medical School in Madison noted 
that animal studies on glaucoma and THC have failed to yield consistent results.

 Palmberg counters by saying that human studies in the 1970s and 1980s showed 
THC's efficacy in reducing glaucoma's punishing pressure on the eye. However, 
researchers at that time discounted marijuana's role in the treatment of 
glaucoma, supposing that patients would need to experience a high in order to 
gain any therapeutic benefit.

 That assumption turns out to be false, Palmberg says. Regular users of 
marijuana develop a tolerance for the psychoactive effects of THC but still get 
relief from their symptoms, he said.

 Scientists have yet to figure out how marijuana lowers pressure in the eye, 
says Kaufman. This makes some scientists uneasy about its widespread use as a 
treatment for glaucoma.

 One of the most intriguing areas of marijuana research addresses a variety of 
disorders that provoke spastic movements. There is very little data from human 
trials in this field, said toxicologist Paul Consroe of the University of 
Arizona College of Pharmacy in Tucson at the NIH meeting. However, laboratory 
investigations have yielded some tantalizing hints about a natural marijuana 
system in the human body.

 Previous research showed that marijuana receptors, specialized proteins that 
serve as docks for THC, are clustered in regions of the brain known to play a 
role in movement disorders such as Huntington's disease. These receptors also 
bind to anandamide, a marijuanalike substance manufactured by the body (SN: 
2/6/93, p. 88).

 Consroe and others believe the anandamide system may play a role in regulating 
muscular movements. If so, could THC help tone down the spasms suffered by 
people with Huntington's disease, spinal cord injuries, and other disorders?

 That's the $64,000 question -- and scientists can't answer it just yet. The 
research so far provides mixed results about marijuana's potential use in 
treating these disorders.

 A 1986 study by Consroe and his colleagues, for example, showed that 
cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive component of marijuana, calmed the abnormal 
movements of five people suffering from dystonia, a rare condition 
characterized by muscle spasms that contort the body. Yet a 1991 study by the 
team failed to demonstrate any improvement when people with Huntington's 
disease took the same agent.

 Consroe points out that cannabidiol is just one component of marijuana. In an 
interview with Science News he said that his scientific design focused on 
cannabidiol, rather than marijuana, in part to allow federal funding. "I'm 
dealing with stuff that's safer than tap water," and it still took years to get 
the research approved, he says.

 This isn't the first time that researchers, politicians, and patients have 
argued the merits of marijuana as an herbal remedy. In 1988, Science News 
interviewed Robert Randall, one of the patients who smokes marijuana for 
glaucoma that didn't respond to conventional medication (SN: 2/20/88, p. 122.)

 Randall says he's still smoking marijuana legally, but in the intervening 
years he unwittingly embarked on a scientific study of sorts.

 In 1994, Randall was diagnosed with late-stage AIDS. For a year, because his 
health was deteriorating, he stopped smoking marijuana. "From April of '95 to 
'96, I didn't use marijuana, and in that period of time I lost more eyesight 
than I had in the previous 20 years," he recently told Science News.

 Randall's weight also slipped during that period, from a healthy 170 pounds to 
125. In April 1996, his doctors put him on the new antiviral drugs called 
protease inhibitors. Many HIV-infected people can't tolerate these drugs 
because they cause extreme nausea. Randall turned back to marijuana.

 He now weighs 180 pounds, and his eyesight has stabilized. He credits 
marijuana for the improvement.

"There's experience out there," Beaver says. "But it is difficult to figure out 
how you can tap this in any meaningful way." For example, Randall's story, no 
matter how compelling, remains far from a scientific study.

 Drug companies can't patent marijuana, so there's no incentive for them to 
conduct such trials, says Lester Grinspoon of the Harvard Medical School in 
Boston. He and other researchers have called on NIH to support such trials. 
However, they point out, a single institute has quashed marijuana trials in the 
past.

"The National Institute on Drug Abuse -- the only legal source of marijuana for 
research -- has been blocking clinical trials by refusing to provide marijuana 
to FDA-approved studies," says the Washington, D.C.-based Marijuana Policy 
Project.

 Two letters published in the Sept. 7, 1995 New England Journal of Medicine 
support that contention. In one, Grinspoon and his colleagues said that NIDA 
derailed an FDA-approved trial of marijuana proposed by Donald I. Abrams of the 
University of California, San Francisco.

 The proposal was the first in more than 10 years to include marijuana in its 
design. In a second letter, Abrams and his colleagues expanded on Grinspoon's 
letter, saying that they had worked extensively with FDA staff to design their 
study. After getting FDA approval, NIDA spent 9 months reviewing the proposal, 
a period during which Abrams got no feedback from NIDA or the DEA, which also 
opposed the project.

 In April 1995, NIDA abruptly rejected the proposal.

 Such reports have created a chilling effect, at least when it comes to 
marijuana research. Government opposition has made it "impossible to do those 
kinds of studies," Consroe says flatly. Indeed, he says, most scientists simply 
won't submit a marijuana research proposal, even though it may be 
scientifically sound.

"It's like jumping off the Brooklyn Bridge," he says. "You know what's going to 
happen."

 Will the panel's report help change NIH's attitude toward marijuana research? 
It's anyone's guess right now. The panel had a very limited mission: to review 
the existing data on medicinal marijuana. The group was also charged with 
identifying areas that might merit further study. It remains to be seen whether 
NIH will use the panel's report to justify funding clinical trials of marijuana.

 Meanwhile, Abrams says, thousands of AIDS patients in the San Francisco area 
alone are already using marijuana -- without any assurance of its safety or 
efficacy.

 The last speaker at the NIH meeting, FDA's Robert Temple, alluded to the 
difficulties in resolving this issue. Noting that passions on both sides of the 
debate are running extraordinarily high, he warns: "This isn't going to be 
easy."


