Science News Online (3/29/97): New glucose test on the way for diabetes

 March 29, 1997 

 New glucose test on the way for diabetes

by J. Raloff

 California researchers have designed a glucose-sensing polymer to measure a 
diabetic's blood-sugar concentrations -- inside or outside the body.

 Because it does not trigger an allergic response, this new sensor holds out 
the prospect of implants for long-term glucose monitoring. It would prove 
especially valuable if teamed with automatic systems for insulin delivery. The 
sensor could also make glucose monitoring through finger-prick blood tests 
affordable throughout the nonindustrialized world, says Frances H. Arnold of 
the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

 To limit complications that can result in blindness, amputation, and kidney 
failure, people with diabetes must carefully monitor concentrations of glucose 
in their blood and then fine-tune their diet or insulin administration to 
ensure that blood sugar does not become elevated for long periods.

 Most glucose monitors rely on bacterial enzymes, which can break down in hot 
environments. They also vary in sensitivity from batch to batch, which 
necessitates expensive calibrations by manufacturers. These factors have put 
regular glucose monitoring beyond the economic reach of the millions of 
diabetics in developing countries, Arnold observes. In the April Nature 
Biotechnology, her team describes what it hopes will prove a better alternative.

 The group has engineered a stable, porous polymer and impregnated it with 
copper. The metal binds glucose when exposed to a blood sample modified to have 
a high, or strongly alkaline, pH. Each glucose molecule that binds to this 
material gives up a proton, lowering the pH of the blood sample. If glucose 
concentrations in the blood fall, so will the number of glucose molecules bound 
to the sensor; each released molecule grabs a proton, raising the blood's pH. 
Thus, monitoring blood sugar becomes as simple as assaying pH, says Arnold.

 The idea of measuring glucose via pH is not new, observes George S. Wilson of 
the University of Kansas in Lawrence in an accompanying commentary. Earlier 
attempts at harnessing pH were thwarted by the blood's capacity for 
neutralizing acids. He notes that the new polymer avoids this problem by 
operating at an unnaturally alkaline pH.

 Though raising blood to this pH poses a challenge for implanted systems, 
Arnold says "it's definitely doable" and something her team is actively 
pursuing. Wilson suggests, for example, that a semipermeable membrane could 
keep the blood molecules that neutralize acid away from the glucose being 
sampled.

 Arnold anticipates that products based on the new technology may reach the 
market "within a couple of years."


