Science News Online (3/8/97): Bacteria give new meaning to 'computer bug'

 March 8, 1997 

 Bacteria give new meaning to 'computer bug'

by C. Wu

 A team of researchers has devised a scheme to use a light-sensitive protein 
made by a saltwater bacterium as the basic component of an optical computer. In 
an optical computer, information zips around as photons of light rather than as 
electrons. The protein, called bacteriorhodopsin, converts light energy into 
electric energy quickly and efficiently.

 Bacteriorhodopsin is an attractive material for optical computers because it 
exists in two stable forms, one purple and one yellow. Shining two lasers of 
different wavelengths alternately on the protein flips it back and forth 
between the two colors. Several groups have used bacteriorhodopsin as computer 
memory and as the light-sensitive element in artificial retinas.

 Aaron Lewis and his colleagues at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
impregnated a plastic film with equal concentrations of the purple and yellow 
forms of bacteriorhodopsin. As they report in the March 7 Science, they then 
illuminated the film with two lasers, modifying the light using an array of 
lenses with focal properties that differ slightly for the two wavelengths. 
Along the edge of an object placed above the film, the two lasers produced 
shadows slightly displaced from one another, creating a narrow region where the 
relative intensity of the two wavelengths varied.

 That varying intensity altered the relative concentrations of the purple and 
yellow forms of bacteriorhodopsin.

 In the system devised by Lewis and his colleagues, high concentrations of 
yellow represent negative values, high concentrations of purple indicate 
positive, and an equal amount designates zero. Because the state of the film 
can be quickly switched by light, it could, in principle, form the working 
element of an optical computer that would have an immediate electronic output.

 The device operates under a digital "trinary logic system," says Robert R. 
Birge, a chemist at Syracuse (N.Y.) University and director of the W.M. Keck 
Center for Molecular Electronics. In analog environments, the scheme also 
provides "the capability to both add and subtract."

 One of the main disadvantages, Lewis and his colleagues say, is that the 
experimental setup is complex and expensive -- a significant obstacle to making 
a practical device. Also, few commercially available lasers produce the 
wavelengths of light that most efficiently stimulate bacteriorhodopsin.


