Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 4/19/97 April 19, 1997

 Thanks for the Memories Scientists evaluate interviewing tactics for boosting 
eyewitness recall

 By BRUCE BOWER Six years ago, a Miami woman walking through the lobby of an 
office building casually noticed two men standing together. Several minutes 
after her departure, the men murdered a person working in the building.

 Police investigators determined that the woman was the only person who had 
observed the two suspects and could possibly describe them. In an initial 
interview with police, her memory of the men proved disappointingly sketchy.

 Several days later, psychologist Ronald P. Fisher of Florida International 
University in Miami was brought in to obtain a more complete account from the 
witness. Fisher's interview consisted of a series of rapport-building and 
memory-enhancing strategies that produced a breakthrough -- the woman reported 
a clear image of one of the suspects as he brushed the hair from in front of 
his eyes. She then recalled several details about his profile, including his 
having worn a silver earring.

 This information gave police critical leads that enabled them to identify the 
suspect and close the case.

 Police investigators summoned Fisher because of his expertise in conducting 
the so-called cognitive interview, a kind of interactive, memory-reconnaissance 
mission that he and a colleague, psychologist R. Edward Geiselman of the 
University of California, Los Angeles, devised nearly 15 years ago. Since then, 
Fisher and Geiselman have conducted cognitive interview workshops throughout 
the world and have witnessed the establishment of in-house training programs in 
the technique for many local and federal law enforcement agencies, including 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

 The standard training manual on witness interviewing distributed to all police 
officers in England and Wales also includes a section on how to conduct a 
cognitive interview.

 Despite the method's widespread use, however, a vigorous scientific debate 
regarding its merits has emerged in the past year. Some researchers argue that 
Fisher and Geiselman's memory-retrieval strategies achieve no more than any 
other procedures that establish rapport with a person and create a comfortable 
atmosphere for communication -- no mean feat under the best of circumstances, 
much less at a crime scene or during a police investigation.

 Some critics fear that the cognitive interview may inspire an unacceptable 
number of memory errors, especially if used awkwardly, by inadequately trained 
interviewers.

"We need to evaluate the effectiveness of the cognitive interview in more 
real-world contexts rather than in artificial laboratory situations," says 
psychologist Amina Memon, currently at the University of Texas at Dallas. "This 
technique is very good at producing detailed reports from memory, but it's not 
known what percentage of that information we can expect to corroborate in an 
actual investigation."

"We need to evaluate the effectiveness of the cognitive interview in more 
real-world contexts rather than in artificial laboratory situations," says 
psychologist Amina Memon, currently at the University of Texas at Dallas. "This 
technique is very good at producing detailed reports from memory, but it's not 
known what percentage of that information we can expect to corroborate in an 
actual investigation."

 Fisher disagrees. "Simply stated, in comparison to other conventional 
interviewing methods, whether in the laboratory or in the field, the cognitive 
interview elicits more information at the same or slightly higher accuracy 
rates."

 In its original form, the cognitive interview focuses on guiding witnesses 
through four general memory-jogging techniques: thinking about physical 
surroundings and personal emotional reactions that existed at the time of 
critical past events; reporting everything that comes to mind about those 
events, no matter how fragmentary or seemingly inconsequential; recounting 
events in a variety of chronological sequences (beginning to end, reverse 
order, forward or backward from highly memorable points); and adopting 
different perspectives while recalling events, such as having a crime victim 
describe the perpetrators from her own point of view and from that of a 
bystander at the scene.

 Other cognitive strategies angle for memories of physical and facial 
attributes, speech mannerisms, names, and numbers (such as those on license 
plates). For instance, a witness who heard but forgot a perpetrator's name is 
asked to go through the alphabet from A to Z, in search of the name's first 
letter.

 Early laboratory tests indicated that both college students and experienced 
police officers trained in this version of the cognitive interview elicited up 
to 35 percent more information from witnesses of staged events than peers who 
received no such training. Moreover, the proportion of errors in witnesses' 
accounts did not climb as they recalled larger amounts of information in 
cognitive interviews.

 Actual crime victims and witnesses often experience more anxiety, display 
poorer communication skills, and confront more confusion about their roles in 
an interview. So in the late 1980s, Fisher and Geiselman developed the 
"enhanced cognitive interview" to address such issues.

 An interviewer begins this procedure by building rapport and encouraging the 
witness to take an active role in recalling information rather than responding 
only to someone else's questions. The witness first describes what happened in 
his or her own words, with no interviewer interruptions. The interviewer then 
probes further with specific techniques, such as having the witness generate 
detailed images of what happened from different perspectives.

 Interviewers need to direct enhanced cognitive interviews with sensitivity to 
a witness' style of recalling information and his or her emotional state, 
Fisher says.

 Experiments with police detectives trained in this demanding interview method 
find that they extract nearly 50 percent more information from witnesses than 
before training, while error rates remain comparable.

 The enhanced cognitive interview improves substantially on the original 
version, Fisher adds. In one study he conducted with Geiselman, witnesses of a 
filmed, simulated violent attack remembered 50 percent more about it when 
interviewed by high school students trained in the enhanced procedure than when 
interviewed by experienced police detectives trained in the original cognitive 
approach.

 The two psychologists summarize their findings in a chapter of a 1996 book, 
Intersections in Basic and Applied Memory Research (New York: Lawrence Erlbaum).

 A cognitive interview offers the greatest benefits in the initial stages of 
investigating a robbery, assault, or battery, where most evidence comes from 
eyewitnesses, the researchers conclude. The procedure also shows potential for 
expanding the amount of information gathered in epidemiological interviews -- 
in which people try to recall past medical symptoms, eating patterns, and other 
personal information -- and in oral histories, they note.

 A growing body of evidence, however, challenges the unique value of that 
interviewing technique, Memon argues. It suggests that adept interviewers 
resuscitate memories just as effectively whether or not they ask people to 
conjure up a mental image of an event or apply other cognitive tactics. 
Moreover, cognitive interviewers need to keep in mind that witnesses commit a 
larger number of memory errors as they recall more information, the Texas 
researcher says.

 Memon and psychologist Sarah V. Stevenage of the University of Southampton in 
England elaborated on this argument last March in an article written for 
Psycoloquy, an electronic journal sponsored by the American Psychological 
Association.

 The much-touted advantages of the cognitive interview largely vanish when 
comparison groups consist of interviewers trained in establishing rapport and 
open communication without the use of specific memory-retrieval techniques, 
according to Memon and Stevenage. In other words, an interviewer who relates 
well to witnesses and picks up on their underlying thoughts and motivations may 
not need an arsenal of memory aids.

 In one study directed by Memon, 19 experienced British police detectives given 
4 hours of training in how to conduct structured interviews -- in which they 
learned to build rapport and put witnesses at ease just as they would in 
cognitive interview training -- elicited as much information of equal accuracy 
from witnesses to a staged armed robbery as 19 detectives given 4 hours of 
training in conducting a full cognitive interview.

 Fisher and Geiselman's cognitive interview classes provide intensive 
instruction for up to 2 consecutive days. However, most studies that endorse 
their method have relied on only 2 to 4 hours of training, Memon says.

 Classes for fledgling police interviewers should begin with an emphasis on 
fostering communication skills, she suggests. Training could gradually 
incorporate tactics for fostering rapport. Only after that might it include 
instruction in specific cognitive interview techniques for those officers 
demonstrating particular aptitude for dealing with witnesses.

 Effective communication and rapport are particularly crucial in interviews of 
children, although cognitive-interview techniques may help as well, Memon 
contends. In a study she directed slated to appear in the British Journal of 
Psychology, college students trained in cognitive interviewing procured a 
larger amount of relevant information from child witnesses than students 
trained to conduct structured interviews. There was no increase in the 
proportion of memory errors.

 The 8- to 9-year-old witnesses had attended a magic show and were interviewed 
about that experience once within the next couple of days and again after 10 to 
13 days had passed. Cognitive techniques elicited more information than the 
alternative approach only in the first set of interviews.

 Prior studies indicate that any superiority of the cognitive interview with 
adult witnesses occurs during the first encounter but not in further attempts 
at memory recovery. Future research needs to examine ways in which repeated 
interviews might uncover additional information from witnesses, Memon holds.

 For every six correct details about the magic show gleaned through cognitive 
interviews, one error occurred, "so the gains appear to outweigh the risks," 
Memon says. Children made more errors when describing persons (such as 
mislabeling the color of the magician's cloak) than when providing other types 
of information.

 Results so far support the careful use of the cognitive interview with older 
children, she asserts, although kids under age 8 probably cannot understand or 
reliably use memory-retrieval tactics. Memon also cautions against relying on 
the procedure to recover memories of sexual abuse or other traumas until its 
usefulness in such cases has been investigated.

"The cognitive interview has great potential as an investigative tool, but we 
need to examine its limitations in pursuit of an even better technique," Memon 
asserts.

 Other researchers express concern that the cognitive interview's focus on 
mentally recreating past events may lead a substantial number of witnesses to 
mistake flights of imagination for reality. Repeated demands to imagine an 
incident raise the likelihood of creating "false memories," they contend (SN: 
8/24/96, p. 126).

 In cognitive interviews, the witness thinks about and then verbally 
communicates to the interviewer the content of scenes imagined from different 
perspectives. Repetitions of this kind may unintentionally apply a sheen of 
truth to some memory blunders, asserts psychologist Kim P. Roberts of the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, Md. 
Children often find it difficult to remember whether an event that they replay 
in their minds stems from a genuine incident or not, Roberts adds.

 Some individuals more than others -- among both adults and children -- tend to 
create scenes in their heads that seem real and accept others' subtle 
suggestions about what they might have witnessed, adds psychologist Rhonda N. 
Douglas of Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton. Douglas recommends 
omitting the mental imagery strategy from the cognitive interview "until 
further research demonstrates that its benefits exceed its costs."


