Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 3/8/97 March 8, 1997

 Vaulting the Language Barrier Computers are helping to search texts and data 
now shrouded in linguistic differences

 By JANET RALOFF

 Marjorie Hlava can't read Russian, but that doesn't stop her from learning the 
contents of a document printed in the Cyrillic alphabet. She simply places each 
page under the cover of the flatbed scanner in her Albuquerque office, presses 
a button, and waits as her computer displays an English-language version.

 Using only English, she can also search Russian databases, such as files of 
published scientific reports. She types in the key words or phrases that 
describe her interests, then lets a series of computer programs take over. 
After converting her request into Russian, they sift through data files for 
references to documents that seem to match, convert those matches back into 
English, and display them on her computer.

 More than once she has even conversed via her laptop computer -- on a plane, 
for instance -- with Russians who know no English. She types her side of the 
dialogue in English, which the computer converts into a Russian display. The 
other party types his or her responses in Russian, which the computer 
translates for Hlava. They can chat for hours that way, provided they restrict 
their words and phrases to those in the thesauruses, or set lists of words, on 
her machine.

 That isn't too hard, Hlava notes, since the Russian-to-English portion 
currently contains some 750,000 words and phrases and the English-to-Russian 
one nearly 600,000.

 Most of the software programs that allow fairly inexpensive, off-the-shelf 
computer hardware to translate Russian are preliminary versions being developed 
by Gerold G. Belonogov and Boris A. Kuznetsov at VINITI, the All-Russian 
Institute for Scientific and Technical Information in Moscow. Hlava's company, 
Access Innovations, helped channel some U.S. government financing into the 
creation of those systems.

 As the Internet has been demonstrating over the past few years, "we now have 
access to an enormous amount of information that didn't used to be available," 
notes Douglas W. Oard of the University of Maryland in College Park. "But it's 
only accessible to those who speak the language. And as the World Wide Web's 
name indicates, not everything on the Internet is in English."

 Because users seldom pay for data they find on the Web, there is little 
incentive for those who post the information to invest in expensive, 
time-consuming multilanguage translations or indexing. What a user needs to 
make full and efficient use of a foreign database or the Internet, Oard 
explains, is a system that translates among languages, searches effectively for 
answers to a user's query or stated interests, and then ranks any matches by 
the likelihood of their satisfying a particular user's needs.

 For many persons interested in focused areas of science or engineering -- such 
as the microwave heating of plasmas or drugs to treat cancer patients -- "the 
things that Marjorie Hlava [and her VINITI colleagues] do are just as good as 
you would like," observes Oard. "The limitation is that humans can find them 
difficult to use"; that is, they need to be trained in effective search 
strategies.

 He and a host of others are working to make foreign data and files easily 
accessible to an even broader audience, one with little training in data 
searches. Unfortunately, he says, "we're only about half as good as you'd like 
at doing this. And getting halfway turns out to have been rather easy." It's 
the second half that will prove costly in both time and money, he maintains.

 The payoff could prove substantial, he and Hlava agree. Such efforts could 
uncloak a world of research and data for people who don't speak a foreign 
language.

 Today, computer technologies are being developed to translate a wide range of 
mother tongues. At the behest of the European Parliament, for instance, several 
ambitious programs are working to make documents prepared in English or French 
intelligible to those who read any of the other nine official languages of the 
European Union. Even more challenging projects around the world seek to pair 
English with languages written in non-Roman characters -- such as Japanese, 
Chinese, Greek, Arabic, Russian, Korean, and Vietnamese.

 Few of these efforts are designed to provide full machine translation of the 
documents; rather, their aim is a more limited rendering of some important 
aspects -- such as titles, key words, or abstracts.

 Indeed, this may be sufficient if the goal is merely to identify a few 
particularly valuable documents that a user might then choose to have 
translated in full, Oard observes. The projects could also help electronic 
browsers identify more circumscribed information, such as images posted on the 
Internet with captions in a foreign language, names and affiliations of foreign 
scientists who have conducted research on a topic of interest, or newly coined 
foreign terms or short quotations in a text.

 Even limited cross-language identification and retrieval of electronically 
stored text represents a tall order, Oard notes.

 For instance, even within a single language, commercial database searching 
remains a fairly unscientific, "seat-of-the-pants thing," observes Richard S. 
Marcus, an information scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
What's not well recognized, he says, is that unless someone is an expert in 
searching or has the services of a good librarian, "you typically are able to 
retrieve only about 5 percent of the relevant documents available."

 By employing certain computer techniques that he says are available only on 
experimental systems, "you can bring the comprehensiveness of a search as close 
to 100 percent as you like." With several interactions, sophisticated programs 
can prompt a user to find the most effective words for a query. Marcus 
maintains that this extra effort "can make all the difference between getting 
almost nothing and getting everything you want."

 Before computers were in wide use, librarians indexed documents with a few key 
words -- the ones that appeared in a card catalog. Such limited indexing "is 
not very good for detailed analysis of articles and documents," Marcus says, 
"because a few terms won't cover all of their information." Moreover, unless 
the wording of an indexed portion of some text -- often the title or abstract 
-- is restricted to terms in a thesaurus, an indexer might employ words that a 
later searcher wouldn't think to use.

 With computers, "you can now index all of the words in a document" for 
full-text querying, Marcus notes. Yet even this does not always prove 
satisfactory. If an author used the word "Cessna" in his text and a searcher 
attempted to retrieve it by asking for references to small planes, even a 
full-text search would miss what conceptually should have been a valid match.

"So our research over the past 20 years has been to make key-word use smarter" 
by getting the computer to suggest synonyms, Marcus says. Not only might it 
point out that a Cessna is a type of small plane, it might also ask whether it 
should expand the ongoing search to include other small planes, perhaps 
helicopters -- even dirigibles.

 Alternatively, the computer may attempt to narrow an overly broad search by 
soliciting feedback on its first few matches. The computer can then look for a 
pattern in what was rejected or ask the user why certain choices were rejected, 
then refine subsequent searches based on the response.

 British computer scientist Steven Pollitt of the University of Huddersfield's 
Centre for Database Access Research is taking a similar tack. His 
computer-aided searches ask the user what terms he or she would like to begin 
with and use them as a departure for identifying related search terms -- some 
broader, some narrower in focus.

 If a searcher typed in Alzheimer's disease, for example, the computer would 
flash a list of related terms, such as Alzheimer's syndrome and Alzheimer 
fibrillary lesion. A number next to each term shows how many documents match it.

 The computer can also search simultaneously for texts fitting additional 
categories -- such as a country (where clinical trials may have occurred), 
drugs, or other treatments (such as acupuncture) -- and count or display all 
texts that match the combination.

 The key to making this approach work is a comprehensive list of index terms 
that have been organized into hierarchies, Pollitt explains. Degenerative 
disease, for instance, would contain a file of terms for Alzheimer's and other 
chronic illnesses. Choosing Alzheimer's would allow the computer to suggest 
broader terms, such as degenerative disease, or narrower ones.

 For searching to work effectively, the developers of a database must have 
indexed all texts using an agreed-upon vocabulary -- and the more specific the 
vocabulary, the better.

 The European Parliament has a list of 6,000 terms, known as EUROVOC, to index 
all subjects in its documents, from politics and law to science. Only a few 
dozen of these EUROVOC terms deal with medicine. In contrast, the National 
Library of Medicine has compiled a working list of more than 17,000 words for 
indexing articles cited in its MEDLINE database.

 Searching success also improves, Pollitt notes, when each starting thesaurus 
is tailored to the vocabulary of a particular field, such as medicine or 
physics. This will limit confusion among terms common to both but having quite 
different meanings -- such as plasma. To physicists, it's an ionized gas, 
whereas to biochemists it's blood minus its cellular components.

 Belonogov, who is a linguist, has embedded 21 such thematically organized 
dictionaries (covering such subjects as ecology, geophysics, and foreign trade) 
within his thesauruses. To limit confusion further, the thesauruses treat as a 
single term many commonly used phrases up to 13 words long. In fact, about 75 
percent of the English entries involve word combos, such as "bottom line," 
"ballistic missile," or "might be interested in."

 When they surveyed the field last year, Oard and Maryland colleague Bonnie J. 
Dorr found few commercial systems that ranked potential matches. So if 20,000 
potential matches are identified, a user must sift through them all to find the 
few that might be valuable.

 Though the VINITI browser does rank its responses, "the drawback is that those 
responses are in Cyrillic," Hlava says. Nonetheless, it can prove useful when 
coupled to VINITI's translator programs. Together, the pair can search and 
retrieve documents from Russia's scientific holdings, which include not only 
Russian documents but also those published by Russia's trading partners, such 
as the former Soviet republics, North Korea, Syria, Iran, and Iraq.

 MIT's experimental system attempts to rank matched terms on the basis of how 
they were used or where they appeared. For instance, Marcus says, "we have 
demonstrated that the title words are most important." So if a queried term 
appears there, the document will be ranked higher than another in which the 
same term is buried in the text.

 Pollitt has tested his searching system on a database of 600,000 medical 
citations written in a host of European languages. He has also tested it by 
querying and retrieving citations -- in English or Japanese -- from INSPEC, a 
British bibliographic database covering texts on physics, electronics, and 
computing. He says the system can now be developed commercially.

 Similarly, Marcus believes the system his team has developed is ready for 
commercialization.

 Though VINITI's systems are still under development, working versions are 
available from the institute in Moscow and from Hlava. However, Hlava notes, 
money to refine them has all but dried up. The software programs that she 
marries into working systems still have a way to go before they offer 
"transparent" translation capabilities to both English and Russian readers, she 
says.

"It breaks my heart," she told Science News, "that we can't get these 
technologies off the ground." Hlava says $20,000 would enable the VINITI team 
to develop a version of the translation and searching programs that would be 
compatible with Microsoft Windows, the primary organizing software on desktop 
computers today. The Moscow researchers have no money to invest in it, however: 
Not only are they working without pay, they don't have money to heat their 
offices this winter.

 Indeed, most of these programs suffer from a paucity of both financing and 
visibility. Oard hopes to counter the latter through a symposium he's 
organizing under the auspices of the American Association for Artificial 
Intelligence. He plans this month not only to showcase what seems to work 
reasonably well today but also to highlight where future challenges lie.

 Among the challenges, he says, are programs to revise thesauruses 
automatically as languages grow and change, to identify words in languages like 
Chinese and Vietnamese, which do not put spaces between words, and to insert 
verbs in languages, such as Arabic, that frequently use nouns in place of verbs.


