Science News Online (3/29/97): Florida's manatees' future: Grim or golden?

 March 29, 1997 

 Florida's manatees' future: Grim or golden?

by C. Mlot

 In 1996, biologists counted 2,600 manatees lolling in the coastal waters of 
Florida -- a record number. They also counted a record number of carcasses: 
415, including about 150 poisoned after the bloom of a toxin-producing marine 
microbe, or red tide, last spring.

 This year, after the mild winter and fewer reported carcasses, researchers 
expected to find an even bigger population. Instead, the aerial count of the 
endangered animals dropped to 2,229.

 The difficulties of counting the elusive manatees have prompted biologists to 
use computer models to fashion a picture of the population's dynamics. One such 
model, described in the April Conservation Biology, is the first to project the 
animals' future in the long haul. If birth and death rates and other conditions 
hold steady, the population should remain stable over the 1,000-year time frame 
of the model. Just a 10 percent increase in the usual death rate of about 150 
per year, however, could gradually eliminate manatees in the United States.

 That translates into only about one additional death per year in each of 13 
key counties in the state, says zoologist Thomas J. O'Shea of the Biological 
Resources Division of the U.S. Geological Survey in Fort Collins, Colo. At that 
rate, "the cumulative impact could be extinction." O'Shea developed the 
analysis with Miriam Marmontel and Stephen R. Humphrey of the University of 
Florida in Gainesville.

 They used data on the age and reproductive status of about 1,200 carcasses 
recovered between 1976 and 1991. The model then generated a pattern of growth 
for the population. By altering birth or death rates and factoring in 
hard-to-predict events like hurricanes or red tides, the researchers projected 
what might happen to the manatees under a variety of conditions.

"There's a certain amount of guesswork involved," says biologist Chip Deutsch 
of USGS' manatee research program in Gainesville. More important than the 
model's absolute numbers or dates, he says, is its identification of the 
factors that have the biggest effect on the direction of the population 
changes. Death rates among adults turn out to drive the changes, and accidents 
involving motorboats or other waterway contraptions account for about half of 
these deaths.

 Despite the uncertainties in predicting natural catastrophes, one thing is 
clear about the Florida manatees' future. They will be jostled by an increasing 
population of people and boats. The problem of collisions with manatees "is 
only going to get worse," says Deutsch. The quality of the manatees' habitat 
will undoubtedly be at risk as well.

 O'Shea notes that the manatees can survive, provided motorboat speed limits 
and other conservation efforts in the key counties stay in place and are 
enforced.


