Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 4/12/97 April 12, 1997

 Gazing into Crystal Balls Colloids help scientists understand how materials 
melt 

 By CORINNA WU

 Liquids freeze into solids; solids melt into liquids. These commonplace phase 
transitions, in which one state of matter transforms into another, nevertheless 
retain an aura of mystery. No one fully understands what happens at the 
interface between two phases -- an uncharted borderland where atoms rearrange 
themselves out of one structure and into another.

 Tracking atoms as they make these rearrangements isn't easy. Although 
scientists can use electron microscopes to image individual atoms as fuzzy 
blobs, that's not a practical way to study an interface between two phases. 
Atoms move in and out of the boundary region quickly and unpredictably, making 
it hard to know which atoms to look at.

 One way around these observational hurdles is to study a model system instead 
of real atoms. Many scientists are turning to colloids, suspensions of small 
particles dispersed in a liquid. Under the right conditions, colloidal 
particles can organize to form crystals -- three-dimensional arrangements with 
a specific structure -- which can then melt like conventional materials. 
Colloidal crystals provide scientists with a way to test how atoms interact and 
what they do during phase transitions. Recent experiments have revealed some 
surprising things about the nature of these interactions, standing accepted 
theory on its head.

 Far from being exotic laboratory concoctions, colloidal suspensions are found 
widely in nature. A person sipping a glass of milk is ingesting a colloidal 
suspension of proteins dispersed in water. Gemstone opals get their fiery 
colors from crystallized silica colloids that are just the right size for 
scattering light.

 Colloidal systems have many industrial uses as well. For example, paint 
consists of pigment particles suspended in a liquid binder. When colloidal 
particles bump, they clump -- creating that gooey glob of pigment that lurks at 
the bottom of an unstirred paint can. The paint industry doesn't like 
precipitation, but "in the dairy industry, that's known as cheese," says David 
G. Grier, a physicist at the University of Chicago. "Many of the industrial 
applications involve controlling the interaction between particles."

 Learning about colloidal interactions could prove useful not only for 
understanding existing materials but for making entirely new ones. Materials 
consisting of linked colloids could have interesting properties. For example, 
researchers are discussing making photonic crystals, materials that act as 
semiconductors for light, out of colloids. To do so, they must arrange 
colloidal particles of a particular size to filter light in a prescribed way.

 Accordingly, Grier and other researchers around the world have focused their 
attention on the physics of colloidal crystals. Some groups use gold or silica 
clusters for their work. Others, including Grier, choose tiny, commercially 
available polystyrene beads, "beautifully spherical" particles less than a 
micrometer in diameter. The beads are so uniform, says Cherry A. Murray, head 
of the semiconductor physics research department at Lucent Technologies in 
Murray Hill, N.J., that scientists use them to calibrate the magnification of 
electron microscopes.

 In addition to uniform size, other properties make the beads attractive to 
colloid researchers. The beads are manufactured with a surface coating of 
thousands of sulfate salt groups, which dissociate into ions when the beads are 
placed in water. The positively charged ions float away, leaving a host of 
negative charges on the beads. Squeezing the fluid against a glass wall 
concentrates the negatively charged spheres so that they coalesce into an 
orderly array -- a colloidal crystal -- but as soon as the pressure is 
released, the crystals fall apart. In other words, they melt.

 Even though the spheres are small, they are big enough to be seen under a 
light microscope, making them easier to study than other types of colloidal 
particles. Murray, who has worked with colloidal crystals for more than 15 
years, pioneered a method of videotaping the crystals as they form and 
disintegrate. She digitizes the video images so a computer can trace the 
particles' patterns of movement.

"I like to call it analog molecular dynamics simulation," Murray says. "The 
observer can see each sphere move individually and follow it in time."

 She uses the word "analog" to distinguish the method from molecular dynamics 
simulations performed wholly on the computer. Such simulations calculate 
behavior of crystals existing only as mathematical constructs. Videotaping and 
digitizing an image of a real colloidal crystal, Murray says, overcomes the 
limitations of even supercomputer simulations.

 For example, a computer has only so much memory, which limits the size of the 
crystal that can be simulated. A real crystal could, in principle, contain as 
many beads as the researcher wants. Also, that crystal could be left to 
equilibrate in the lab for as long as necessary. Time on a supercomputer is too 
precious to design lengthy experiments.

 Grier, who worked with Murray several years ago, also captures colloidal 
crystals on video. One day, he and his colleague Amy E. Larsen, now at St. Olaf 
College in Northfield, Minn., ran what they expected would be a routine 
experiment: compressing layers of spheres against the walls of a glass 
container, releasing the pressure, and watching the crystal melt. Instead, what 
they saw challenged a basic tenet of the currently accepted theory of colloidal 
interactions.

 That theory says that a group of particles with the same charge should repel 
each other, and indeed, they usually do. If negatively charged polystyrene 
spheres had only repulsive interactions, they should push away from each other 
in a matter of seconds. Surprisingly, some of the crystals made by Grier and 
Larsen refused to melt. Instead, they stayed together for nearly an hour. "It's 
exactly like slush, or a frozen margarita," Grier says. "You have chunks of 
crystal floating around in a very dilute fluid."

 What keeps the colloidal slush from melting? Grier and Larsen concluded that 
the colloidal particles must possess some sort of long-range attraction, even 
though their individual charges should repel each other. Two Japanese 
scientists first proposed this idea more than a decade ago, developing what 
became known as the Sogami-Ise theory. Experiments supported the idea of 
long-range attractions in colloids, but other calculations eventually exposed 
flaws in the theory's details, says Grier.

 The currently accepted theory of how particles interact balances the repulsive 
forces and the weak attractions caused by shifting electric charges in the 
spheres. Grier and Larsen's results suggest that the theory does not account 
adequately for the strong attractive part of the interaction.

 The shape of the crystals, which show facets, or flat edges, provides 
additional evidence to support this idea, he says. Faceted crystals need more 
energy to hold themselves together than amorphous blobs do.

 To elucidate the nature of this long-range attraction, the scientists tested 
the influence of the glass plates against which they squeezed the crystals. 
Previous studies had shown that glass promotes attractive interactions between 
the spheres. They measured the interaction between two polystyrene beads near a 
glass wall. At a distance of about 2.5 micrometers from the wall, the two beads 
attracted each other, within a certain range of separations, but at about 9.5 
micrometers from the wall, they always repelled each other.

 The crystals in the slush were too big and too far from the glass for the 
effect of the walls to explain their stability, however. "The wall-induced 
attraction could be holding together the first layer, but then what's holding 
together the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth layers?" asks Grier. He and 
Larsen described their findings in the Jan. 16 Nature.

 Since two spheres repel each other but many spheres attract, Grier describes 
this anomaly as a many-body effect, a catchall phrase for this kind of 
phenomenon. In a colloid, each negatively charged sphere tends to attract a 
cloud of positive ions around it. Grier suggests that the overlapping of these 
positive ion clouds might hold a collection of spheres together. A similar 
thing happens in metals, whose electrons spread out in a sea over all of the 
atoms in the material. Grier's suggestion may also explain how a glass wall 
causes nearby spheres to attract. "The glass turns out to be [negatively] 
charged in water also," Grier says, so the positive ion cloud associated with 
it could act as a mediator between the spheres.

 The origin and nature of the long-range attractions that Grier and Larsen see 
in their colloidal crystals remain mysterious. In particular, molecular 
dynamics simulations performed on a computer show no such phenomenon under the 
conditions of the experiment, says Mark J. Stevens of Sandia National 
Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M.

 Beyond understanding how colloids themselves interact, researchers want to see 
how well these crystals can simulate other materials. The way polystyrene 
spheres pack together to form colloidal crystals offers a useful simulation of 
the close packing of atoms in a typical metal, Murray says, but colloids are 
not good mimics of other elements. For example, she explains, "silicon wants to 
bond with four nearest neighbors in a tetrahedral arrangement" that the tiny 
spheres don't reproduce.

 The resemblance to metals becomes even more pronounced in systems that consist 
of two kinds of colloids. By mixing two types of polystyrene spheres with 
different sizes or electric properties, Murray can create colloidal crystals 
that behave like metal alloys. One system she's found closely resembles the 
structure of a calcium-copper mixture.

 Murray is also using these binary mixtures to study the kind of phase 
transition certain crystals make when they transform from tight arrays into 
glasses, whose particles are less ordered. "You can get very complicated 
phases," she says.

 Despite the evident similarities, extrapolating from the micrometer-size beads 
to atoms one ten-thousandth their size is tricky, Stevens cautions. The beads 
are classical systems, but on the scale of true atomic systems, quantum 
mechanics takes over. That difference in the physics governing each system 
limits how far the analogy between colloidal and atomic crystals extends.

 The next challenge, Grier says, will be to place the new experimental results 
in a theoretical framework.

"The understanding of phase transitions is, in my opinion, one of the most 
important problems in condensed-matter physics today," he says. Perhaps as 
theory, experiment, and computer simulations gradually come together, 
scientists' understanding of colloids and materials will crystallize too.

 Reference:

 Larsen, A.E., and D.G. Grier. 1997. Like-charge attractions in metastable 
colloidal crystallites. Nature 385(Jan. 16):230. Further readings

 Murray, C.A., and D.G. Grier. 1995. Colloidal crystals. American Scientist 
83(May-June):238.

 Peterson, I. 1996. Fine points of melting in plasma crystals. Science News 
149(March 9):150.

_____. 1990. Shining a bright light on quantum darkness. Science News 138(Sept. 
29):196.


