Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 3/8/97 March 8, 1997

 Hormone Therapy: Issues of the Heart

by J. Raloff

 At the close of a woman's childbearing years, her body undergoes hormonal 
changes that render her more vulnerable to a number of degenerative conditions, 
especially heart disease and osteoporosis. Drug therapy can slow or forestall 
that vulnerability.

 However, the recipe of hormones most commonly prescribed in the United States 
may not fill the bill -- at least in lowering heart risks, several new studies 
indicate. That's troubling, maintains physiologist Kent Hermsmeyer, who 
coauthored two of the studies, because heart disease kills three out of every 
four postmenopausal women.

 Hormone therapy delivers estrogen to make up the shortfall that occurs with 
menopause. To prevent the rise in uterine cancer risk that typically develops 
when women receive estrogen alone, physicians often prescribe a combination 
that contains a second hormone -- usually a synthetic form of progesterone.

 The new studies suggest that this duo's heart benefits depend on the form of 
progesterone used.

 Hermsmeyer's team at the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center in Beaverton 
gave estrogen daily to 18 rhesus monkeys whose ovaries had been removed to 
simulate menopause. Six also got natural progesterone, while another six 
monkeys received the synthetic medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), the most 
widely prescribed progesterone for postmenopausal U.S. women.

 After 4 weeks, the researchers injected the animals with two chemicals 
released by blood platelets, simulating a heart attack. In monkeys receiving 
MPA and estrogen, this injection provoked an unrelenting constriction in the 
coronary artery, cutting off blood flow. Unless treated within minutes, the 
animals would have died, says Hermsmeyer. This chemical challenge produced the 
same result in animals that had received no hormone therapy.

 Monkeys that had been treated with estrogen alone or together with natural 
progesterone quickly recovered normal blood flow without drug treatment. The 
researchers report their findings in the March Nature Medicine and the March 1 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

"The big surprise," Hermsmeyer says, is that "MPA poses such a huge risk. If 
the effects of MPA on coronary artery reactivity are the same in women as in 
monkeys, then MPA may be a dangerous drug."

 J. Koudy Williams of Wake Forest University's Bowman Gray School of Medicine 
in Winston-Salem, N.C., was less surprised by the findings. He says new data 
from his team's experiments on monkeys show that MPA can "obliterate the 
beneficial effect of estrogen [therapy] on the progression of coronary artery 
atherosclerosis."

 Peter Collins of the National Heart and Lung Institute in London and his 
colleagues saw similar effects in 16 women with coronary artery disease. 
Participants in their study received two hormone replacement therapies, each 
for several weeks. The therapies contained estrogen plus natural progesterone 
or MPA.

 The women exercised on a treadmill until tests showed they were experiencing 
reduced blood flow to the heart. They could exercise significantly longer when 
natural progesterone was part of the hormone therapy. "There appeared to be a 
negation of the beneficial effects of estrogen by MPA but not by natural 
progesterone," concludes Collins. He plans to present these data in a few weeks 
at the American College of Cardiology's annual meeting.

 As far as MPA is concerned, "there's enough data accumulated to give us 
pause," Williams argues. In terms of heart disease protection, "it appears to 
lessen the beneficial effects of estrogen."

 Endocrinologist JoAnn E. Manson of Harvard Medical School in Boston disagrees, 
arguing that the relevance of these "intriguing" studies remains uncertain. Yet 
they do "underscore a need for more research on different forms of 
progesterone," she adds.

 Indeed, Williams' newest data indicate that some synthetic progesterones -- 
such as nomegestrol acetate, widely used in Europe -- do not erase 
postmenopausal estrogen's benefits.


