Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/10/97 May 10, 1997

 Cosmic axis begets cosmic controversy

by R. Cowen What's the fastest way to get an astrophysicist to write a paper? 
Publish a report claiming the universe has a special direction.

 That's the way it seemed last week, when a flurry of new papers, none of them 
peer-reviewed, appeared on the Internet. The authors lambasted a recent study 
suggesting that the cosmos has a distinct axis, along which the polarization of 
radiation is rotated more than it is in other directions (SN: 4/26/97, p. 252). 
If correct, that finding could overturn long-cherished notions about the birth 
and evolution of the universe.

 In the latest reports, astronomers using newer, higher-quality data say they 
have failed to replicate the controversial finding, while theorists assert that 
they have identified fatal flaws in the statistical analysis performed by the 
original study's coauthors, Borge Nodland of the University of Rochester (N.Y.) 
and John P. Ralston of the University of Kansas in Lawrence.

 Astronomers John F.C. Wardle of Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., Rick A. 
Perley of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, N.M., and 
Marshall H. Cohen of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena 
analyzed 26 galaxies and quasars -- far fewer than the 160 galaxies used by 
Nodland and Ralston. However, the new data consist of high-resolution images 
from the Very Large Array radio telescope in Socorro and the W.M. Keck 
Telescope on Hawaii's Mauna Kea.

 The researchers used an easy-to-see reference -- the alignment of jets of 
radio waves emitted by many of the quasars and galaxies in their study -- to 
measure the polarization angle of radiation. Because polarization is generally 
thought to start out perpendicular to the jet direction, any extra rotation, or 
twist, in the polarization of light should be readily apparent, Wardle and his 
colleagues assert.

 Their new data "directly refute" the presence of cosmological rotation, the 
researchers write. They add that Nodland and Ralston, who had to rely on 
lower-resolution images, calculated net polarization by averaging the 
polarization of radio waves from several different regions within a galaxy, a 
technique that provides "a very blunt tool for searching for systematic 
[rotation]."

 Ralston disagrees, arguing that averaging minimizes the confounding effect of 
a galaxy's magnetic field, which also twists the polarization of the radiation 
the galaxy emits. Nodland adds that the extra twist which he and Ralston found 
along a particular direction in space is a statistical effect apparent only as 
an average over a large sample of galaxies distributed evenly across the sky.

 The team's statistical analysis has also come under fire. Daniel J. Eisenstein 
of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., and Emory F. Bunn of 
Bates College in Lewiston, Maine, assert that Nodland and Ralston did not 
properly test whether the cosmic twist they found is real. Sean M. Carroll of 
the University of California, Santa Barbara and George B. Field of the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., come to a 
similar conclusion.

 Ralston says, however, that the statistical comparison recommended by these 
researchers would fail to detect a genuine twist.


