Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 4/5/97 April 5, 1997

 A Fantastical Experiment The science behind the controversial cloning of Dolly 

 BY JOHN TRAVIS

 In 1938, just a few years before his death, the famous German embryologist 
Hans Spemann pondered a long-debated idea called nuclear 
equivalency. Spemann and his contemporaries knew that all animal cells contain 
a nucleus, the membrane-bound structure that houses a cell's 
genes.

 During the earliest stages of life, when an embryo consists of fewer than a 
dozen or so cells, the genes inside every nucleus have their 
fullest potential. Each embryonic cell is, in the jargon of biologists, 
totipotent: It has the ability to give rise to cells that make up the 
eyes, the liver, the brain, or any other part of an adult animal.

 Yet as an embryo develops, cells lose this ability. By ordering genes to turn 
on or off, cells begin to specialize. One group of embryonic 
cells may commit itself to constructing the nervous system, while another acts 
to create muscles.

 This gradual specialization of cells, also known as differentiation, poses a 
provocative question. Does a nucleus from a differentiated cell 
retain the know-how to construct an entire organism? Scientists have generally 
dismissed this idea of nuclear equivalency, suggesting that as 
cells specialize, they irreversibly alter their DNA or even discard whole genes.

 Spemann wasn't so sure. In a 1938 article, he suggested an experiment that 
might resolve the debate: Remove the nucleus from an unfertilized 
egg and replace it with one from a differentiated cell.

 This "fantastical" experiment, as Spemann called it, lay beyond the 
technological reach of his time. Yet today, almost 6 decades after 
Spemann proposed the strategy of nuclear transplantation, Scottish scientists 
have startled the world by using that process to create a lamb 
named Dolly (SN: 3/1/97, p. 132).

 With this first cloning of a mammal from an adult nucleus, the fantastical has 
become reality, and biologists are struggling to explain Dolly 
and to discover whether the method used to make her can be put to practical use.

 One of the first issues raised by Dolly's birth is the troublesome question of 
what is meant by "cloning."

"Cloning is not really a scientific word, and unfortunately it has many, many 
meanings," notes W. Richard Dukelow of Michigan State University 
in East Lansing, who conducts in vitro fertilization research in nonhuman 
primates.

 In its most common use, cloning means creating an organism genetically 
identical to another organism. Some scientists use the word to include 
a procedure more accurately called embryo splitting (SN: 2/5/94, p. 92). In 
this process, which has been available to animal breeders for 
decades, scientists take a young embryo, still composed of totipotent cells, 
and divide it in half or thirds or quarters. Each of these 
portions can give rise to a normal animal, so the procedure creates twins, 
triplets, or quadruplets.

 The experiment Spemann envisioned -- replacing the nucleus of an unfertilized 
egg with the nucleus from another cell -- is what most 
scientists refer to as cloning. Nuclear transplantation is nothing new, notes 
Robert M. Moor of Babraham Institute in Cambridge, England, who 
2 years ago reviewed the field in Current Topics in Developmental Biology.

 In 1952, scientists working with frogs transferred nuclei into unfertilized 
eggs whose own nuclei had been removed. Those first experiments 
used donor nuclei from early frog embryos, whose cells were thought to be 
totipotent. The resulting frogs made it only to the larval stage 
before dying.

 Since then, other scientists have perfected the approach in a variety of 
species -- frogs, mice, sheep, cows, and most recently monkeys (SN: 
3/8/97, p. 142). In each case, when a nucleus from a very early embryo replaces 
an unfertilized egg's nucleus, the offspring generated grows 
into a fertile adult.

 The feat is typically performed by removing the egg's nucleus with a fine, 
hollow needle. A donor cell is fused to the egg by pulses of 
electricity, which break down the donor cell's outer membrane and allow the egg 
to envelope its new nucleus.

 While transplantation of early embryonic nuclei proved successful, researchers 
almost always failed with transfers of older nuclei -- those 
from the cells of a late-stage fetus or an adult. Such results seemed to 
confirm that the nucleus undergoes irreversible changes during 
development.

 A few experiments provided hints to the contrary, however. Notably, in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s, John B. Gurdon of the University of 
Oxford in England showed that nuclear transplants from tadpole cells could 
produce fertile adult frogs. He also established that transplants 
of nuclei from adult frogs generated tadpoles, though the animals died before 
fully maturing.

 Gurdon interpreted his results as proof that nuclei of differentiated cells 
can regain their totipotency.

 In light of this rich history of the nuclear transplantation field, the 
cloning of Dolly from an adult cell should come as only a "mild 
surprise," argues Matthew P. Scott, president-elect of the Society for 
Developmental Biology.

 Still, how did the Scottish scientists manage to create Dolly, when attempts 
to clone mice from adult cells have invariably failed and even 
Gurdon's frog experiments were not completely successful?

 The key to nuclear transplantation with adult cells seems to be a phenomenon 
that scientists call either nuclear reprogramming or chromatin 
remodeling. "Chromatin is really just a word for the mixture of proteins and 
DNA and small molecules that constitutes the substance of 
chromosomes," explains Scott.

 While it seems that most nuclei do not suffer irreversible changes during 
differentiation, researchers have found that chromatin inside the 
nucleus of an adult cell differs considerably from that inside an egg cell or 
an early embryo. As cells differentiate, clusters of atoms, such 
as methyl groups, latch onto DNA; some of these clusters deactivate specific 
genes on chromosomes. In addition, some of the proteins forming 
the core of chromatin appear to change over time.

 Consequently, for an adult nucleus to behave like a totipotent one requires 
the genetic equivalent of the Fountain of Youth. Such a 
rejuvenation formula seems to exist inside the egg cell. Proteins and other 
molecules floating within the egg can interact with a transplanted 
nucleus to restore its vitality, says Alan P. Wolffe of the National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, Md.

 The specific molecular mechanisms by which an egg exerts this influence on a 
nucleus are just beginning to be revealed. In the Nov. 1 EMBO 
Journal, for example, Wolffe and a colleague describe how one egg protein 
induces the nucleus of an adult frog cell to shed certain chromatin 
proteins and incorporate others more suited to an egg nucleus. This exchange of 
proteins turns on several genes that had been shut down 
formerly.

 To clone an animal from an adult cell, scientists had to find ways of helping 
the egg with its nuclear reprogramming. That's exactly what Ian 
Wilmut and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, the team that 
created Dolly, believe they've found.

 Their trick is to starve the adult cells. The strategy, developed by Wilmut's 
colleague Keith H.S. Campbell, involves depriving the intended 
donor cells, mammary cells in the case of Dolly, of almost all nutrients for 5 
days.

 This diet induces the cells to abandon their normal cycle of growth and 
division and enter a quiescent stage. Such cells appear to have few, 
if any, genes activated, and Wilmut suggests that the starvation prompts some 
initial chromatin remodeling that makes it easier for the egg 
cell to finish the job.

 Nonetheless, Wilmut and other researchers warn that Dolly could still turn out 
to be a fluke. After all, the Roslin group fused 277 donor 
cells to eggs and produced just one viable animal.

 Nutrient deprivation "is the only aspect of the whole study that is novel to 
Wilmut's group. It might be the key, but when you have only one 
young out of hundreds of tries, it's difficult to know," says Moor.

 Why have Wilmut and his colleagues persisted for years in attempts to create 
cloned sheep from embryonic, fetal, and now adult cells? To a 
large extent, commercial interests motivated the effort. The cloning research 
was funded by PPL Therapeutics, a Scottish biotech firm 
interested in genetically altering female animals to secrete valuable drugs 
into their milk. By adding human genes to sheep, for example, the 
company has already created animals that provide large, easily recoverable 
quantities of a protein that holds promise in the treatment of 
cystic fibrosis.

 This strategy has been around for years, but companies such as PPL have faced 
a major hurdle in creating drug-producing animals. The 
traditional method is to inject multiple copies of a human gene into a newly 
fertilized egg -- an approach that resembles playing roulette, 
however. The injected genes rarely integrate properly into the egg's genome, 
and few drug-producing offspring result.

 Wilmut and his coworkers hope to have laid the foundation for a more efficient 
approach to genetically altering animals. In their cloning 
method, there is a short period during which researchers can grow donor cells 
in the laboratory before transplanting the nuclei into eggs. 
During that time, Wilmut's group plans to manipulate the cells, either adding 
or deleting genes. The scientists will then transplant only the 
nuclei of cells that have been effectively altered, thereby dramatically 
increasing their odds of creating a commercially useful animal. They 
might then use that animal to create a herd, cloning it over and over again.

 In addition to drug-producing livestock, new animal models of human diseases 
may result from the development of this cloning technology. 
Wilmut told a Senate hearing last month that he is particularly interested in 
adding to large animals the mutant human gene that causes cystic 
fibrosis. "Sheep will provide an outstanding model for this disease," he 
testified.

 Another much-discussed use of cloning is to tailor animals, most likely pigs, 
so that their organs can be transplanted into people. 
Controversial for many reasons, this technique depends upon finding ways to 
make animal organs appear less foreign to the human immune system 
(SN: 11/4/95, p. 298). With an effective cloning technique, researchers might 
delete from pigs the genes whose proteins tell the human immune 
system to reject the foreign organs.

 On the most speculative front, some scientists suggest that the recent cloning 
work may provide medically useful information about 
reprogramming the genes in cells. Such knowledge might enable them to produce 
whole organs from undifferentiated cells or to trick cancer 
cells into assuming a less harmful form.

 Wilmut has repeatedly stressed that cloning technology is still in its infancy 
and that many questions remain unanswered.

 In one sense, Dolly isn't even a true clone -- she does not share all of her 
genes with her donor. As many scientists have pointed out, a few 
dozen genes reside in the energy-producing organelles called mitochondria. 
Since only the nucleus of an adult ewe cell was transferred to the 
egg, Dolly's mitochondrial DNA comes from the recipient egg.

 Wilmut and his colleagues do not know whether this mixing of genes is 
important. Nor do they know whether Dolly will be fertile or have a 
normal life span.

 Regarding the latter concern, the nucleus that created Dolly was 6 years old. 
It's unclear whether the chromatin remodeling of the 
transplanted nucleus reset its age. If it didn't, Dolly's life might be 
historic but brief.

 Moreover, Dolly was the only survivor of 277 cloning attempts with adult sheep 
cells. One explanation for the group's low success rate may be 
the electric pulses that trick the egg into developing, says Moor. These pulses 
don't always trigger the same signals inside an egg that a 
sperm's arrival does, he and other researchers have found.

 The most obvious unsettled issue surrounding Dolly is whether she is a 
precursor to human cloning. From the very beginning, Wilmut has 
stressed that there is no reasonable justification for cloning humans. 
Moreover, given the current lack of knowledge about how cloning works, 
it would be too dangerous to try, he says. "In the past, we have had lambs that 
were born that were quite deformed."

 Fundamental scientific barriers could prevent human cloning via nuclear 
transplantation, Wilmut and other scientists suggest. One may be the 
differing speeds at which developmental events occur among species. A 
developing embryo doesn't immediately make use of its genes, for 
example. During the first few cell divisions, it depends upon proteins and 
genetic instructions the unfertilized egg had already prepared.

 When an embryo switches on its genes varies among species, notes Richard M. 
Schultz of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Mouse 
embryos activate their genes quickly, sheep wait much longer, and human embryos 
fall somewhere in between, he explains.

 The sheep embryo's relatively late activation of its genome may have been 
crucial to the success of cloning Dolly because it allowed more 
time for the transplanted nucleus to be reprogrammed. Human embryos may not 
provide enough time for this chromatin remodeling, thus preventing 
the cloning of humans using adult cells, says Schultz.

 This potential limitation may offer solace to people who do not want to 
address the ethical dilemmas of human cloning and may allay fears 
that this fantastical experiment will soon become routine throughout the animal 
kingdom.



