Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/10/97 May 10, 1997

 Science's Role in Shake-Up of DOE Lab

by J. Raloff

 Among the problems cited is a reactor's fuel storage pool that has been 
leaking water containing low concentrations of radioactive tritium into the 
soil for an estimated 10 years. Although the leak, discovered last January, is 
on the facility's grounds, residents of the area are outraged.

 Pena announced the unprecedented change in management -- his first major 
policy decision since taking office a month ago -- during a visit to the Upton, 
N.Y., laboratory on May 1. He also released a 50-page evaluation of 
Brookhaven's environmental and safety conduct and pledged to overhaul 
immediately the lab's administration and federal oversight of it.

 At Pena's request, for instance, the Environmental Protection Agency began a 
full inspection of the lab this week. In addition, Martha Krebs, director of 
DOE's Office of Energy Research, has been charged with creating an "action 
plan" within 30 days to strengthen DOE's oversight of all its national 
laboratories. Pena admitted that the agency shares much of the blame for the 
attitudes that allowed safety and environmental protection problems to develop 
at Brookhaven because it did not maintain sufficiently close oversight of 
Associated Universities or make the contractor directly accountable for safety.

 Said Pena, "I'm sending a message to [the residents of] Long Island -- and to 
our facilities nationwide" that "there need not -- and will not -- be a 
trade-off between award-winning scientific research and environment, safety, 
[or] health."

 Some of the 250 scientists who had been using the lab's High Flux Beam Reactor 
(HFBR) are likely to see things differently. Their research may have to be 
abandoned if cleaning up low-level radioactive contamination depletes the 
reactor's operating budget.

 HFBR, the most heavily used U.S. basic science facility for neutron studies, 
was shut down for routine maintenance last December. Days before it was to 
restart, the lab found the tritium leak.

 In response to a public uproar, the lab's managers said the reactor would 
remain closed down while they assessed the situation. Last week, Krebs said 
that even though the shutdown "is a very significant loss [to science]," 
whether it reopens now hinges on finances.

 The pledged cleanup of the tritium leak during the next 2 years is expected to 
cost $25 million. Lining the fuel storage pool with stainless steel -- a 
further measure under discussion -- could cost $10 million more. Brookhaven's 
$400 million budget might not stretch to pick up these costs and still finance 
reactor operations, says lab spokeswoman Mona S. Rowe.

 At a press conference on the Brookhaven announcements, a reporter noted that 
the scientists who use HFBR "weren't at fault" and asked if DOE would help them 
find the money to move their work to reactors elsewhere. Krebs responded that 
it's too early to say.

 DOE Assistant Secretary Tara O'Toole argued that "it is wrongheaded to say the 
users were not at fault." Users created an environment at Brookhaven that 
prompted a technician to do electrical repairs on live circuits -- and risk 
electrocution -- rather than shut down an experiment, she continued.

"The main message here," said O'Toole, "is that the users do have [a] 
responsibility for environment, safety, and health."


