Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 4/19/97 April 19, 1997

 Aged garlic could slow prostate cancer

by J. Raloff 

 A compound derived from aged garlic dramatically diminishes the growth of 
human prostate cancer cells, according to data from a new test-tube experiment.

 Researchers from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York worked 
with a line of cells that retains many of the features characteristic of those 
in the diseased prostate. For instance, they multiply faster when exposed to 
testosterone, the primary male sex hormone, or to DHT, a far more potent analog 
that the body produces from testosterone.

 The cultured cells also produce compounds characteristic of human prostate 
tumors, making them a good model of human disease, explains Richard S. Rivlin, 
Sloan-Kettering's director of clinical nutrition.

 His group exposed the cells to S-allylmercaptocysteine (SAMC), a sulfur 
compound that forms as garlic ages. It caused the cancer cells to break down 
testosterone two to four times more quickly than normal -- and through a route 
that does not produce DHT, notes John T. Pinto, a coauthor of the study. In 
this sense, he told Science News, the garlic-derived compound "is doing the 
same thing that testosterone deprivation would do."

 At concentrations that could develop in the blood of people taking 
commercially marketed aged-garlic pills, SAMC slowed the cancer cells' growth 
by as much as 70 percent, compared to the rate in untreated cells. Pinto and 
Rivlin reported their findings in New Orleans last week at the Experimental 
Biology '97 meeting.

 The compound offered a few other bonuses. It cut the production of two 
proteins (including prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) exuded by the cells and 
often used in blood tests for prostate cancer (see p. 240). However, Rivlin 
notes, the garlic-induced PSA decrease was greater than expected, "out of 
proportion to the decrease in cancer growth." This might further retard a 
tumor's growth, Pinto says, since PSA itself can promote cancer cell 
proliferation.

 From the results achieved at the low exposures in this study, SAMC "looks 
promising," says Maurice Bennink of Michigan State University in East Lansing.

 John A. Milner of Pennsylvania State University in State College, who heard 
the SAMC data reported in New Orleans, agrees. Especially with so few 
treatments available for prostate cancer, he says, "I think [the new study] is 
significant -- no question about it."

 The results don't suggest there's any new value in flavoring entrees 
generously with garlic. "It is unlikely you could obtain [potentially 
therapeutic doses of SAMC] from eating fresh garlic," Rivlin points out. The 
bulbs need to have been commercially aged for at least a year.


