Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/17/97 May 17, 1997

 Impurities give crystals that special glow

by C. Wu Kids know that the easiest way to create a miniature light show is to 
munch on wintergreen candy in the dark. When a piece is cracked, the sugar 
emits light that the wintergreen flavoring intensifies. Many materials exhibit 
this phenomenon, called triboluminescence.

 In a new study, Linda M. Sweeting of Towson (Md.) State University and her 
colleagues try to deduce what makes sparks fly from some materials but not 
others. Their findings, reported in the May Chemistry of Materials, support the 
idea that crystal structure and impurities are central to whether a material is 
triboluminescent.

 For years, scientists suspected that only materials with an asymmetrical 
crystal structure would flash when crushed. Splitting such a crystal into two 
pieces puts positive charges on one face and negative ones on the other (SN: 
7/30/88, p. 78). The charges immediately recombine, crackling through the air 
like tiny lightning bolts.

 However, several materials with symmetrical crystal structures also show the 
characteristic sparks, Sweeting says. To study this discrepancy systematically, 
the researchers synthesized a group of 12 related compounds, coaxed them to 
grow into crystals, and identified their structures with X-ray diffraction. 
They tested the crystals for triboluminescence by mashing them with a glass rod 
in a test tube and watching carefully for light.

 The very first compound Sweeting synthesized sparked in the dark, which makes 
it "the first compound designed to be a triboluminescent molecule," she says. 
All of the substances with asymmetrical structures glowed, whereas only half of 
the symmetrical ones did.

 Moreover, those symmetrical crystals lost their triboluminescence once they 
were purified. "Impurities in crystals can reduce the symmetry that you think 
you have," says Bart E. Kahr, a chemist at the University of Washington in 
Seattle. "As you get down to the microscale, the differences between the pure 
and impure crystal can be extreme."

 Those local structural asymmetries could explain why materials that are 
symmetrical overall can still exhibit triboluminescence, Sweeting says.

 A surprising finding underscored the significance of impurities: One of the 
asymmetrical compounds also lost its ability to flash when purified, indicating 
that impurities may be required to generate light even in asymmetrical 
materials. In past experiments, some ostensibly pure asymmetrical compounds may 
have contained enough impurities to create triboluminescence, Sweeting notes.

 Scientists are still far from a full understanding of the effect, which not 
only explains wintergreen candy but may account for other mysterious lights 
observed in nature, such as deep-sea luminescence (SN: 9/7/96, p. 156). Arnold 
L. Rheingold, a crystallographer at the University of Delaware in Newark who 
collaborated on the study, calls triboluminescence "a beautiful phenomenon in 
search of an application."

 Sweeting imagines that one day, triboluminescent coatings could be used in 
remote sensing applications to signal mechanical failure.


