Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/31/97 May 31, 1997

 Is Earth Pelted by Space Snowballs?

by R. Monastersky

"My attitude has changed from one of very great skepticism to one of 
fascination. We've got a very interesting problem to cope with," comments 
Thomas M. Donahue, a space scientist at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor 
who has examined the new data.

 Frank first detected signs of these interplanetary snowballs in the early 
1980s, while examining ultraviolet (UV) images of Earth's atmosphere taken by 
the Dynamics Explorer 1 satellite. In the daytime, oxygen in the atmosphere 
emits UV light, creating a glow that satellites can detect when looking down on 
Earth. Frank found thousands of tiny dark spots in images of this glow. He 
interpreted the spots as clouds of water vapor high in the normally bone dry 
atmosphere.

 To explain the water vapor, Frank hypothesized in 1986 that a previously 
unknown group of what he called "small comets" was pelting Earth and bringing 
water into the upper atmosphere.

 Other researchers found the proposal hard to stomach. Frank's theory demanded 
revisions of long-accepted ideas about water on Earth, Venus, and Mars. It 
suggested, for instance, that Earth has been continually gaining water and may 
have acquired several oceans' worth over geologic time.

"Its influence in several fields of science will be profound," Alexander J. 
Dessler told Science News in 1986. At that time, he was editor of Geophysical 
Research Letters and had accepted Frank's report for publication.

 Other scientists later published 11 critical replies to Frank's work, and 
Dessler attacked the theory in 1991. Since then, many scientists have regarded 
the idea as dead.

 Meanwhile, Frank was working on imaging equipment to fly on NASA's Polar 
satellite, launched in early 1996. The satellite's main mission is to study the 
solar plasma, but Frank designed his set of cameras to look for the suspected 
"small comets" as well.

 Images from the Polar cameras have not only confirmed the original 
observations but provided even stronger evidence of these objects, Frank 
reported at the meeting. "When we first saw all these things, it just amazed 
us. I feel happy that it's confirmed. It's been a hard battle," he says.

 The new evidence comes from Polar's Visible Imaging System, a set of three 
different cameras run by Frank's team. One camera, which senses UV light, has 
detected dark spots in Earth's normal UV glow -- the same kind of spots first 
observed years ago by the Dynamics Explorer 1 satellite.

 Many scientists discounted those earlier images because the dark spots usually 
spanned only one picture element, or pixel, raising the possibility that they 
stemmed from a problem in the camera. The Polar UV camera has a much higher 
resolution, so the dark spots spread over a cluster of pixels, making the 
blotches harder to explain away.

 In addition, Frank has images that appear to show the postulated snowballs 
hurtling toward the planet. When the UV and a visible-light camera look just 
above Earth's atmosphere, they detect long streaks of bright light. Frank 
interprets the streaks as sunlit clouds of water vapor and other gases coming 
off some of the snowballs as they near Earth.

 The images were convincing enough to persuade several former skeptics that 
some new type of water-bearing object is pelting Earth's atmosphere. "You have 
to accept that these things are bringing water to this planet, at least in the 
present epoch," says Donahue. "It's exciting that a guy who was pretty badly 
pilloried is going to be vindicated, at least as far as the observations are 
concerned."

 Robert R. Meier of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C., comments 
that "they've certainly vindicated the old observations. I'm convinced now that 
[Frank] is seeing something, and now we need more data to really understand 
what this phenomenon is."

 Both Donahue and Meier caution that the new observations do not necessarily 
confirm Frank's original hypothesis, with all its sweeping implications.

 It is unclear, for instance, exactly what these objects are. "These things 
look like comets, and they quack like comets. But they can't possibly be comets 
in the traditional sense," says Paul D. Feldman of Johns Hopkins University in 
Baltimore.

 If the small objects were comets, their gradual evaporation should have added 
significantly to the amount of hydrogen in the space between Earth and Mars. 
Scientists detect no such enrichment. To circumvent this problem, Frank has 
proposed that the snowballs are covered with a carbon skin that keeps them from 
vaporizing until they get within 2,000 kilometers of Earth, close enough for 
gravity or electrical forces to tear them apart.

 The new data have not silenced all of Frank's former critics. Until an 
independent team confirms the observations, Dessler says, he will remain 
doubtful. "There's too much evidence against the small comet theory," he says.

 For instance, scientists studying the moon have found no evidence of craters 
created by the impact of these snowballs. What's more, seismic detectors left 
on the moon by Apollo astronauts have not detected any crashes of the 
hypothesized bodies, even though each would equal a 15-kiloton blast, says 
Dessler.

 The Polar satellite is carrying another UV camera that could, in theory, 
provide independent confirmation of Frank's observations. The team operating 
that camera has not been able to provide corroboration thus far, but the camera 
has only operated in the appropriate mode for a few hours.


