Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 5/24/97 May 24, 1997

 Chemical Buzz Honeybees and their hives act as sensors for pollution

 By CORINNA WU The canaries that used to accompany workers into coal mines had 
a serious job to do, serving as crude air quality sensors for methane gas. A 
canary that died in its cage warned miners to be cautious of methane, which can 
ignite and explode.

 Although more sophisticated sensors have since replaced canaries in mines, 
humans still occasionally tap into the sensitivity of animals to detect 
chemicals in the environment. Bluegill fish, for example, have been used to 
monitor stream temperatures and water quality near waste treatment plants. 
Comparable efforts for terrestrial monitoring haven't been as effective, 
however.

 That may change if Jerry J. Bromenshenk and his colleagues at the University 
of Montana in Missoula succeed in their attempts to develop a modern version of 
the miner's canary. Instead of birds, they're using honeybees to collect and 
measure environmental contaminants. On their forays from the hive, bees pick up 
water, nectar, and pollen -- along with particles from the air containing 
whatever contaminants happen to be present. The little scouts bring it all back 
to the hive, where the scientists are waiting to analyze the loot.

 Millions of hives exist across the United States, each of which can serve as a 
monitoring station for an area up to a mile in diameter. Instead of having 
people go out to gather samples and bring them back to the lab for analysis, 
the Montana scientists hope to recruit a force of thousands of bees to do the 
job.

 Because bees are very efficient and undiscriminating collectors, Bromenshenk 
and his colleagues are using them to conduct broad surveys of contaminated 
areas. The insects get into everything -- air, water, soil, and plants, 
Bromenshenk says. They are like "flying dust mops," with electrostatic charges 
on their bodies picking up both pollen and dust particles. The bees also ingest 
water and nectar from flowers.

 Once back at the hive, bees fan the air furiously with their wings to regulate 
the hive's temperature, thereby releasing the pollutants and circulating the 
contaminated air through the hive. By analyzing the hive air and the bees 
themselves, scientists can identify what chemicals may be in the area.

 Bromenshenk began using bees as environmental monitors about 25 years ago. The 
first significant demonstration of their usefulness took place in Washington's 
Puget Sound area in 1982, where many mining and smelting operations were 
located.

 He enlisted the cooperation of 64 local beekeepers to collect samples from 
their hives from July to mid-September. Traps at the hive entrances scraped off 
and collected pollen from the bees' hind legs. The keepers also periodically 
vacuumed bees into plastic bags and froze them.

 Bromenshenk measured the amounts of inorganic elements, such as arsenic, 
cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, and fluoride, in the bees' bodies. Using the 
results of the tests, he mapped out patterns of metal contamination in the 
area. They corresponded well to similar maps that local agencies had drawn by 
analyzing soil samples.

 Garon C. Smith, an analytical chemist, joined Bromenshenk's team in 1991 to 
extend the monitoring to organic contaminants. "The organic ones have been more 
difficult because bees are very fatty little animals," Smith says. "It's very 
difficult to separate out contaminants from all of the organic constituents 
that are in bees and beehives."

 Analysis of organic chemicals is nevertheless part of their current project, 
known as Bee Alert, a 5-year collaboration with the U.S. Army Center for 
Environmental Health Research at Fort Detrick, Md. The center is providing 
contaminated sites for the scientists to study. Smith and his colleague Ghassan 
Alnasser presented the group's recent findings in April at a meeting in San 
Francisco of the American Chemical Society.

 The researchers are monitoring three sites at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., 
where the Army once manufactured chemical weapons and currently stores mustard 
gas in large tanks (SN: 5/3/97, p. 270). One site is a hazardous waste landfill 
that had been used to dispose of chemical weapons, phosphorus, and industrial 
solvents. The second site, where a chlorine plant once stood, lies along a 
creek that empties into a saltwater marsh. That site had been lightly cleaned 
up 2 years ago. The third site, 10 miles away, is on a farm owned by a hobbyist 
beekeeper. The scientists are using the farm as a reference for background 
levels of contaminants.

 The team has installed new high-tech, portable electronic hives at the sites, 
each containing from 7,000 to 10,000 bees. A small copper tube attached to the 
side of each hive pumps air out for analysis without disturbing the bees. This 
air passes through filters that trap the organic components. When the filters 
are heated, the volatile organics go through a gas chromatograph and the 
separated compounds move into a mass spectrometer. The scientists can then 
determine exactly what each component is.

"You could technically put a copper pipe in any hive in the country and sample 
the air inside," says Smith. That vision translates into millions of potential 
sampling stations.

 The researchers found that concentrations of contaminants inside the hive were 
much higher than those outside; the bees efficiently consolidated environmental 
substances. As expected, the dump site had the highest concentration of 
contaminants, but the hobbyist beekeeper's hives, surprisingly, had higher 
readings than those at the second Army site.

 Of seven organic chemicals identified, the most prevalent at all three sites 
was perchloroethylene, a degreasing agent best known as a dry cleaning solvent. 
The dump site contained much higher amounts than the remediated site or the 
farm.

 On the farm, the contaminants were mostly pesticide residues. The scientists 
also detected a compound there called hydroxymethyl furfural. It turned out 
that this substance wasn't present in the environment, it was in the corn syrup 
that the beekeeper fed to his bees as a nutritional supplement. The syrup 
supplier told the beekeeper that the compound is a by-product of fructose 
processing.

 For metals and other inorganics, the researchers looked at the substances 
incorporated into the bees themselves. Overall, the concentrations were the 
same as background levels in other parts of the United States. No significant 
amount of arsenic was found, even though previous studies indicated that it 
contaminated the sites. If the element is still present, the bees don't pick it 
up.

 That's an important distinction. Not all substances in the environment get 
into living organisms, whether bees, birds, or people. "This system shows you 
what's directly available to the biota in the region," says Smith. Instead of 
extrapolating from soil or water measurements, "here we're directly measuring 
what was bioavailable to something that is fairly low on the food chain."

 The Army plans to release a complete report of the findings once they've 
undergone internal review.

 In these studies at Aberdeen, the researchers are combining information from 
all the hives at each site. Bees from adjacent hives often collect from 
different locations.

 To determine where the bees go to forage for food, a botanist examines the 
pollen grains under a microscope to see what kinds of plants they come from. 
Researchers can determine 75 percent of the pollen sources this way, says Dewey 
M. Caron, an entomologist at the University of Delaware in Newark who kept an 
eye on the Aberdeen bee colonies over the winter.

"A lot of times, beehives that are side by side show very different levels [of 
contaminants]," Smith says. "That's indicative that one hive found a hot spot, 
and the other hive was foraging in an area that wasn't contaminated. If all the 
hives in a cluster came back with high levels, then it would say that it's a 
general area wide contamination."

 At the dump site, for example, four of the eight hives registered much higher 
contamination than the others. It turned out that the bees had found an 
abandoned, open chemical storage container.

 To deal with the enormous amount of data from the beehives, the researchers 
are beginning to use artificial neural networks in their analyses (SN: 
11/26/88, p. 344). In some preliminary tests, which Smith presented at the 
meeting, they used a commercially available neural network program to see if it 
could match a chemical fingerprint to a hive.

 The hive fingerprints are the gas chromatograms, which show peaks 
corresponding to the substances in the air samples. The researchers 
characterized chromatograms taken from the hives in Montana with three values: 
the number of peaks, the height of those peaks, and the area under each peak.

 They fed 80 percent of their data into the neural network program, essentially 
teaching it to recognize the chemical profile of each hive. "I can't look at a 
chromatogram myself and tell which hive it came from," Smith says.

 Then, the researchers gave the program the remaining 20 percent of the data 
and asked it to match the chromatograms to a hive. The program got every one 
right, Smith says.

 Ideally, the researchers would like to obviate the need to do chemical 
sampling at all. They think they may be able to find links between 
environmental contamination and the bees' activity levels.

 The Montana group's electronic hives monitor bee activity through a 
sophisticated counting system that registers how many bees leave and enter the 
hive throughout the day. To go in or out of the hive, the bees must walk 
through tunnels at the entrance, passing two infrared beams on the way. On a 
typical day in Montana, the counters register 200,000 trips a day from a hive 
containing about 10,000 bees.

 Other bee counters exist, says Michael Burgett, a bee scientist at Oregon 
State University in Corvallis, but Bromenshenk "has built the grandest one of 
them all."

 The bees have learned to go through the tunnels so well, Smith says, that even 
when the beekeepers open up the front of the hive, the bees do a 90o turn to 
crawl through the tunnels before flying out.

 The scientists are beginning to compare activity with factors in the 
environment. A weather station on top of the hives allows the scientists to 
correlate weather to hive activity. When a storm comes, for example, the 
entrance counts skyrocket, reflecting the large number of bees coming back to 
the hive to stay dry. On the other hand, when the beekeepers send puffs of 
smoke into the hive to calm the bees, the counts drop.

 Among the seven hives at the hazardous waste dump in Maryland, the researchers 
found that the hives with the highest contaminant concentrations were missing 
their queens. They had either died or left to find better real estate.

 The scientists intend eventually to use the same neural network program that 
successfully analyzed air chemicals to examine the activity profiles. That 
accomplishment would move the bee monitoring technology one step closer to 
automation.

 Caron emphasizes that, so far, a lot of the work is focused on determining the 
baselines for honeybee behavior, in order to have something to which anomalies 
can be compared.

"Our ultimate goal is to use the bee behavior as a tip-off to the existence of 
a chemical problem," says Smith. "Running a beehive is fairly inexpensive, 
compared with doing ongoing chemical sampling. To sample the same milewide area 
with [conventional] samplers would just be unfeasible."

 The researchers look forward to the day when the technique moves beyond 
assessing normal events, such as weather, and can warn them of chemical changes 
in the environment as they happen. Then, the busy bees will be working not only 
for their brothers and sisters in the hive but also for the humans watching 
their every move.


