Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/24/97 May 24, 1997

 Napless cats awaken interest in adenosine

by J. Travis Nearly 2 decades ago, scientists unearthed the biochemical 
explanation for why so many people crave a morning cup of coffee. Caffeine, the 
well-known stimulant in coffee, tea, and many sodas, revives people by 
preventing a compound called adenosine from binding to brain cells.

 Since that discovery, adenosine has begun to intrigue more and more sleep 
investigators. Many studies in animals have shown that blocking adenosine's 
actions in the brain increases alertness, while injections of adenosine or 
similar compounds induce apparently normal sleep.

 Now, by monitoring the brain chemistry of cats, a team of researchers has 
shown that natural adenosine concentrations in at least some parts of the brain 
build up during waking periods and decline during sleep. Moreover, the 
investigators report in the May 23 Science, adenosine concentrations in the 
brain shoot up dramatically in animals forced to stay awake.

 The findings offer the most compelling evidence yet that adenosine is one of 
the long-sought factors whose fluctuating concentrations in the brain determine 
when an animal must sleep.

"That's fantastic. We predicted what they got," says Miodrag Radulovacki of the 
University of Illinois College of Medicine in Chicago, the earliest champion of 
the adenosine theory of sleep.

 The new adenosine research may bolster a recent theory that the body's regular 
desire for sleep stems from the brain's periodic need to replenish low stores 
of energy.

 Adenosine is a relatively simple, nitrogen-containing compound used widely by 
the body. It forms the core of adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, the 
energy-storage molecule that powers most of the biochemical reactions inside 
cells.

 In the brain, adenosine secretion by cells such as neurons and glia often 
reflects how busy the cells are. "Areas that are active generate adenosine; 
areas that aren't active tend not to," says report coauthor Robert W. Greene of 
Harvard Medical School's Brockton (Mass.) Veterans Administration Medical 
Center.

 This observation is central to a proposal put forth by H. Craig Heller of 
Stanford University and Joel H. Benington of St. Bonaventure University in 
Olean, N.Y. A few years ago, the pair pondered the mystery of why animals need 
to sleep. A host of theories, ranging from memory consolidation to aiding the 
immune system, have addressed this provocative issue.

 Heller and Benington suggested that sleep occurs when some or all of an 
animal's brain becomes dangerously low on energy. Since the sleeping brain is 
much less active than the waking one, sleep allows the organ to replenish its 
energy, they proposed.

 Adenosine could fit into this theory nicely, says Benington. Since adenosine 
secretion reflects brain cell activity, rising concentrations of this chemical 
may be how the organ gauges that it has been burning up its energy reserves and 
needs to shut down for a while.

 To understand how adenosine induces sleep, Greene's team has studied the 
compound's effect on the brain's arousal centers. Cells in these centers have 
connections throughout the brain, and they help keep a body awake and alert. 
Test-tube studies of the cells conducted several years ago showed that 
adenosine "can actually shut them off," says Greene.

 From that work, Greene's group hypothesized that increasing concentrations of 
adenosine near arousal centers might compel an organism to sleep.

 In the new study, the scientists anesthetized cats and implanted electrodes in 
several regions of the brain, including arousal centers, to monitor neuronal 
activity. They also inserted small probes to sample the extracellular fluid.

 The researchers found that adenosine concentrations near an arousal center 
were higher when the cats were awake than when they were asleep.

 The scientists then deprived the cats of sleep by constantly playing with 
them. After 6 hours or so of playing, the felines were exhausted. "At the end 
of the sleep-deprivation period, they just sit there and look at you trying to 
get their attention," says Tarja Porkka-Heiskanen, a study coauthor.

 At that point, adenosine concentrations in the cats' brains were, on average, 
double those observed when the cats had been awake for 2 hours. During 3 hours 
of "recovery" sleep, adenosine concentrations fell slowly.

 Adenosine "is likely not the only sleep factor that exists in the brain. There 
may be others," notes Greene, adding that adenosine concentrations that 
normally induce sleep may be overcome sometimes by an excited or stressed 
animal.

 Greene expects his group's work will stimulate renewed interest in adenosine, 
but he cautions against expecting a new sleeping pill soon. Even though the 
brain chemical induces a natural sleep that many current sleeping pills cannot 
duplicate, medicinal adenosine exerts several other effects. It can lower body 
temperature, alter blood pressure, and damage the heart.

 The recognition of adenosine's importance in inducing sleep is gratifying, 
given that many scientists once discounted the connection, says Radulovacki.

 The 64-year-old scientist notes that a friend recently asked him if he were 
happy that adenosine is now a hot topic. "I feel a lot better than when they 
ignored me. A scientist has to live long to reap the benefits," Radulovacki 
laughingly responded.


