Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/17/97 May 17, 1997

 Health may succumb to grief reaction

by B. Bower

 A severe form of bereavement increases the likelihood of suffering from a host 
of physical and mental ailments up to 2 years after a partner's death, 
according to a new study. A surviving spouse's long-standing insecurities 
regarding intimate relationships presages such a grief response, the 
researchers propose.

 This virulent strain of bereavement, dubbed traumatic grief by psychologist 
Holly G. Prigerson of Yale University School of Medicine and her colleagues, 
may diminish in response to psychotherapy. Without treatment, the condition 
appears to promote sleep disturbances, wrenching anguish, and suicidal 
thoughts, as well as increased alcohol, tobacco, and food consumption, high 
blood pressure, heart trouble, and perhaps even cancer, Prigerson's group 
reports in the May American Journal of Psychiatry.

"We find that individuals exhibiting traumatic grief tend to have relied on 
their departed spouses as a Band-Aid for an underlying insecurity in close 
relationships that often got its start in childhood," Prigerson holds.

 It is not unusual for grief to trigger feelings of depression, personal 
worthlessness, and despair, for which clinicians typically offer treatment. 
Traumatic grief, says the Yale scientist, represents a distinct form of 
bereavement characterized by searching and yearning for the deceased, disbelief 
that a dead partner is really gone, avoidance of reminders of the spouse, 
bitterness and guilt over the death, and hallucinations of seeing or hearing 
the lost loved one (SN: 1/14/95, p. 22).

 These symptoms may represent a form of post-traumatic stress disorder, 
Prigerson theorizes.

 She and her coworkers studied 150 widows and widowers, first contacted when 
their spouses were hospitalized for serious illnesses. Interviews were 
conducted 6 months later, by which time all of the volunteers had been 
bereaved, and again 1 year and 2 years after the initial hospitalization.

 The 92 women and 58 men who had lost their spouses averaged 62 years old. Most 
of them were white and had been married for at least 20 years.

 Over the 2-year period of the study, new instances of a variety of health 
problems occurred much more frequently in the 33 participants who had been 
diagnosed with traumatic grief at the 6-month interview. Four of the 33 were 
diagnosed with cancer during the study period, whereas none of the other 
volunteers was. Larger studies are needed to explore possible influences of 
traumatic grief on cancer, Prigerson says.

 In a subsequent study of 20 similarly bereaved adults suffering from traumatic 
grief, Prigerson has found substantially greater drops in immune cell function 
than those already reported for major depression.

 Prior studies have linked physical and mental ailments to bereavement, but 
none has examined differences between individuals who did or did not develop 
traumatic grief, she adds.

 In the upcoming July American Journal of Psychiatry, Prigerson's group 
describes the successful treatment of a woman suffering from traumatic grief. 
Psychotherapy sessions addressed serious disturbances in her sense of security 
and trust in her parents and others that extended back to her childhood.

"Traumatic grief is probably a valid condition that may lead to serious health 
problems," says psychiatrist Sidney Zisook of the University of California, San 
Diego School of Medicine. "But we need to know more about how it works."

 For instance, he notes, traumatic grief symptoms seen after a spouse's gradual 
death from disease may differ from those appearing after an accidental death or 
suicide.


