Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 5/31/97 May 31, 1997

 In 1974, a 17-year-old from Stuyvesant High School in New York entered the 
annual Westinghouse Science Talent Search (STS). His mathematics paper, on 
quasiperfect numbers, won first place. One thing he gained from the project, he 
wrote on his application, was "a respect for the computer as a useful tool 
rather than just a 'toy.'"

 Today, Eric Lander runs the computer-intensive genome sequencing project at 
the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., and 
teaches at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Although he started out 
as a business school professor after earning degrees in mathematics, Lander 
found his way into a field of science where he has generated about 150 
publications so far in biology and genetics. Last month, he was recognized with 
membership in the National Academy of Sciences.

 It's the kind of creative life in research and teaching that most students in 
the high-level science competition set their exuberant sights on. "It'll 
definitely be science. It'll definitely be research," says one of this year's 
winners (SN: 3/15/97, p. 159). If the students express any hesitancy, it 
usually has to do with picking which inviting area to pursue. There is little 
doubt about their impassioned interest in science.

 For a significant number of the finalists and winners, however, the STS will 
be the highlight of a very short scientific career. In a unique longitudinal 
study, education researcher Rena F. Subotnik of Hunter College in New York has 
been following the careers of about 100 of the semifinalists from the 1983 
contest, including 9 of the 10 top winners. At the time, all but a few were 
intent on pursuing a career in science. Now in their early thirties, about half 
of them are still in science, many in applied fields like medicine or 
engineering. Only a few are established in academic research careers.

 Their stories reveal a lot about the personal, educational, and social factors 
that must come together to turn an interested, talented teen into a productive 
scientist. They are particularly telling about what happens -- much of it 
discouraging -- to science students in the first years of college.

 The experiences of the STS students jibe with a national trend that other 
researchers have uncovered. The sciences do an especially poor job of retaining 
young talent. Half of the students who begin in the physical or biological 
sciences and 60 percent of those in mathematics switch out of these fields, 
according to data from the Higher Education Research Institute at the 
University of California, Los Angeles. The humanities and social sciences lose 
only 30 percent of their students.

 There is a certain amount of appropriate switching -- students who discover 
more interesting or suitable fields or who lack some of the required 
preparation. However, a recent book documents that the students who leave 
science are among the most qualified, talented, and interested, at least 
initially.

 Subotnik, whose interest is gifted children, turned to the Westinghouse 
competition because it is a clear and established indicator of talent -- 
defined as the application of abstract potential in a specific area, in this 
case science, math, or engineering. In 1942, Westinghouse Electric Corp. began 
sponsoring the national scholarship competition, which is administered by 
Science Service, the publisher of Science News.

 Students are evaluated primarily on an original research paper, a truer gauge 
of talent than a test, according to Subotnik. Says Samuel P. Whalen of 
Northwestern University's Center for Talent Development in Evanston, Ill., "We 
aren't talking SAT scores. These are kids who have a knack for asking 
interesting questions."

 That knack appears early. A retrospective study of eminent scientists in the 
1950s (Anne Roe, The Making of a Scientist, 1953, New York: Dodd Mead) 
concluded that a bent for science emerges by age 7. This year's 40 STS 
finalists (SN: 2/1/97, p. 69) fit that pattern. They're hard put to explain the 
origins of their interest in biology ("I just always liked nature"), math 
("I've always liked working with abstract objects"), or engineering ("I've been 
tinkering since I was a baby").

 Having scientists in the family can be a positive influence, but it's not 
essential. One of this year's STS winners, the daughter of a poet and a power 
plant employee, is the first in her family to be interested in science. "When I 
was 4, I wanted to be a doctor," she says. Now, she's torn between medicine and 
anthropology because "they're both part of the human story." In Subotnik's 
group, about one-quarter had parents neither of whom had graduated from college.

 Subotnik did an initial survey by mail of the STS students in 1984, their 
first year in college; she surveyed the respondents again in 1988,1990, and 
1994. This April, she gave an update on the project at the biennial meeting of 
the Society for Research in Child Development in Washington, D.C.

 By 1988, when most had finished college, 22 of the 57 men and 37 women still 
in the study had left science and its applied fields. Fifteen of the 22 were 
women.

 Typically, STS students are talented in a variety of areas, so some of the 
1983 class simply chose to pursue another field or had shaken off their 
parents' influence. "I liked history as much as biology," reported one. Another 
student left to concentrate on training as a triathlete.

 Historical and social forces no doubt shaped the fate of the group, as they 
have for each STS class, says Subotnik. The 1983 class came of working age when 
Wall Street, not Sputnik, dominated the zeitgeist and Bonfire of the Vanities 
was a best-seller. For some students, it no doubt seemed more prestigious to be 
a Master of the Universe than a student of it, especially as funding and job 
opportunities in science tightened during the 1980s.

 A frequently reported reason for leaving, however, had to do with the contrast 
between the students' high school and college experiences in science. As one 
student put it:

"When I was doing the Westinghouse project, I really enjoyed the whole process 
of doing scientific research, so that was where I was focused. When I got to 
college and went to some of the required science classes, like intro bio and 
chem, I realized I was going to be in for 3 years of memorizing scientific 
facts. At that point I said to myself, 'I'm going to be miserable if this is 
what I do for the next 3 years.'"

 Unlike talented young athletes or musicians, science students often have to 
give up the tinkering and inquiring -- the science they've "always" been 
pursuing -- once they get to college. If they are exposed to research science, 
the quality of that experience can be crucial.

 One student who had won an STS scholarship for her high school project in 
neurophysiology was turned off by the routine work and unsupportive culture she 
found in her lab. "My job ended up being cutting out fish eyes." Although she 
earned a science degree, she says her "heart wasn't in it," and she now works 
as a business writer and editor.

 Many of the students regretted their choice of school. "People picked schools 
for odd reasons," Subotnik says, usually unrelated to the quality of science 
training. She emphasizes the need for better advising and guidance of 
research-ready science students.

 Indeed, the students who remained on a science track were more likely to have 
been singled out by supportive scientists along the way. Having mentors was the 
most important factor for one of the former STS students, now a physician and 
cancer researcher. "I was learning how to think like a scientist," he says of 
his generous interactions with mentors.

 Another STS student, who attended the same university as the business writer, 
says she switched out of science because she felt more at home in her 
humanities classes. Coming from an immigrant family of nonscientists, she 
earned a degree in cultural studies and turned her thesis topic into a 
well-received book.

 Eventually, the interest that had won her a scholarship for a project in 
protein chemistry resurfaced. She went to work for a biotechnology company and 
is now a medical student and researcher again, in microbiology.

"In science education, there's really not a focus on talent till graduate 
school. There's lots of talent lost at the undergraduate level that could have 
been nurtured," says Subotnik.

 Most of the women who left science did so in college. For men, the defections 
and doubts about continuing in science came later, according to the 1990 and 
1994 surveys. While in graduate school and postdoctoral training programs, 
concerns over jobs, salaries, funding, and lifestyle emerged as important 
factors in the students' decisions to leave.

 Funding remains a worry, even for those who have it, like the cancer 
researcher-physician, who has published a dozen research reports. Since high 
school, he has had mentors, rich research opportunities, and funding. He 
considered leaving a few years ago, when it seemed to him that funding 
shortages were forcing doctors to work as full-time clinicians, but he is now 
settling into an academic job that combines both research and clinical practice.

 About 10 years after the 1983 STS students had entered college, two 
sociologists from the University of Colorado at Boulder took a different look 
at the experiences of talented undergraduates in science, math, and 
engineering. Elaine Seymour and Nancy M. Hewitt describe their findings in 
Talking About Leaving: Why Undergraduates Leave the Sciences (1997, Boulder, 
Colo.: Westview Press).

 The researchers selected 335 students at seven institutions who were asked to 
be "expert informants" about their science education. Another 125 students were 
interviewed in focus groups to check the reports. The 460 students were 
considered to be well qualified for science careers on the basis of their high 
math SAT scores (at least 650) and their high school preparation, but slightly 
more than half of them had switched out of science or related majors.

 The seven schools ranged from a small, private, liberal arts college in the 
West to a large public university in the Northeast. All are considered to have 
strong science programs.

 Although the design of this study was different from Subotnik's, the 
conclusions about college science were not. The most common of the 23 reasons 
offered for dropping out of science were a lack or loss of interest in science, 
belief that another major was more interesting or offered a better education, 
poor science teaching, and an overwhelming curriculum. The relatively few 
undergraduates who had opportunities to interact with faculty on a research 
project had a more positive view of science.

 The Colorado researchers noticed something else: "Those who switch represent 
only the tip of a much larger problem." Most of the students continuing in 
science, math, and engineering shared with the "switchers" the same concerns 
about their education. Poor teaching was the most common complaint, cited by 83 
percent of all the students.

 Working scientists who have made it through the educational system often 
portray the undergraduate science experience as a proving ground -- those who 
can't take it are better off in another field. Yet the process is turning off 
students with talent and interest and selecting for coping strategies and other 
traits, the researchers found.

 Says one who stayed in engineering, "The people who leave aren't necessarily 
any less talented, but they just say, 'Why do this?'"

 Efforts to recruit talented students, especially from underrepresented groups, 
will be doomed until the weeding-out system and the poverty of the educational 
experience are reformed, says Seymour. "So many of the really bright ones were 
bored out."

 Reform has at least begun. In response to the widespread diagnoses of problems 
in science education (SN: 11/30/96, p. 341; 10/19/96, p. 244; 1/25/92, p. 61), 
a slew of institutions and individuals has set out to make the classroom 
experience of science truer to the inquiring experience of research science 
(SN: 2/3/96, p. 72).

 In the last few months alone, the National Research Council in Washington, 
D.C., and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Chevy Chase, Md., have issued 
reports on improving science teaching in college. These follow other major 
initiatives -- by funding agencies, national scientific societies, and many 
individual schools and professors -- that are geared to improving science 
education from kindergarten through graduate school.

 What are the chances that students entering college this fall will have their 
interest in science sustained instead of sapped? It's too early to see 
improvements, says Seymour, who also serves as an evaluator for one of the 
National Science Foundation's education change programs. "It's uphill stuff. 
It'll take a lot of time. . . . Faculty who are change makers are in the 
minority."

 Most of the reform efforts focus on improving science education for students 
across the board. Programs that aim specifically to improve the lot of 
promising young science stars don't win the enthusiastic support reserved for 
young tigers in golf or gymnastics. STS students, for example, are often 
portrayed as members of an elite group who have enough advantages already.

 Science is losing out "on the creative potential of men and women nationally 
recognized for their science talent," says Subotnik, who is next turning to a 
study of young musicians at the Julliard School in New York. "The arts are 
doing a better job of taking this level of talent and considering it a precious 
resource."


