Science News Online (5/17/97): Those Old Dioxin Blues

 May 17, 1997 

 Those Old Dioxin Blues Some small fry are exquisitely sensitive models of 
dioxin vulnerability

 By JANET RALOFF Since the 1940s, a wildlife poisoning episode has quietly been 
evolving in the Great Lakes. The problem has garnered almost no public notice, 
even though it may have contributed to the downfall of a 10,000-ton-per-year 
fishery -- one that today would be valued at $40 million annually.

 Over the past decade, however, teams of aquatic toxicologists headed by Philip 
M. Cook of the Environmental Protection Agency office in Duluth, Minn., and 
Richard E. Peterson of the University of Wisconsin-Madison have been 
investigating a curious coincidence. The lake trout's demise began at about the 
same time that large amounts of dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and 
their chemical kin were pouring into these lakes. What's more, concentrations 
of these pollutants peaked around 1970 -- just when fisheries managers began 
noticing that, although restocked lake trout had reached sexual maturity, their 
lake-spawned young were not surviving.

 Dioxinlike toxicants sabotaged these efforts to reintroduce a self-sustaining 
population of the fish, Cook and Peterson argue in several studies to be 
published later this year. They even make the controversial claim that exposure 
to these pollutants before 1960 "probably contributed to the decline and 
virtual extinction" of this trout in Lake Ontario and perhaps in the other 
lakes.

 There's good news, however. After more than 25 years of restocking the trout, 
"we are just beginning to see success," says Clifford P. Schneider, a biologist 
at the Cape Vincent (N.Y.) Fisheries Station. In Lake Ontario, historically the 
most dioxin-contaminated of the Great Lakes, "each year now, for the last 4, 
we've had successful reproduction that's gone beyond the fry stage."

 Still, the fish may not be home free. As pollutant concentrations fall, new 
laboratory tests suggest that less-than-lethal amounts of dioxinlike pollutants 
may cause harm. Moreover, several newly identified lake contaminants appear at 
least as harmful to fish as the 2,3,7,8-chlorinated dioxin (TCDD). Until 
recently, TCDD was considered the most potent dioxinlike toxicant.

 The five Great Lakes constitute the world's largest freshwater system. Until 
midway through this century, the silvery lake trout, which can live to 30 years 
and grow to more than 30 pounds, reigned as undisputed king.

"The importance of lake trout in the food web cannot be overstated," says Marc 
Gaden of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission in Ann Arbor, Mich. This trout's 
collapse "allowed alewife and smelt populations to expand, which set off a 
disruptive chain reaction." Today, the Great Lakes' fish population is less 
diverse than it was before the trout's decline, Gaden notes, and species 
abundances oscillate far less predictably.

 Fishers and resource managers have been anxious to understand why commercial 
catches of lake trout fell so precipitously in Lake Ontario during the 1930s, 
in Huron during the early 1940s, in Lake Michigan by the end of that decade, 
and in Superior by the 1950s.

 Overfishing and predation by sea lamprey undoubtedly played a role, believes 
aquatic toxicologist Michael Mac of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in 
Reston, Va. However, no one realized that toxicants might also have contributed 
to the decline until Cook began probing the ecological fallout of dioxins 
released from Superfund sites (SN: 5/31/80, p. 340) around Love Canal in 
Niagara Falls, N.Y.

 Because contaminated sediment and particulates would collect downstream, the 
EPA team designed a Lake Ontario study in 1987. By 1992, they had strong 
evidence that lake trout embryos exposed to dioxin could develop a lethal 
syndrome called blue sac.

 The yolk sac of healthy trout spawn gives them a rich golden hue. During the 
month or so after hatching, when the fry rely exclusively on that yolk for 
nutrients, they become vulnerable to blue sac syndrome. In this disorder, fluid 
leaks out of the blood vessels and into the yolk sac, which turns milky and 
slightly blue.

 Though many conditions can cause blue sac, it has usually been linked to 
incubating fish eggs at too warm a temperature. In collaboration with 
Peterson's group, Cook's team has now confirmed that lake trout fry fall prey 
to blue sac syndrome if their eggs possess dioxinlike chemicals.

 At concentrations of just 60 parts per trillion (ppt), TCDD kills 50 percent 
of lake trout fry -- making this fish the most vulnerable known. The same 
mortality in rainbow trout requires 400 ppt.

 Eleven types of PCBs exhibit dioxinlike toxicity, as do 6 other 
chlorine-containing dioxins and 10 of the 135 different chlorinated furans 
emitted by combustion (SN: 9/24/94, p. 206). Though none of these related 
compounds matches TCDD in potency, Peterson's group has demonstrated over the 
past year that their presence adds to any blue sac risk posed by TCDD.

 Based on calculations of former concentrations of these dioxinlike chemicals 
in Lake Ontario, Cook told Science News, "you end up with a pretty significant 
period when exposures to lake trout embryos would have been 2.5 times greater 
than would cause 100 percent mortality."

 What's more, certain brominated dioxins, furans, and biphenyls, though less 
persistent in the environment, are even more toxic than their chlorinated 
counterparts. For instance, the 2,3,7,8-brominated dioxin poses a higher risk 
of blue sac than TCDD does, and certain brominated biphenyls are 10 times more 
potent than PCBs, Peterson's group finds.

 Since most of these brominated compounds come from the burning of 
flame-retardant materials -- and the use of flame retardants is increasing -- 
the pollutants may pose a growing risk to wild fish, Peterson and his 
colleagues concluded in the October 1996 Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology.

 In December, Peterson and Erik W. Zabel, also of Wisconsin, reported finding a 
component of paper mill waste (2,3,6,7-tetrachloroxanthene) that is about as 
potent as TCDD at inducing blue sac in trout. They worry that it may pose a 
risk to wild fish "even at low concentrations."

 An even more arcane blue sac threat has just been identified by government 
scientists in Canada. This dioxin, present in a lamprey-killing compound used 
in the Great Lakes, contains not only a chlorine atom but also three fluorine 
atoms and several other chemical groups. Its discovery "shocked the pants off 
of us," says Mark R. Servos of Environment Canada in Burlington, Ontario.

 While this pollutant does not appear to pose a major risk now, observes Cook, 
"it does suggest how, by doing something in the name of improving the lakes and 
their trout, we could actually risk aggravating the problem."

 Since tough pollution control laws went into effect during the early 1970s, 
dioxinlike pollutants in the Great Lakes have been falling -- generally to 
concentrations below which blue sac mortality might be expected. This has 
prompted many researchers to begin investigating possible sublethal effects.

 Dioxinlike chemicals have long been known to retard growth, but studies in 
EPA's Duluth facility also indicate that sublethal exposures to TCDD can induce 
lethargy and a failure to avoid light -- changes that might further compromise 
a fry's ability to evade predators, Cook notes.

 Donald E. Tillitt of the USGS laboratory in Columbia, Mo., and his colleagues 
find that dioxins foster programmed cell death in vascular and neural tissue. 
One of Tillitt's students has just begun studying whether sublethal exposures 
might cause nerve damage that impairs behavior.

 Meanwhile, John P. Giesy's team at Michigan State University in East Lansing 
has begun investigating immune function. George Noguchi there has preliminary 
evidence that certain PCBs damage infection-fighting T cells. PCB-induced 
suppression of immunity could have contributed to the large number of fish 
deaths from bacterial kidney disease in 1989, Giesy now believes.

"The real shocker from Peterson and Cook's work is that by 1940, levels of 
2,3,7,8,-TCDD in Lake Ontario may have been so high that none of the lake trout 
were hatching," says Michael Gilbertson of the International Joint Commission 
in Windsor, Ontario.

 Many others, like Mac and Giesy, argue that there are not and probably never 
will be sufficient data to indict pollutants as a major cause of the lake 
trout's extinction. Still, they share Cook and Peterson's concern that 
sublethal effects of chlorinated and brominated pollutants may continue to 
compromise the health of Great Lakes fish -- and perhaps the wildlife and 
people that eat them.


