Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/14/97 June 14, 1997

 Nevada's Basin and Range: Down on its luck

by R. Monastersky The traditional story of the western United States reads like 
a geologic Horatio Alger tale. From a low birth, the landscape has pulled 
itself up by its bootstraps to reach its present high elevation. New studies, 
however, are deflating this story of the West's rising fortunes by showing that 
much of the landscape has actually lost elevation in the recent geologic past.

 The latest blow to the textbook account comes from an analysis of fossil 
leaves in Nevada's Basin and Range geologic province, which separates the 
Sierra Nevada from the Rocky Mountains and the Colorado Plateau. The Basin and 
Range region consists of high ridges and flat, sediment-filled valleys, the 
bottoms of which now lie at 1,000 to 1,500 meters above sea level.

 To probe the geologic history of this region, Jack A. Wolfe of the University 
of Arizona in Tucson and his colleagues studied fossil leaves at 12 sites in 
western Nevada. They analyzed each leaf for its shape, size, the number of 
notches around its margin, and other characteristics. Because moisture and 
temperature control these features, Wolfe and his colleagues could use the 
fossils to determine earlier climatic conditions of the Basin and Range. That 
climatic information was then fed into estimates of the landscape's previous 
altitude.

 According to the new study, reported in the June 13 Science, the Basin and 
Range reached some 3,000 meters above sea level 16 million years ago, then 
dropped to its present height by about 13 million years ago.

 Further back in time, the region apparently stood even taller, perhaps 
resembling the modern Andes, says Wolfe. Since then, the Nevada crust has 
stretched and thinned, causing the land to drop. "Presumably, in the long run, 
places like the Andes will show the same sort of pattern as the Basin and 
Range," he says.

 Brian Wernicke of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena and his 
colleagues reached a similar conclusion last year in a study of the Sierra 
Nevada. Most mountain ranges have a thick foundation of buoyant crustal rock, 
which makes them float high above the denser, underlying mantle. The 
scientists' seismic analysis showed that the Sierra crust is only 30 to 40 
kilometers deep, not nearly thick enough to explain the range's current 
elevation. The group inferred that the Sierra and the Basin and Range once 
stood taller and had a thicker crust, which has thinned in the last 20 million 
years.

"This is a hard-core about-face," says Wernicke. "The idea had been that this 
was a low-elevation area, and it had been rising until now."

 His team is seeking to test its ideas by studying the canyons in the Sierra 
Nevada. If the range reached much higher in the past, it would have contained 
major canyons cutting into the heart of the mountains and helping to cool their 
molten interiors. Such accelerated cooling should have left a fingerprint in 
the existing rocks of the mountain range.


