Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/21/97 June 21, 1997

 Microbial Trigger for Autoimmunity?

by J. Travis

 If suffering through a cold or the flu weren't bad enough by itself, a new 
study hints at the existence of a mechanism by which microbial infections may 
inflame or even initiate autoimmune disorders such as multiple sclerosis.

 Autoimmune disorders are one of the continuing mysteries of immunology. These 
diseases initially confounded researchers, who thought the immune system 
deleted all cells capable of acting against the body's own tissues.

 In recent years, however, investigators have found that people and animals 
harbor immune cells that, though normally inactive, can selectively target the 
body's own molecules.

 What spurs these dormant cells into a deadly rebellion? Infections have long 
been a prime suspect, since they frequently predate the onset of an autoimmune 
disorder or a worsening of an existing autoimmune illness.

 One infection-based theory of autoimmunity, known as molecular mimicry, begins 
with the observation that some molecules of microorganisms resemble those of 
the host they infect. Consequently, as the host mounts a defense against 
infecting microbes, it may inadvertently activate some immune cells that 
recognize its own molecules.

 Several investigators now propose that one of the body's initial responses to 
infection, the production of a compound called interleukin-12, may also awaken 
self-reactive immune cells.

"It's a more universal mechanism than that of molecular mimicry," says Benjamin 
M. Segal of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) 
in Bethesda, Md.

 Segal and his colleagues study a mouse disease called experimental allergic 
encephalomyelitis. It resembles multiple sclerosis in that the animal's immune 
cells destroy the myelin that surrounds and insulates nerve cells.

 In recent studies, the researchers isolated immune cells from a strain of mice 
resistant to the disease. Some of those cells can target myelin basic protein, 
a component of myelin, but nonetheless seem to ignore its presence.

 When exposed to bacterial DNA or a particular component of bacterial cell 
walls, the immune cells become activated, Segal and his colleagues report in 
the June 1 Journal of Immunology. Mammalian DNA provoked no response. Previous 
investigators had made similar findings and attributed them to repetitive CG 
nucleotide sequences, which occur frequently in bacterial DNA but rarely in 
mammalian DNA.

 Segal's group further found that severe to moderate autoimmune disease results 
if the cells that react to myelin basic protein are exposed to bacterial DNA or 
the cell wall component and are then injected into mice.

 More important, the researchers have largely pieced together how these 
microbial products ignite autoimmunity. Macrophages and other immune cells that 
are the first to respond to infections react to the bacterial material by 
producing interleukin-12. This potent immune system stimulator then triggers 
the production of compounds that help the immune system create an army of cells 
specific to a particular microbe.

 In test-tube studies, the researchers found that this production of 
interleukin-12 can also arouse the self-reactive immune cells that cause 
autoimmune problems. In theory, this chemical call to arms against a pathogen 
may activate immune cells that happen to be near an infection, causing them to 
turn against the body.

 While earlier studies in animals had shown that bacterial products can induce 
autoimmunity, the process "has never been analyzed in detail like this," says 
Charles A. Janeway of Yale University School of Medicine.

"It's a potentially important mechanism," adds David S. Pisetsky of Duke 
University Medical Center in Durham, N.C. "There's a lot of interest in the 
interplay between infections and autoimmune diseases and in what impact 
bacterial and microbial products have."

 Very few microbial infections may actually lead to autoimmune diseases, note 
researchers. "There's probably a lot of mechanisms that dampen autoimmune 
responses," says study coauthor Ethan Shevach of NIAID.

 Shevach and his colleagues suggest that interleukin-12 inhibitors may aid 
people with autoimmune disorders. Such diseases are particularly difficult to 
treat because physicians must find ways to dampen the autoimmune attack without 
severely curtailing normal immune responses. "That's always the tradeoff," says 
Pisetsky.


