Science News Online (6/14/97): Divide and conquer for quantum computers

 June 14, 1997 

 Divide and conquer for quantum computers

by I. Peterson

 One way to get a job done faster is to divvy it up into small chores that 
different people can do simultaneously. The same strategy can be applied to 
solving certain computational problems by breaking them up into components that 
are distributed among many computers working in parallel.

 In principle, a quantum computer (SN: 1/14/95, p. 30) offers an alternative 
approach to speeding up lengthy calculations (SN: 5/14/94, p. 308). Now, Lov K. 
Grover of Bell Labs in Murray Hill, N.J., has found a way in which quantum 
computers can also be made to work in parallel, considerably speeding up a 
quantum computation.

 The significance of Grover's work on what he calls "quantum telecomputation" 
is that it pioneers the study of an important question, says theoretical 
physicist John Preskill of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. 
"How can the task of performing a quantum computation best be distributed among 
many processors?"

 The finding follows up on Grover's remarkable discovery last year that, in 
theory, a quantum computer can search an unsorted database to locate a specific 
entry more efficiently than a conventional computer can (SN: 8/31/96, p. 143).

 Grover's initial interest was in exploiting quantum mechanical effects to 
develop an efficient procedure, or algorithm, for solving an important type of 
problem in computer science. The task is to estimate the mean value of a large 
set of numbers in such a way that the estimated value has a high probability of 
being within a specified range of the true mean. The closer the estimated value 
must lie to the true mean, the more numbers must be randomly selected from the 
entire group to calculate that value and the longer the computation takes.

 In Grover's scheme, each number is represented as a quantum mechanical 
particle (such as an electron), and its value is encoded as the particle's 
phase. The phase is a wavelike property intrinsic to the particle that allows 
interference between particles in the same way that wave crests and troughs 
nullify each other when ripples meet.

 By manipulating the phases of all these particles in the same manner, it's 
possible to obtain an estimate of the mean, derived from the quantum state of 
the entire ensemble, in fewer steps than a conventional computer would take to 
do the same calculation.

 The computation can be speeded up if the operations are shared among a number 
of processors. In conventional computing, each processor would simply calculate 
the exact mean of a certain fraction of the numbers and transmit the resulting 
value to a central processor, which would then assemble the data and calculate 
the overall mean.

 In Grover's quantum mechanical algorithm, however, each processor computes the 
approximate mean of the whole group to a certain precision. Consequently, 
there's no simple way of partitioning the calculation among several quantum 
processors.

 Grover's alternative approach takes advantage of a phenomenon known as quantum 
entanglement. The idea is to set up a large system that exists in two quantum 
states at the same time. The act of observation then determines which state is 
manifest at any given moment.

 Scientists have created such entangled states in an electron orbiting an atom 
(SN: 8/26/95, p. 133) and in a single atom (SN: 5/25/96, p. 325). In both 
cases, the particle appears to be in two well-separated positions at the same 
time.

 Grover proposes the possibility of representing numbers as entangled 
particles, each of which is a combination of two states. The particles can then 
be physically separated among individual quantum processors that independently 
compute the mean of the ensemble to a certain precision. Because the parallel 
processors are already linked through quantum entanglement of the particles, 
only a minimal amount of data finally needs to be transmitted to a single 
processor to obtain the final result.

"By exploiting their shared entanglement, the processors can get the job done 
faster than one processor acting alone," Preskill says.

 The prospects of achieving practical quantum telecomputation any time soon 
appear dim, however. "This is a tremendously difficult thing to do [in the 
lab], but as far as we know, the laws of physics don't make it impossible -- 
only somewhat improbable," says Norman Margolus of Boston University. "By 
investigating the theoretical limits of quantum computation without worrying 
about the practicality, Grover and others are helping to stimulate continued 
interest in the field."


