Science News Online (6/21/97): Guardians of the Genome?

 June 21, 1997 

 Guardians of the Genome? Two breast cancer genes may safeguard DNA

 By JOHN TRAVIS Historic discoveries are often followed by frustratingly long 
periods in which scientists struggle to understand the meaning of what they 
have found.

 Take the famed Rosetta stone, uncovered in Egypt in 1799 by soldiers of 
Napoleon Bonaparte's army. The slab, chiseled with the same message in three 
languages, proved the key to deciphering the Egyptian hieroglyphs.

 Yet as they raced to decode the ancient writing, Egyptologists argued fiercely 
over the stone, often ridiculing each other's theories. In 1822, more than 20 
years after the discovery, French scholar Jean-Francois Champollion finally 
deciphered the hieroglyphs.

 In the world of breast cancer research, the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 may prove to 
be a Rosetta stone. Mutations in this pair of genes, identified in 1994 and 
1995, respectively, account for the large majority of inherited breast and 
ovarian cancers.

 Though discovery of the two genes occasioned great fanfare and raised hopes of 
new treatments for breast and ovarian cancer, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are only slowly 
giving up their secrets. Biologists have again encountered the hard truth that 
identification of a cancer gene does not immediately reveal the function of the 
protein it encodes or how a mutation in the gene triggers tumors.

 Indeed, until recently, the discovery of BRCA1 generated little more than 
confusion, as several research groups offered utterly different proposals 
concerning the gene's protein. The field was in such turmoil last year that 
Richard Klausner, director of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., 
called in members of the competing teams and urged them to cooperate to unravel 
the issue quickly.

 The solution to this biological Rosetta stone may now be near. While the 
details are far from complete and some controversy remains, a rash of papers in 
the last few months strongly suggests that the proteins encoded by BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 play a role in a cell's ability to detect or repair damaged DNA. If so, 
these genes would join a select group of other cancer genes that have earned 
the title Guardians of the Genome.

 Since the discovery that many families plagued with breast and ovarian cancer 
have BRCA1 mutations, scientists have pursued several leads to the gene's role. 
The first came in 1995, when a team led by Wen-Hwa Lee of the University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio argued that the gene's protein, 
BRCA1, normally stays in the nucleus, the sac housing a cell's genes. In cancer 
cells, the protein sits solely in the cytoplasm outside the nucleus or in both 
places, the investigators reported (SN: 11/18/95, p. 334).

 Lee's group suggested that the abnormal location of BRCA1 lies at the heart of 
why a healthy cell turns cancerous. Even more provocative, the researchers 
contended that the misplacement might explain noninherited cases of breast and 
ovarian cancer in which BRCA1 is not mutated.

 These sporadic cases account for more than 90 percent of all breast cancer, 
and Lee's group offered evidence that breast and ovarian cancer cells from such 
cases also have BRCA1 in the cytoplasm. The researchers theorized that 
mutations in other genes were turning cells cancerous by changing where BRCA1 
appears.

 This hypothesis landed on the front page of the New York Times, but a 
competing theory soon surfaced. The protein encoded by BRCA1 does not function 
in the nucleus or in the cytoplasm, countered Roy A. Jensen and Jeffrey T. 
Holt, both of Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville, 
Mary-Claire King of the University of Washington in Seattle, and their 
colleagues. Instead, BRCA1 is a secreted molecule belonging to an obscure 
family of proteins known as granins, the investigators said (SN: 3/2/96, p. 
132).

 How could researchers come to such starkly different conclusions? The conflict 
stems largely from the difficulty scientists face in determining the location 
of proteins in cells. Scientists normally manufacture antibodies that bind 
tightly to a selected target protein and then use several well-established 
methods to spot those antibodies. By using different antibodies, teams can 
generate conflicting results, however. Moreover, such experiments can be 
misleading if the antibodies bind to more than their target protein.

 Indeed, most scientists outside the San Antonio and Seattle-Nashville teams 
have now concluded that both research groups were mistaken and that BRCA1 is 
neither secreted nor found in the cytoplasm of cancer cells.

"I'm comfortable that it's a nuclear protein," says Cindy A. Wilson of the 
University of California, Los Angeles, who has conducted an independent 
analysis with the BRCA1 antibodies used by various research groups.

 The most recent break in the BRCA1 story occurred early this year, when 
scientists reported an association between the gene's protein and a protein 
called RAD51.

 Like other researchers, Ralph Scully of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in 
Boston and his colleagues had used fluorescent antibodies to identify the 
location of BRCA1. They observed that the protein's location in the nucleus 
forms a distinctive pattern -- a collection of dots. Cells with these nuclear 
dots, the researchers discovered, have just entered S-phase, the period in a 
cell's life cycle during which it synthesizes a second copy of its DNA in 
preparation for dividing into two cells.

 A search through the scientific literature for other proteins forming similar 
dots ultimately revealed RAD51, a human version of a bacterial protein known to 
help fix breaks in the DNA double helix. Scientists believe that RAD51 performs 
a similar function in mammalian cells.

"The evidence that it repairs breaks directly is very strong," says Paul Hasty, 
a RAD51 researcher at Lexicon Genetics in The Woodlands, Texas.

 In the Jan. 24 Cell, Scully and his colleagues reported several coincidences 
leading them to believe that BRCA1 works in concert with RAD51. The nuclear 
dots formed by the two proteins often, though not always, overlap. Moreover, 
mice with mutations in both their copies of either BRCA1 or RAD51 die at 
roughly similar points in embryogenesis, apparently from a lack of cell 
proliferation.

 Furthermore, when the scientists fished BRCA1 out of cells with antibodies, 
RAD51 often came along. The proteins may not bind to each other, but they are 
probably part of a complex of proteins, says Scully.

 In addition to normal DNA repair, RAD51 aids in the shuffling of genes among 
pairs of chromosomes during meiosis, the process by which a cell readies itself 
for sexual reproduction. Scully and his colleagues found that BRCA1 and RAD51 
both appear in synaptonemal complexes, complicated DNA-protein structures 
formed by chromosomes undergoing meiosis. Scully notes that DNA probably breaks 
and anneals in these complexes, which adds to the circumstantial case that 
BRCA1 works with RAD51 in ensuring DNA integrity.

 At a recent lecture at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., 
Scully's colleague David M. Livingston described unpublished findings further 
supporting that view. His research team has damaged the DNA in cells and 
observed that those cells respond by quickly adding a phosphate group to BRCA1, 
a method commonly employed to activate a protein to carry out a specific duty. 
Livingston's group also had evidence that after DNA damage, the dot pattern 
disappears, apparently because BRCA1 moves to sites in the nucleus where DNA is 
being synthesized.

"The cell biology observations, meager as they are, are strongly consistent 
with the notion that BRCA1, for at least part of its life, possibly only part 
of its tumor-suppressive life, operates as a guardian of the genome. How it 
actually does that is very much open to speculation," says Livingston.

 Remarkably, BRCA1 is not the only breast cancer gene being linked to DNA 
repair and RAD51. Just before Scully and his colleagues published their report 
in Cell, Hasty had found a protein that bound to RAD51. It turned out to be 
BRCA2.

 Not far down the road from Hasty, his former boss, Allan Bradley, founder of 
Lexicon and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator at Baylor College of 
Medicine in Houston, had begun to study the activity of BRCA2 by creating mice 
without a functioning copy of the gene. These so-called knockout mice 
invariably died about a week into their embryonic development. Indeed, the 
BRCA2 knockout mice more closely resembled RAD51 knockouts than did BRCA1 
knockout mice. The latter mice tended to die a day earlier in their development 
than the other two strains.

 Another link observed between BRCA2 and RAD51 involved radiation-induced DNA 
damage. Cells from RAD51 knockout embryos are extremely susceptible to death 
from ionizing radiation, presumably because the absence of the protein prevents 
the proper repair of DNA. As Bradley, Hasty, and their colleagues report in the 
April 24 Nature, cells from the BRCA2 knockout mice exhibit a similar 
vulnerability. "We've clearly shown BRCA2 is involved in the DNA repair 
pathway," asserts Bradley.

 Beyond the connection to RAD51, other data imply that the BRCA1 and BRCA2 
genes share functions, whether DNA repair or as-yet-undiscovered duties. 
Scientists have recently found that BRCA2 is particularly active during 
embryogenesis in tissues that experience large amounts of cell proliferation 
and differentiation. This pattern of gene activity largely mirrors that of 
BRCA1, they discovered.

"It's quite striking the degree to which the genes get turned on in the same 
organs, in the same cells within those organs, and at the same developmental 
time point as each other. You just don't find many genes that behave in such a 
similar manner," says Lewis A. Chodosh of the University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine in Philadelphia. Chodosh is an author of the study, which appears 
in the April 15 Developmental Biology.

 Chodosh notes that the activity of the two cancer genes is not identical. 
Moreover, the discrepancies may help explain why mutations in the two genes 
pose different cancer risks, he notes. For example, BRCA2 mutations are much 
more frequently found in male breast cancer than BRCA1 mutations are.

 Scientists are still struggling to make sense of all the latest findings. "My 
feeling is that there may be a large complex that includes BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51, 
and maybe some other things," says Bradley.

 This hypothetical complex may monitor the integrity of DNA in rapidly 
proliferating or differentiating cells, propose Bradley and other scientists. 
That action would resolve an apparent paradox. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are considered 
tumor-suppressor genes. The absence of other genes in that category stimulates 
cell growth and division. Yet mice lacking the breast cancer genes die as 
embryos because their cells do not proliferate when they should. The BRCA1 
knockout mice, for example, die at gastrulation, usually a period of tremendous 
cell proliferation. "Cells are basically dividing every 5 hours [during 
gastrulation]," says Tak W. Mak of the University of Toronto.

 The paradox would vanish if mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 do not trigger cell 
proliferation by themselves, observe researchers. In this scenario, the normal 
role of the proteins encoded by the two genes is to repair DNA. Cells that have 
mutations in those repair genes but are otherwise healthy, such as cells in the 
knockout embryos, would sense accumulating DNA damage and stop dividing, 
causing the embryos to die.

 Occasionally, particularly in older organisms, cells with defective BRCA1 or 
BRCA2 genes would also experience mutations in the genes needed to arrest the 
cell cycle. Such cells are then free to divide out of control, generating a 
tumor.

 Additional evidence connecting the mutated genes and cell cycle arrest has 
recently come from Mak's research group and one led by Argiris Efstratiadis of 
Columbia University. The groups have eliminated BRCA1 or BRCA2 from mice that 
do not have either of the cell cycle genes p53 or p21. The mice die at least 1 
day later than normal BRCA1 and BRCA2 knockout mice, indicating that disrupting 
the cell cycle control in such mice allows their cells to proliferate a bit 
longer.

 Linking BRCA1 and BRCA2 to DNA repair may explain why so few sporadic cases of 
breast and ovarian cancer involve one of those genes. For such cancers, at 
least three mutations would have to occur: Both copies of either BRCA1 or BRCA2 
would have to go bad, and additional mutations would have to strike genes 
regulating the cell cycle. In contrast, people who inherit mutations in either 
BRCA1 or BRCA2 have an unfortunate head start on this road to tumor formation.

 Researchers stress that they have just started to make inroads into 
understanding the roles of the proteins encoded by BRCA1 and BRCA2. Moreover, 
old controversies linger. Lee maintains that BRCA1 shows up in the cytoplasm of 
cancer cells, noting that new antibodies generated by his group confirm the 
earlier results. In addition, according to other researchers at a recent 
meeting on BRCA1, the Seattle-Nashville collaboration reiterated its belief 
that the gene's protein is a secreted granin. (Members of the collaboration did 
not return calls from Science News.)

 Another unresolved issue is whether BRCA1 or BRCA2 directly influences the 
activity of genes. Several studies have hinted that the proteins have this 
ability, and their structures suggest they should be able to bind DNA. 
Supporting that notion, Scully and his colleagues report in the May 27 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that BRCA1 may be part of RNA 
polymerase II holoenzyme, a large collection of proteins used to create strands 
of RNA, the first step in assembling a gene's protein.

 Whether the recent clues linking BRCA1 and BRCA2 to DNA repair can lead to a 
new cancer therapy remains the most pressing question. Researchers caution that 
the proteins are large, so they probably do more than repair DNA. "I'd be very 
surprised if there's just a single function for these things," says Chodosh.


