Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 5/3/97 May 3, 1997

 Exercise helps some cancer, heart patients

by S. Sternberg Getting over chemotherapy? Hobbled by heart failure? That's no 
excuse. Haul out those sweats, pull on those sneakers -- and get some exercise.

 Surprising and callous though it seems, doctors may soon be giving patients 
such advice. Two new studies, though small in scope, suggest that exercise is 
as important for people with congestive heart failure and those recovering from 
chemotherapy as it is for healthy people.

 Without any firm evidence, doctors have cautioned such patients against 
vigorous exercise, fearing that physical activity would make matters worse. 
Most studies probing the safety and usefulness of exercise in people with 
cancer or congestive heart disease have yielded untrustworthy or inconclusive 
results.

 In the new studies, however, two groups of researchers working independently 
found that such individuals can increase their stamina, stave off fatigue, and 
boost their muscles' oxygen-carrying capacity by riding stationary bicycles and 
walking. The studies could have an enormous impact on cancer and cardiovascular 
rehabilitation efforts, expanding existing programs and spawning new ones. 
Sadly, there is no shortage of clients.

 About 70 percent of cancer patients report that the one-two punch of a 
malignancy and aggressive treatment saps their strength and energy. Most cancer 
rehabilitation programs offer only physical therapy aimed at specific problems 
such as those caused by amputations.

 Fernando C. Dimeo, a rehabilitation and sports medicine specialist at Freiburg 
University Medical Center in Germany, and his colleagues decided to step into 
the cancer rehabilitation arena with a pilot study of 32 patients, half of whom 
participated in an active exercise program. The rest served as controls. After 
chemotherapy ended, but before the exercise regimen began, the two groups were 
evenly matched -- achieving the limit of their tolerance for exercise on 
treadmills paced at about 6 kilometers per hour.

 After 7 weeks, those in the exercise group had increased their exercise 
tolerance to 8 km per hour, compared to 7 km per hour for the control group. In 
addition, they had significantly higher concentrations of hemoglobin in their 
blood, indicating that their oxygen-carrying capacity had risen substantially.

"Cancer patients should be counseled to increase their level of exercise in the 
recovery phase after high-dose chemotherapy," the investigators report in the 
May 1 Cancer.

"To my knowledge, this is the first study that has solidly documented this," 
says Harmon Eyre of the American Cancer Society in Atlanta. "Even though it's a 
small study, I think it's pretty impressive."

 People with congestive heart failure, whose hearts are already so impaired 
that they pump just one-third the normal volume of blood, fared about as well 
as the cancer patients. Until now, cardiac rehabilitation through exercise was 
considered too risky for these people because their damaged heart muscles are 
often thin-walled and weak. This cautious approach gained currency after a 1988 
Canadian study -- using a medical application of sonar -- showed that exercise 
in cardiac patients appeared to damage the heart.

 Using a more precise method called magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a study 
of 25 men with congestive heart failure now shows that exercise does not damage 
the heart. Twelve of the men undertook a 2-month regimen of daily walks and 
regular 45-minute sessions on a stationary bike; 13 others did not exercise.

 The investigators then used MRI to measure the thickness of the men's heart 
walls, which showed no evidence of damage from the exercise. "The results are 
indisputable," says Jonathan Myers of Stanford University. His team's study, 
reported in the April 15 Circulation, also showed that physical activity 
improved exercise capacity by 26 percent. The 13 sedentary patients showed no 
such gain.

 Bernard Chaitman, chief of cardiology at Saint Louis University Health 
Sciences Center, says that a 26 percent improvement may permit people to carry 
out their normal activities rather than remain bedridden.

 Evidence is also mounting that exercise can help keep people from getting 
cancer as well as heart disease. A study of 20,624 women by Inger Thune and her 
colleagues at the University of Tromso in Norway, published in the May 1 New 
England Journal of Medicine, found that those who worked out regularly cut 
their breast cancer risk by 72 percent.


