Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/14/97 June 14, 1997

 Faulty protein repair spurs mouse seizures

by J. Travis

 People don't normally throw away their silverware after a single meal. It's 
usually cheaper to wash and reuse the utensils than to buy new ones.

 Similarly, cells may sometimes do better to repair partially damaged proteins 
than waste a fair amount of energy synthesizing replacements. In test-tube 
experiments, scientists had identified a few repair mechanisms that cells may 
employ, but they had obtained little information on whether animals actually 
depend on such molecular restoration.

 Dramatic proof that they do is now at hand. Investigators who created mice 
bereft of an enzyme implicated in protein repair have discovered that the 
seemingly healthy rodents suffer fatal seizures within a month or two of birth.

 The enzyme's absence "has rather dire consequences. It's an exciting 
development and emphasizes the importance of this repair pathway," says Earl R. 
Stadtman, a protein repair investigator at the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute in Bethesda, Md.

 Compared to the crush of scientists examining how cells fix DNA damage, few 
researchers have focused on the natural deterioration of proteins as cells age. 
In recent years, however, some scientists have championed a theory of aging 
that blames the gradual accumulation of damaged proteins, many of them 
generated by interactions with highly reactive, oxygen-bearing molecules known 
as free radicals (SN: 5/18/96, p. 311).

 Other forms of protein damage also occur naturally, including spontaneous 
degradation of amino acids such as asparagine and aspartic acid. Such damage 
involves "a shuffling around of atoms within the molecules. It can grossly 
affect the whole structure of a protein," notes Edward Kim of the University of 
California, San Francisco.

 Scientists had found an enzyme called both L-isoapartyl (D-aspartate) 
O-methyltransferase and PCMT-1 that in test tubes could heal proteins with this 
type of amino acid injury. However, they didn't know whether cells use the 
enzyme in this way or simply junk damaged proteins and make new ones. Kim and 
his colleagues genetically engineered mice to lack PCMT-1. Though significantly 
smaller than normal, the rodents seemed healthy. After several weeks, however, 
the situation changed. When researchers left the lab for the evening, or even a 
few hours, they would often find a dead mouse when they returned.

 Autopsies revealed no obvious abnormalities, so the investigators began 
videotaping the mice around the clock. They discovered that the animals 
suffered fatal seizures. Their muscles would begin to twitch, and after several 
minutes they would run around or jump for 15 to 20 seconds. Finally, they would 
fall on their sides and stop breathing.

 Since the seizures suggested abnormal brain activity and PCMT-1 is most 
abundant in the brain, the scientists examined cells there for damaged 
proteins. They found plenty. About 6 percent of the proteins inside the cells 
were damaged, they estimate in the June 10 Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences. Normally, less than 1 percent are faulty, says Kim.

 How the absence of PCMT-1 generates seizures remains unclear, though Kim and 
his colleagues speculate that the accumulation of damaged proteins may 
interfere with the metabolism of glutamate, a crucial neurotransmitter. The 
question of PCMT-1's relevance to aging remains open. "The premature death of 
the mice precludes a test of [the enzyme's] role in aging," notes George M. 
Martin, a gerontologist at the University of Washington in Seattle.

 Kim and his colleagues agree, and they now plan to test the aging theory by 
generating mice that make PCMT-1 in the brain but nowhere else. That should 
prevent the seizures and may allow the mice to live long enough for other 
organs to exhibit difficulty in dealing with damaged proteins, says Kim.


