Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/28/97 June 28, 1997

 Channeling quantum information efficiently

by I. Peterson To be understood over a crackly telephone line, a person can try 
to speak more slowly or loudly -- or even repeat phrases -- to get the message 
across.

 Indeed, noise affects all sorts of communication, whether a radio broadcast or 
the transmission of bits from one computer to another, and researchers have 
long sought to determine the most efficient ways of packaging and transmitting 
information so that it arrives in a form intelligible to the recipient.

 The use of photons, electrons, or other quantum particles to carry information 
represents one potential communication channel. The sender encodes the data as 
the quantum state of a particle, and the recipient makes a measurement on the 
particle to infer the original quantum state. The laws of quantum mechanics 
specify the maximum amount of information that the recipient can extract per 
particle.

 Now, researchers have demonstrated that one can, in principle, approach the 
theoretical maximum for transmitting information via photons and other quantum 
particles by carefully choosing how the information is encoded, transmitted, 
and decoded. The techniques work even when environmental noise distorts the 
message.

 Benjamin W. Schumacher of Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio, and Michael D. 
Westmoreland of Denison University in Granville, Ohio, report their findings in 
the July Physical Review A. In a paper accepted for publication in IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, Alexander S. Holevo of the Steklov 
Mathematical Institute in Moscow describes his similar analysis.

"These are interesting results," says Charles H. Bennett of the IBM Thomas J. 
Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, N.Y. Such work "is relevant to 
communication, precision measurement, and ultimately, perhaps, to quantum 
computation."

 To transmit a string of digits, an apparatus can generate photons whose 
electric fields vibrate in particular directions. Scientists would like to find 
the most efficient way to encode those digits.

 One possibility is to use many distinct polarization states of a single photon 
to encode a large number of digits simultaneously. However, quantum mechanics 
prevents the recipient from reliably distinguishing all those states to convert 
the quantum information back into digits.

 In 1973, Holevo proved a theorem establishing the maximum amount of 
information a recipient can obtain from a transmitted quantum signal. Last 
year, Paul Hausladen of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia and his 
colleagues showed how it was possible to get arbitrarily close to this 
theoretical limit. The new results from Holevo, Schumacher, and Westmoreland 
extend those findings to signals distorted by noise -- for example, when 
photons pass through a medium that rotates polarization angles.

 In their article, Schumacher and Westmoreland suggest three complementary 
strategies to get close to the limit. One is to use long strings of photons to 
send messages in blocks rather than as single photons. The underlying idea is 
to encode the message in units consisting of a certain number of photons each.

 For instance, the sender can encode information in three-photon units. If two 
different photon polarizations stand for 0 and 1, a set of three photons could 
encode 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, and 111. Each of these eight 
combinations, or code words, could represent a particular symbol or letter.

 To improve the reliability of decoding, the second strategy is to employ only 
the most distinguishable of the available quantum states. Thus, it's better to 
use only the four code words 000, 011, 110, and 101, which differ in two places 
from each other.

 The third technique is to insist that the recipient of a message make a joint 
measurement on a large number of photons. Measuring three photons at a time, 
for example, can reveal more information about their quantum states than 
studying them separately.

 Thus, by using long code words (chosen for distinguishability) and an 
appropriate measurement scheme, it's possible to convey information at any rate 
up to the Holevo maximum, Schumacher and Westmoreland say.

 The findings may give researchers a better sense of how to encode and decode 
information transmitted via quantum particles and especially how to use as 
little energy as possible to convey information or even store it in a computer 
memory. Putting the ideas into practice, however, presents daunting obstacles. 
For example, making a single measurement on more than two quantum particles at 
a time remains a formidable task.

 The new results from Holevo, Schumacher, and Westmoreland focus on the 
capacity of quantum channels to carry information expressed in 1s and 0s. 
Because they can also be prepared in mixed quantum states, photons and other 
quantum particles can be used to convey information expressed in more complex 
forms (SN: 4/10/93, p. 229). Such mixtures of states are of particular interest 
to those exploring the possibility of developing computers that operate 
according to quantum principles (SN: 1/14/95, p. 30).

"The quantum situation is more complicated," Bennett says. "It's frustrating 
that we know only parts of the answer yet."


