Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 7/12/97 July 5, 1997

 The Bitter Truth Do some people inherit a distaste for broccoli? 

 By Kathleen Fackelmann Former President George Bush got a lot of flack for his 
dislike of broccoli. Is it possible that he, as well as many others, has an 
inherited aversion to this bitter-tasting cruciferous vegetable?

 Yes. At least, that's the conclusion of some scientists who say that 25 
percent of the U.S. population are supertasters, people with a genetically 
determined dislike of bitter compounds found in many vegetables and fruits.

 A trivial matter? Not to the parent of a picky eater. Nor to the purveyors of 
public health, who know that many cancers could be prevented if diners would 
load their plates with fruits and vegetables. Indeed, the National Cancer 
Institute recommends that people eat at least five servings of fruits and 
vegetables each day.

 Lack of attention to this inherited yuck factor could derail NCI's effort to 
lower the country's cancer rate, says Adam Drewnowski, director of the 
nutrition program at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. His research 
suggests that supertasters indeed shun certain foods containing bitter-tasting 
compounds that scientists think may ward off cancer.

"This story starts in the thirties with a fabulous accident in the lab of a 
chemist," says Linda M. Bartoshuk, a taste researcher at the Yale University 
School of Medicine.

 In 1931, Arthur L. Fox of E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company in Wilmington, 
Del., was synthesizing a compound called phenylthiocarbamide (PTC), when some 
of it blew into the air. A colleague who inhaled the PTC dust commented on the 
terrible taste. Fox tasted nothing. He went on to test a variety of his 
colleagues and discovered that some experienced PTC as intensely bitter, while 
others said the compound "has no more taste than sand" (SN: 4/18/31, p. 249). 
This early research indicated that people could be divided into two groups: 
tasters and nontasters.

 Fox then provided PTC to other researchers, who conducted family studies. They 
soon found that the ability to taste PTC is an inherited trait.

 In the 1970s, Bartoshuk's team began to do research on a similar chemical, 
called 6-n-propylthiouracil, or PROP. After years of use, researchers had 
learned that PTC has some toxic effects, so they relied on PROP, a thyroid 
medication, to test people for sensitivity to bitter flavors.

 At first, the research produced results similar to those for PTC. Some people 
experienced PROP as incredibly acrid, while others couldn't tell the difference 
between a solution containing PROP and water. Like PTC tasting, reactions to 
PROP were inherited. The scientists thought that the two tests reveal the same 
trait.

 As time went on, Bartoshuk began to notice that "tasters weren't all alike." 
The research began to reveal a subset of people who seemed unusually attuned to 
the bitter taste of PROP. She called such people supertasters. Subsequent 
studies by Bartoshuk and other groups have shown that about 25 percent of the 
U.S. population are supertasters, 50 percent are regular tasters, and 25 
percent are nontasters.

 The researchers were curious as to whether supertasters let their acute 
sensitivity influence their choice of food. Drewnowski and his colleagues 
focused on naringin, a substance responsible for the bitter flavor of 
grapefruit juice. Naringin is also thought to fight cancer in several ways.

 Drewnowski's team tested 123 women and found that 28 percent were 
supertasters, 40 percent were regular tasters, and 32 percent were nontasters. 
The researchers then had each woman rate several solutions of naringin and 
sugar water. Supertasters disliked the bitter naringin more than regular 
tasters and nontasters did, the team found.

 In addition, when the scientists asked the volunteers to rate different foods, 
they discovered that the supertasters were most likely to report an aversion to 
grapefruit juice. There was no difference in the acceptability of orange juice, 
which does not contain naringin. These results are slated to appear in the 
August American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

 The researchers haven't finished analyzing the other food preference data from 
their study, but they have found that the supertasters are more likely than the 
others to reject broccoli. This vegetable contains another bitter compound that 
is also a powerful anticancer agent. If purchased from a chemical supplier, 
this substance contains a warning because it is so corrosive. "It's mean 
stuff," Drewnowski says.

 In an as-yet-unpublished study of 53 women, Drewnowski's group has found that 
supertasters are more likely than other women to reject green tea and soy 
products. When they do drink soy milk, supertasters prefer vanilla soy milk, 
which is sweeter than the regular variety. Both green tea and soy products are 
popular in Japan, which has a low cancer rate. Ironically, supertasters are 
more common among Asians than in other populations tested.

 Previous research has shown that a bitter substance in soy called genistein 
may act against breast cancer (SN: 5/12/90, p. 296). Genistein resembles the 
female sex hormone estrogen, which fuels the growth of breast cancers.

 Researchers believe genistein may block the breast cell's estrogen receptor, 
thus impeding cancer's growth.

 Family studies have revealed a pattern in the inheritance of tasting and 
supertasting abilities. The researchers propose that people with one copy of 
the supertasting gene or genes become regular tasters and experience some of 
PROP's bitter flavor. People who inherit two copies become supertasters, 
grimacing and gagging in response to a solution of PROP. So far, the exact 
location of the gene or genes that influence whether people taste these bitter 
substances remains unknown.

 In the course of human evolution, supertasters may have derived some advantage 
from their finicky taste. For example, says Drewnowski, people living in remote 
jungle areas must judge whether a particular plant or berry is poisonous. "Not 
being able to reject bitter poisons really places you in danger if you live in 
[such an] environment," he says.

 For people living in a city, regular taster or nontaster status might prove 
beneficial, Bartoshuk says. Such people would be more likely to eat a broad 
range of items -foods they pick out at the grocery store, where poisons should 
not be a problem.

 In addition, the supertasting ability may have helped women avoid certain 
foods during pregnancy. Scientists have found that more women than men can 
detect the bitter taste of PROP. In addition, many of the compounds found to be 
harmful to a fetus, but not to an adult, are bitter. That may be why pregnant 
women can suddenly become choosy eaters.

 Valerie B. Duffy of the University of Connecticut School of Allied Health in 
Storrs decided to check out that folk wisdom. She analyzed the food preferences 
of 50 pregnant women and found that the women were most likely to reject 
bitter-tasting foods in the first trimester, when the fetus is especially 
vulnerable to damaging compounds. Duffy presented her findings this week at the 
International Symposium on Olfaction and Taste held in San Diego.

 Bartoshuk's team has also found that the number of supertasting women drops 
after menopause. In a study of 60 women age 65 and older, Laurie A. Lucchina, 
also at Yale, showed that about 7 percent were supertasters. Bartoshuk 
speculates that the supertaster gene becomes less active after the childbearing 
years, perhaps because it's no longer necessary to protect a developing child.

 Supertasters may prove more sensitive to tastes and food sensations in 
general. According to Bartoshuk's research, they experience sweet foods as more 
sugary, fat foods as more slippery, and hot foods as more spicy than regular 
tasters or nontasters. "So you can imagine that the supertaster is living in 
quite a different world of food," Bartoshuk says. "We're just beginning to 
explore that."

 A simple physical difference may explain their sensitivity. "Supertasters have 
very different tongues," Bartoshuk says. Her research has shown that, compared 
to regular tasters and nontasters, supertasters have more of the round 
structures on the tongue called fungiform papillae, so named because they 
resemble button mushrooms. These structures contain the taste buds, which send 
perceptions of flavor to the brain.

 Who cares if you shun broccoli in favor of cake?

 The National Cancer Institute, for one.

"The evidence supporting the role of fruits and vegetables in preventing cancer 
is fairly considerable," says Gloria Stables, director of NCI's 5-A-Day 
program. For example, reviews of more than 150 epidemiological studies show 
that people who eat about five servings of fruits and vegetables halve their 
risk of certain cancers, compared to those who eat less than that amount. The 
American Heart Association, for another.

 The AHA's nutrition committee recommends eating a wide variety of fruits and 
vegetables. Such a diet may help reduce the concentration of cholesterol in the 
bloodstream, the panel says in the June 3 Circulation. Many fruits and 
vegetables contain natural chemicals, such as flavonoids, that inhibit 
cholesterol absorption. Thus, a diet rich in fruits and veggies may not only 
fight cancer but ward off a heart attack as well.

 With all these benefits, why do many people continue to shun broccoli, 
brussels sprouts, spinach, grapefruit, melon, kale, tofu, and other healthful 
items found on the supermarket shelves? In the most recent U.S. Department of 
Agriculture survey, just one in three U.S. adults ate the recommended five 
servings of fruits and vegetables per day.

 Drewnowski blames the supertaster gene, in part, for the vegetable-poor diet 
consumed in the United States. "There may be genetic reasons why you gag on 
broccoli," Drewnowski says.

 Stables cautions that researchers have yet to prove that supertasters reject 
certain health-promoting foods. If there is a genetic component to taste, "it's 
a very small factor," adds Ritva Butrum of the American Institute for Cancer 
Research in Washington, D.C. "A much bigger factor is the way foods have been 
introduced early in life," she says.

 Drewnowski agrees that his findings must be tested. Even if genes do play some 
role in food selection, their influence certainly wouldn't override experience, 
he says. He believes public health officials should take into account the fact 
that some people can't abide the taste of certain foods. Food campaigns could 
then work around a distaste for bitter-tasting vegetables and fruit.

"I think a supertaster can learn to like brussels sprouts," Drewnowski says. 
Supertasters who want to include more such veggies in their diet might start 
gradually, using some adaptations to take the bitter edge off. He points out 
that cooking vegetables, rather than eating them raw, helps tone down the 
bitter flavor.

 It may be that such research will lead to the development of additives 
specially designed to filter the bitter taste of fruits and vegetables. A study 
in the June 5 Nature suggests that salt is a natural bitter blocker ().

 In the end, health officials may have to target children. "For whatever 
reason, some kids have a hard time eating some of the stronger-flavored 
vegetables," Stables says, noting that kids lag behind adults in adherence to 
the 5-A-Day program.

 Children who are supertasters may resist all efforts to tempt them, Drewnowski 
notes. "If they don't want to eat cabbage, you can't make them." Will public 
health officials fare any better at getting Johnny to eat his vegetables? 
That's the job. It won't be easy.


