Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/7/97 June 7, 1997

 A New Gap in the Antibiotic Arsenal

by N. Seppa

 Not long ago, to demonstrate how staphylococcus bacteria invade the body, 
instructors would have medical students roll up their sleeves and smear the 
microbes on their forearms. The instructors then pricked the skin. Within days, 
the students developed infections -- which the instructors treated with 
antibiotics. Point made.

 They don't do that anymore.

 Like other bacteria, some staph strains are showing resistance to many 
antibiotics. Indeed, concerned scientists have kept an uneasy vigil, watching 
for a microbe that would repel all drugs.

 Now, a strain of staphylococcus infecting a 4-month-old Japanese boy has 
withstood a pharmaceutical onslaught from vancomycin, physicians' lone 
remaining surefire drug against the bacterium. The microbe, a strain of 
Staphylococcus aureus, had already acquired resistance to every other 
antibiotic.

 The unsettling news that vancomycin had failed after 29 days of treatment has 
the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta 
scrambling to warn U.S. hospitals to redouble their vigilance against the 
spread of staphylococcus.

 The report has also sent a shudder through the research community, which some 
scientists claim has become complacent about resistant microbes.

 At worst, the S. aureus could signal the rise of a microbe that no drug on the 
U.S. market can handle.

 The CDC terms the Japanese infection "intermediate resistance" -- somewhat 
short of full resistance, a medical red alert. Nonetheless, scientists consider 
the case ominous. S. aureus is a potentially lethal staph that occurs naturally 
in humans, residing on the skin and along the mucous membranes. This 
opportunistic microbe typically needs a break in the skin to invade the body. 
It can form an abscess at that spot or travel in the bloodstream to infect 
kidneys, bones, or other tissues.

 Vancomycin routinely stops it and probably still will for a time, says Stuart 
Levy, director of the Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance at 
Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston. However, Levy and others expect 
the resistant strain to spread.

"Bacteria do not sit around," he says. "They are moving targets."

 The fact that this strain was found in only one individual "doesn't make any 
difference," says Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases. "It's not a question of whether it's going to 
happen here, it's a question of when."

 Despite a recent research push, the U.S. pharmaceutical industry could be 
caught flat-footed. Work on new antibiotics slowed in the 1980s and early 
1990s. It can take a decade to bring a new antibiotic to market (SN: 5/17/97, 
p. 310).

"We have a few drugs in the pipeline that appear effective against 
vancomycin-resistant microbes," Fauci says. "But they are only in the 
development stage."

 The staphylococcus group of bacteria is especially hardy and difficult to wipe 
out with normal precautions. Hospitals fight a running battle against the 
microbes, which can withstand hot water and some disinfectants, says Gail H. 
Cassell, a microbiologist at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

 Scientists have worried that staph would gain resistance by swapping genes 
with other bacteria. Of the enterococci, less virulent bacteria that inhabit 
the intestines but seldom cause problems in healthy people, as many as one in 
four strains has proved resistant to vancomycin, report researchers at the 
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia in the Feb. 19 
Journal of the American Chemical Society.

 Instead of swapping genes, S. aureus has apparently become resistant by 
mutating its own genes, Levy says. Exactly how S. aureus did so remains unknown.

 Thus far, the story in Japan has a happy ending. Doctors gave the boy a 
combination of other drugs -- including some that aren't commercially available 
in the United States -- and he warded off the infection. Japanese officials are 
withholding details, awaiting publication of a report on the case in the July 
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.


