Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/28/97 June 28, 1997

 Industries Tally Air Pollution Poorly

by J. Raloff

 Companies in the United States that annually spew 100 tons or more of 
smog-forming volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) must provide the federal 
government with a quantitative breakdown of those emissions. These inventories 
-- best estimates of releases from various processes, operations, and plumbing 
-- often fall somewhere between fantasy and fraud, a new study reports.

 Most policy makers "assume these numbers are gospel" and use them to fine-tune 
smog-control strategies, observes Ronald C. Henry of the University of Southern 
California in Los Angeles, who led the study. The faulty inventories can hurt 
public and polluter alike, he argues, if they lead to costly process- or 
pollution-control changes that provide little smog relief.

 The state of Texas employed Henry to help home in on the sources and 
conditions most responsible for Houston's continuing smog-ozone problem -- the 
nation's second worst. He applied a sophisticated mathematical formula to the 
data collected over 6 months by an automated air-sampling monitor. This device 
provides hourly parts-per-billion readings of more than 50 different industrial 
smog-fostering VOCs in Houston air.

 By correlating the hourly VOC readings with wind direction and speed in this 
leading petrochemical hub, Henry could project not only where many VOCs 
originated but also "how many [different industrial] sources there must have 
been and what the composition of their emissions was." This approach works, he 
explains, because each source tends to emit its own signature mix of VOCs over 
time, though quantities may vary. In a test in Atlanta, the technique 
successfully apportioned VOCs to their largely vehicular sources.

 By comparing the chemical signatures detected and the reports from each Texas 
firm upstream of the monitor, Henry's team found that, with a few notable 
exceptions, industrial inventories appear very "inaccurate" in terms of 
location, composition, and emission rates. The researchers describe their 
findings in the June 24 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 For instance, the second largest oil refinery in Texas is located a few miles 
southeast of the monitor. While the refinery's own inventory tagged it as a 
large VOC source, Henry notes that "we didn't see anything -- even though that 
refinery was running full tilt." On the other hand, his team found a potent 
source of ethylbenzene, a compound often emitted by refineries, although no 
ethylbenzene sources were reported upwind.

 Air pollution analysts "have worried for many years about the suspected large 
inaccuracies in these emissions inventories," observes Charles W. Lewis of the 
Environmental Protection Agency in Research Triangle Park, N.C.

 Until now, however, analysts have lacked evidence to challenge those 
inventories. Henry says that his new study finally provides "the smoking gun."

 While he can't rule out some fraud, Henry suspects that most inaccuracies were 
unintentional. After all, he notes, companies were as likely to err in ways 
that made themselves look bad as in ways that improved their image.

 Indeed, notes Steve Bromberg of EPA, assembling an emission inventory "is 
still really more of an art than a science." Ironically, most firms consider 
the inventories "scut work" for junior engineers, notes Jim Price of the Texas 
Natural Resource Conservation Commission in Austin.

 The increasing use of VOC inventory data in computer models that simulate air 
quality "presents some of the most severe requirements on the accuracy of these 
inventories," points out Glen Cass of the California Institute of Technology in 
Pasadena. Indeed, he notes, some firms may simply report the allowed, rather 
than the actual, emissions. Studies like Henry's could spur moves to improve 
models' accuracy, Cass believes, "by raising questions that can be answered by 
direct emissions measurements."

 Indeed, Lewis says, "we've got to get people to take these [inventories] more 
seriously and begin making more actual measurements rather than trying to 
calculate them on paper."


