Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/7/97 June 7, 1997

 Patients savor this brain disorder

by J. Raloff Swiss researchers report finding a new brain disorder in a small 
percentage of people who have suffered strokes, brain tumors, and head traumas. 
In each case, the damage has produced a persistent behavioral effect. Yet none 
of the victims desires a cure. Indeed, they're enjoying the fallout: a craving 
for fine foods.

 Marianne Regard of University Hospital in Zurich and Theodor Landis of Geneva 
University call this benign disorder gourmand syndrome.

 Regard first encountered the condition 8 years ago in a 48-year-old political 
journalist who had been hospitalized with a stroke. Scans of the man's brain 
identified a lesion around the middle cerebral artery in the right hemisphere. 
The wound produced a temporary weakness on the left side of his body, making 
him unable to walk. Even so, Regard recalls, "he didn't complain about that." 
Instead, he griped about hospital meals.

"Since most people complain about hospital food, we initially took no notice," 
the neuropsychologist admits. But when she asked him to keep a diary of his 
thoughts, the man exhibited an inordinate preoccupation with food. Before the 
stroke, he had had an overwhelming interest in politics and had shown no 
particular food preferences. Afterwards, he lived for food. Indeed, as soon as 
he returned to work, he abandoned politics to become a columnist on fine dining.

 When she observed a businessman hospitalized for stroke who also exhibited a 
newfound "lusting" after food, Regard says, she began investigating the role of 
the brain damage. After studying 723 patients suspected of having a discrete 
lesion in the brain, she and Landis identified 34 more instances of gourmand 
syndrome. Each patient had brain damage, usually in the right frontal region.

 What constitutes fine food has proved "very individual," Regard says, with no 
single cuisine or taste -- such as sweet or salty -- driving the compulsion.

 Most patients exhibited additional symptoms at first, such as spatial memory 
problems or diminished control over impulsive behaviors. During 8 years of 
follow-up, these symptoms disappeared for the most part, but the passion for 
food remained. Although preoccupied with shopping, dining rituals, and food 
preparation, the patients did not become overweight.

 Many types of brain damage have been linked to altered eating behaviors, from 
insatiability to anorexia, but none seems to stem from this region of the 
brain, the authors note in the May Neurology.

 The new findings "coincide with work that we and others have done with brain 
degenerations that affect primarily the right side of the brain," says 
neurologist Jeffrey Cummings of the University of California, Los Angeles 
School of Medicine. Some patients, he's found, experience a behavior-altering 
"heightened sensitivity" to and appreciation for particular stimuli.


