Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 6/7/97 June 7, 1997

 Pinning down a superconductivity theory

by I. Peterson

 In conventional, low-temperature superconductors like niobium, electrons 
overcome their mutual repulsion and pair up to pass unhindered through the host 
material. This pairing is facilitated by vibrations of the material's crystal 
lattice.

 Quantum theory describes the pair by means of a single wave function, which 
mathematically specifies the probability distribution showing where the two 
electrons are most likely to be. In a conventional superconductor, the 
electrons' wave function is spherical, indicating that a pair has an equal 
chance of moving in any direction. Such a pairing is said to display s-wave 
symmetry.

 In copper oxide superconductors, lattice vibrations alone are not strong 
enough to maintain the necessary electron pairing at elevated temperatures. 
Some theorists have proposed that magnetic interactions between the electrons 
and copper atoms play a key role in forging electron pairs.

 In this case, an electron pair would instead have a wave function with d-wave 
symmetry, resembling a four-leaf clover that has its lobes aligned along the 
crystal axes.

 Researchers performed a number of experiments aimed at detecting d-wave 
pairing. The results pointed to the presence of d-wave symmetry, but they 
couldn't unambiguously rule out an additional contribution from s-wave pairing 
(SN: 3/9/96, p. 156).

 Kirtley and his coworkers looked for d-wave pairing in a thin film of a 
thallium barium copper oxide that has a crystal structure known as tetragonal, 
which is difficult to make but highly symmetrical.

 In particular, the crystal geometry requires that the electron pairing be 
either s-wave or d-wave. "It can't be a combination of the two," Kirtley says.

 The results indicate that electron pairs in thallium barium copper oxide 
display d-wave symmetry. "This is the first time that an experiment has shown 
that s-wave behavior in electrons is not critical to high-temperature 
superconductivity," says Jui H. Wang of the State University of New York at 
Buffalo, a member of the team that fabricated the material.

 The identification of a superconductor displaying pure d-wave symmetry serves 
as a starting point for understanding the more complicated, mixed states that 
appear to characterize other high-temperature superconductors.


