Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 7/26/97

 July 26, 1997 

 When Earth Tipped, Life Went Wild

by R. Monastersky

 More than 500 million years ago, Earth may have lost its balance and listed to 
one side, causing the continents to reposition themselves at breakneck speed, 
according to a team of geophysicists. This hypothesized event, they claim, 
sparked the evolutionary big bang known as the Cambrian explosion, when almost 
all major divisions of animals first appeared in the fossil record.

"It's a wild idea, if it's right," says the leader of the team, Joseph L. 
Kirschvink of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. The proposal 
has drawn mixed responses from other scientists, who caution that such a grand 
claim will require geologists to collect firmer evidence from this critical 
period. "If it's true, it's incredibly important. But it is based on a somewhat 
scarce database that is open to many different interpretations," comments Ian 
W.D. Dalziel, a geophysicist at the University of Texas in Austin.

 Before the Cambrian period, almost all life was microscopic, except for some 
enigmatic soft-bodied organisms. At the start of the Cambrian, about 544 
million years ago, animals burst forth in a rash of evolutionary activity never 
since equaled. Ocean creatures acquired the ability to grow hard shells, and a 
broad range of new body plans emerged within the geologically short span of 10 
million years. Paleontologists have proposed many theories to explain this 
revolution but have agreed on none.

 Kirschvink and his colleagues now implicate Earth itself. During this time, 
shifting masses within Earth's interior mantle unbalanced the spinning globe, 
and the entire surface of the planet reoriented itself. As a result, the mantle 
and the crust tilted with respect to the axis of rotation, they propose in the 
July 25 Science.

 To understand this process-called true polar wander-think of a ball with a 
half-dollar, a quarter, and a dime taped onto different spots. If the ball were 
set spinning on ice, it would naturally orient itself with the greatest masses, 
the half-dollar and the quarter, along the ball's equator. If the quarter 
suddenly fell off, the unbalanced ball would adjust. In the end, the new 
equator would run through the half-dollar and the dime, with the axis of 
rotation still pointing in the original direction.

 According to the new hypothesis, the same kind of true polar wander occurred 
during the Cambrian. It carried ancestral North America from a position close 
to the South Pole all the way to the equator. At the same time, the giant 
continent of Gondwanaland-Africa, Antarctica, Australia, India, and South 
America-traveled clear across the Southern Hemisphere.

 Geophysicists have identified relatively minor instances of true polar wander 
in recent geologic times, but they have never documented such a dramatic case. 
The evidence supporting the new hypothesis comes from records of Earth's 
magnetic field. As rocks form, the minerals inside align themselves with the 
existing magnetic field. By analyzing the orientation of the grains, scientists 
can tell the position of the ancient continents relative to the magnetic north 
pole, which almost always lies close to the rotation axis.

 By charting the motion of the continents during the Cambrian, Kirschvink and 
his colleagues found a brief period of major motion consistent with the idea of 
true polar wander. North America completed its journey from pole to equator 
sometime between 540 million and 515 million years ago, they claim. 
Gondwanaland shifted between 535 million and 500 million years ago. Putting 
these and other data together, the researchers suggest that most of the 
continental motion occurred between 535 and 520 million years ago.

 The researchers invoke true polar wander as their explanation because the 
continents moved at least two times faster than ever documented in plate 
tectonics, the process that shuttles thin blocks of Earth's outer skin around 
the globe.

 The quick Cambrian motion "would violate the plate tectonics speed limit. You 
can't make plates move that quickly," says Kirschvink.

 If the entire surface of the planet turned by almost 90@, it would have 
drastically altered the climate and disrupted ecosystems. This would have 
opened the door to rapid evolution of new species, setting off the Cambrian 
explosion, speculate Kirschvink and his colleagues.

 Geologists say that the available data are too sparse to tell whether all of 
Earth's continents moved that quickly. Other interpretations of the same 
paleomagnetic data draw the continental motion out over a much longer span. 
Even if the globe started tilting 535 million years ago, that shift could not 
explain the initial biological burst, which began some 10 million years 
earlier, at the opening of the Cambrian. "The explosion was certainly set off 
long before this global tilting," says Stefan Bengtson of the Swedish Museum of 
Natural History in Stockholm. He notes, however, that such a drastic change 
"certainly would have influenced conditions for life. It could have 
strengthened an event that was already occurring."


