Science News Online (7/19/97): Human Embryonic Stem Cells Found?

 July 19, 1997 

 Human Embryonic Stem Cells Found?

by J. Travis 

 Biologists who ponder the remarkable process by which an embryo develops into 
an adult will long remember 1997. First came the cloning of Dolly the sheep. 
Now, investigators report they may have isolated for the first time human 
embryonic cells that have the potential to develop into muscle, blood, nerves, 
or any other tissue in the body. 

"I feel fairly confident that they will be demonstrated to be totipotent," says 
John D. Gearhart of Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, who 
described the cells at last week's International Congress of Developmental 
Biology in Snowbird, Utah. 

 With these mother cells, scientists may someday create many sorts of tissues 
to treat conditions such as spinal cord injuries, diabetes, leukemia, and even 
neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson's disease. 

 In the long run, the use of the stem cells may make moot the furor over 
transplanting cells from aborted fetuses to relieve some of these conditions. 
In the short run, however, the cells may reignite the controversy, since 
Gearhart's group derived them from terminated pregnancies. 

 Like Dolly, the stem cells are also apt to trigger concern about how this 
scientific advance might be misused. In theory, for example, the cells could 
generate a human baby if properly implanted into a woman's womb. 

 Gearhart and other researchers stress that such a scenario is not currently 
achievable or even under consideration. 

"To concentrate on the risks [of human embryonic stem cells] is to deny 
potential health benefits to a lot of people," asserts Brigid L.M. Hogan of 
Vanderbilt University in Nashville, who has worked with mouse embryonic stem 
cells. 

 Scientists have used such mouse stem cells for nearly a decade to create 
genetically altered mice. By deleting a specific gene in embryonic stem cells 
and injecting the altered cells into a developing embryo, scientists can create 
a chimera - a creature whose cells are of two distinct genetic types. With 
chimeras, scientists can breed progeny that lack the chosen gene. Mice made 
this way can mimic human diseases or reveal what proteins guide embryogenesis. 

 To understand the development of human embryos and to generate tissue for 
transplantation, several research teams had searched for human embryonic stem 
cells, with no success. Gearhart's group and others, following the path blazed 
by mouse scientists, initially tried to tease apart human blastocysts, clusters 
of 100 or so cells that constitute a stage of embryonic development. Gearhart 
then decided to adopt the strategy of two other research groups, one led by 
Hogan, that in 1992 had collected primordial germ cells, the cells that give 
rise to sperm or eggs. Grown under certain conditions, these mouse cells come 
to resemble stem cells derived from blastocysts. 

 Working with aborted fetuses 5 to 9 weeks old, Gearhart and his colleagues 
gathered primordial human germ cells and have kept some of them alive in the 
laboratory for more than 7 months. 

 The cells are shaped like mouse embryonic stem cells, carry several of the 
same surface proteins, and make telomerase, an enzyme thought to keep stem 
cells virtually immortal (SN: 11/25/95, p. 362). They can spontaneously form 
embryoid bodies, clusters of differentiated cells also formed by embryonic stem 
cells. Gearhart has found that these clusters contain various tissues, 
including blood cells, although he hasn't yet found every cell type. 

 Debate continues over whether primordial germ cells are the equivalent of 
blastocyst-derived stem cells. As germ cells develop into sperm or eggs, some 
genes receive a sex-specific chemical imprint that governs their activity 
during development. This imprinting may compromise the use of such germ cells 
as stem cells, says Hogan. 

 Stem cell investigators caution that Gearhart has not yet published his work. 
"They're obviously very interesting cell lines . . . but we don't really know 
their properties," says Anne L. McLaren of the University of Cambridge in 
England. 

 Before publishing their findings, Gearhart and his colleagues plan to implant 
the putative stem cells into mice that have no effective immune system and 
therefore will not reject them. At the implant sites, the cells should multiply 
and differentiate into a variety of cell types. 

 Investigators expect they will one day be able to control this 
differentiation. 

"If these are totipotent cells, they should have the ability to form anything 
in the body. Basic developmental biology isn't at the point where you can 
direct [stem cells] into any cell type you want, but there've been tremendous 
strides recently," says James A. Thomson of the University of Wisconsin-Madison 
Regional Primate Center, who in 1995 reported isolating embryonic stem cells of 
monkeys (SN: 8/26/95, p. 139). 

 In fact, a description of progress toward generating blood stem cells from 
mouse embryonic stem cells followed Gearhart's talk in Utah. If similar efforts 
prove successful with human embryonic stem cells, they could eliminate the use 
of bone marrow tissue or umbilical cord blood to treat blood disorders such as 
leukemia. While such tissues contain blood stem cells, the cells are rare and 
may not proliferate as well as those derived from embryonic cells. Gearhart 
envisions altering genes of embryonic stem cells to ensure that they will not 
be rejected by the immune system. "We may end up with universal donor tissue," 
he says. 

 Irrespective of their medical uses, human embryonic stem cells could shine a 
light on such mysteries as how developing cells commit to becoming neurons or 
other types of cells. "There's a lot of interesting, straightforward biology 
that could come from them," says Hogan, noting that little is known, for 
example, about what genes human fetal cells use or what growth factors they 
secrete. 

 To study conditions such as Down's syndrome, Gearhart plans to use the cells 
as a source of chromosomes unsullied by the changes that normally occur as an 
organism develops. 

 The availability of totipotent human stem cells may offer difficult ethical 
issues. Instead of generating a baby via the union of sperm and egg, fertility 
specialists might be able to implant stem cells to create offspring. 

 Such a feat seemed impossible, even in mice, until 1993, when researchers 
combined mouse embryonic stem cells with a chromosomally abnormal mouse embryo. 
Before the defective embryo degenerated, it helped the stem cells implant and 
ultimately give rise to a new mouse by themselves, says Janet Rossant of Mount 
Sinai Hospital in Toronto and a member of the research team that conducted the 
1993 experiment. 

 Bioethicist Ronald M. Green of Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., suggests 
that this year's frenzy over Dolly (SN: 4/5/97, p. 214) may temper people's 
reaction to news of human embryonic stem cells. While the cells could, in 
theory, spawn many clones, the procedure does not raise as many questions of 
personal identity as would the Dollylike cloning of an adult, he contends. 

 Gearhart himself wonders who, if anyone, will regulate the use of embryonic 
stem cells. Johns Hopkins University officials have already filed for patents 
on the cells and the procedures used to create them. One or more companies may 
soon buy the rights to their research, adds Gearhart, noting that the stem cell 
research has been conducted without any federal funding. 


