Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 7/12/97 July 12, 1997

 Brains show signs of two bilingual roads

by B. Bower Unlike people who become bilingual after childhood, those who learn 
a second language at an early age rely on the same critical patch of brain 
tissue when speaking either tongue, according to a new study.

 Adult learners of language apparently recruit nearby groups of brain cells, 
suggest neuroscientist Joy Hirsch of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in 
New York and her colleagues.

"On the basis of our findings, the distinction between native and second 
languages may be less for [people who had] younger ages of exposure to a second 
language," Hirsch holds.

 According to her study, bilingual individuals who acquired a second tongue 
during childhood display elevated activity in the same part of Broca's area -a 
frontal lobe structure considered crucial for language use -regardless of which 
language they use. In contrast, people employing a second language acquired 
later exhibit neuronal bustle in another segment of Broca's area, the 
researchers report in the July 12 Nature.

 Wernicke's area, located in the temporal lobe and also known to perform 
language functions, displayed comparable responses in both groups. The 
researchers relied on a noninvasive technique known as functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) to study changes in blood flow in the brains of 12 
bilingual adults. Half of the group had learned a second language starting in 
infancy, while the remainder attained fluency as teenagers.

 Together, the volunteers speak 10 native and second languages, including 
English, French, and Turkish. The two groups reported roughly equal fluency and 
frequency of use for their second tongues.

 Researchers obtained brain scans as participants silently recited, first in 
one language and then the other, brief descriptions of an event from the 
previous day.

 The findings may reflect either the sensitivity of part of Broca's area to 
language exposure during childhood or the existence of marked differences in 
the ways that children and adults learn languages, Hirsch says.

"These new results are interesting but inconclusive," comments neuroscientist 
Robert J. Zatorre of the Montreal Neurological Hospital. "It's devilishly 
difficult to study naturalistic types of language in a well-controlled way."

 For instance, the short descriptions of personal events offered by volunteers 
in Hirsch's study allow for large individual differences in the amount of 
mental imagery generated during the task and the extent to which events sparked 
emotional reactions. Such differences may have influenced language-related 
brain activity, Zatorre contends.

 Unpublished fMRI data obtained from bilingual speakers as they name various 
objects, a more restricted verbal task, yields the same disparity regarding age 
of learning a language, Hirsch responds.


