Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 7/12/97 July 12, 1997

 Postcards from the Red Planet

by R. Cowen

 The journey was 7 months long, the landing bumpy. But right on schedule, the 
spacecraft Pathfinder struck the surface of Mars this July 4, bounced at least 
16 times, and landed upright in the chilly darkness.

 Soaking up the energy from the earliest light of a Martian dawn, the craft 
awakened and soon beamed to Earth the first close-up images of an alien 
landscape--distant hills and nearby rocks that provide the most compelling 
evidence to date that the bone-dry terrain was once awash in water.

 Next, the craft's six-wheeled rover, Sojourner, made its Martian debut. After 
an obstructive airbag had deflated fully and a communications problem with the 
mother ship had been cleared up, this tiny field geologist rose to its full 
height--30 centimeters--and inched down a ramp. At 1:38:55 a.m. Eastern 
Daylight Time on July 6, the steel-cleated tires of the first rover on Mars 
left their tracks in the powdery red soil.

 Meanwhile, 191 million kilometers away, Pathfinder scientists and engineers at 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, Calif., hugged, cried, and 
gave each other high-fives.

 The reception was no less enthusiastic on the Internet, where Web sites 
containing the new images received some 100 million hits in 5 days--a world 
record, according to NASA. Little wonder about all the hoopla: After a gap of 
21 years, a representative of Earth had once again arrived on the Red Planet. 
Last Monday, Sojourner nestled up to a rock called Barnacle Bill, placing its 
spectrometer squarely against the rock's intriguingly bumpy surface. The 
spectroscopy provided further proof that the 12 meteorites believed to have 
fallen to Earth from the Red Planet had really done so. Several chemical 
fingerprints, including the ratio of iron to magnesium, were similar to those 
found in the group of 12. Yet the rock is richer in silica than any of the 
dozen and in this respect resembles a class of volcanic Earth rocks found in 
the Andes Mountains.

 One way rocks produce silica is by undergoing repeated cycles of heating and 
cooling. The abundance of silica in Barnacle Bill suggests that ancient rocks 
on Mars were exposed to more prolonged heating than scientists had thought. 
Even the first images taken by Pathfinder's camera "had scientists salivating," 
says project scientist Matthew P. Golombek of JPL. Those images reveal that the 
landing site, the mouth of a dried-up flood plain called Ares Vallis, displays 
a cornucopia of colors, rock shapes, and soil textures far exceeding what 
scientists had hoped for (SN: 6/28/97, p. 402). For instance, although much of 
Mars has rusted, tinted red by oxidizing gases in the atmosphere, the rocks at 
Ares Vallis sport a variety of red hues, ranging from dark to light.

"This is just an absolutely wonderful surprise," says Pathfinder investigator 
James F. Bell of Cornell University. Viewing the rocks through all 12 of the 
camera's color filters may help to identify their composition, he adds. 
Researchers had selected Ares Vallis as a landing site because of its watery 
history. Torrents of water equal in volume to 1,000 times the flow of the 
Amazon River are believed to have swept boulders from Mars' ancient southern 
highlands into this floodplain several billion years ago, giving Pathfinder the 
chance to view some of the planet's oldest rocks.

 In addition, says Pathfinder investigator Daniel Britt of the University of 
Arizona in Tucson, an asteroid or meteorite that gouged a small crater just a 
kilometer or so from the craft brought buried rocks to the surface. Rubble 
scattered around a larger crater, some 50 km distant, forms yet another 
population. Thus, three distinct sets of rocks populate the landing site. In 
comparison, the landing sites for the two Viking craft that touched down on 
Mars in 1976 were "dreadfully flat," uniform in color, and not nearly as 
interesting geologically, notes Golombek. "There are many wondrous things to 
see and many wondrous things to go and do," he adds.

 During the first week of the mission, members of the science team devised 
their own nomenclature as they sought familiarity with a panoply of intriguing 
landforms. A wall-size panoramic view of the region recorded by Pathfinder's 
camera was soon dotted with yellow stick-on tags labeling nearby rocks with 
such fanciful monikers as Yogi (because it resembles the back of a bear), 
Chimp, Flat Top, Casper, Scooby Doo, and the more distant Couch boulder and 
Twin Peaks.

 Sojourner, whose mission is expected to continue for several weeks, can crawl 
only to the closest of these. Its travel path is plotted by researchers who don 
3-D goggles to analyze stereo views of the terrain. If it strays farther than 
500 meters from Pathfinder, the rover will lose contact with the mother ship, 
which relays the marching orders from Earth.

 Several features in the pictures speak volumes about the region's watery past. 
Stereo images transmitted by Pathfinder reveal that the craft touched down at 
the edge of a channel marked by undulating ridges and valleys. This pattern may 
have been generated by helical flows of water that swept sediment away from the 
center of a rushing stream and deposited it on either side, notes Ronald 
Greeley of Arizona State University in Tempe.

 If water was indeed the architect, then measuring the spacing between the 
ridges and valleys, as well as the depth of the channel, could provide a gauge 
of the depth of the inundation that once flowed over Ares Vallis.

 As it drained away, water from a flash flood is likely to have collected in 
small depressions and formed ponds. Some of the ponds may have been rich in 
mineral salts, which would have precipitated as the water evaporated, forming a 
crust. Michael Malin of Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego says the 
crusts at Ares Vallis appear similar to the scumlike coverings he has 
encountered during austral summers in Antarctica, when ice melts briefly and 
creates ponds. The rover's spectrometer should be able to identify salt 
deposits if they exist.

 Other indications of the action of water come from one of the two hills known 
as Twin Peaks. This hill appears to display four or five horizontal layers of 
rock. Such layers, like the multihued striations in the Grand Canyon, could be 
generated by erosion or could represent deposits pushed up against the hill. 
Either way, the process required the action of water over an extended period. 
"The point is that we see evidence of several floods, not just one catastrophic 
event," says Greeley.

 That's intriguing, he adds, because the longer the water persisted in a 
particular region, the more likely it is that some form of life thrived there. 
The rounded shape of many of the rocks littering the landing site may also have 
been sculpted by water, he says. Across the site, Greeley adds, rocks are 
oriented in one general direction. That orientation matches the direction of 
water flow indicated by the huge channels seen in Viking images of the area. 
Greeley says he's particularly taken by Stripe, a rock named for the whitish 
swath down its side. At first, scientists figured this marking was simply a 
fracture that had been filled in by bright dust. Now, images taken with the 
Pathfinder camera extended to its full 3-meter height show that the swath 
extends onto the top of the rock. Greeley speculates that it represents a vein 
of minerals deposited in the rock, possibly by liquid water percolating through 
and leaving behind a mineral sediment.

 Just such a process has been suggested by several researchers to explain how 
ALH84001, the famous Martian meteorite thought to contain fossils of bacteria, 
acquired its carbon-rich compounds (SN: 8/10/96, p. 84). If his hypothesis pans 
out, Greeley says it would be the "first confirmation of that kind of activity 
on Mars."

 Pathfinder also managed to record several images of the smaller of Mars' two 
moons, Deimos. "I'm pleased to report that the only astronomical observatory on 
Mars is open for business," says Nicholas Thomas of the Max Planck Institute 
for Aeronomy in Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany.

 Addressing meteorology as well as astronomy, Pathfinder's instruments provide 
a daily weather report. The winds at Ares Vallis blow a gentle 5 meters per 
second, and temperatures have ranged from a low of about -90@C at night to a 
high of about -10@C during the day, says Tim Schofield of JPL.

 Another set of measurements, which analyzed how quickly Pathfinder decelerated 
as it entered the Martian atmosphere, will be critical for planning maneuvers 
with the next craft to visit the Red Planet. Those measurements reveal that 
above 60 km, the craft encountered an atmosphere only one-fifth as dense as the 
Viking craft experienced at the same altitude. At lower altitudes, Pathfinder 
also recorded a lower density than Viking did, but the difference was not as 
great.

 Mars Global Surveyor, launched last fall, is expected to enter orbit around 
Mars in September, but it won't begin monitoring the planet's climate until 
March. Surveyor will use atmospheric resistance--rather than a costly 
propulsion system--to move into a lower orbit.

 With luck, Pathfinder and Sojourner will still be operating when Surveyor 
arrives. Even if they aren't, the July 4 landing is one for the history books. 
Message to Mars: We're back!


