Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 7/19/97

 July 19, 1997 

 Nuclear Medicine Gets Friendlier

 Experimental therapies seek to poison just the disease 

 By JANET RALOFF 

"I looked like a concentration camp survivor," recalls Sue Spenceley, 
describing the day 2 years ago when she arrived at the Arlington (Texas) Cancer 
Center. Ravaged by both Hodgkin's disease and the myriad therapies that had 
been directed against this lymphoma over the previous 8 years, the 5'8" woman 
weighed just 113 pounds and had barely enough energy to walk. 

 As director of medical staff support at what she describes as "a very savvy 
hospital" in Orange County, Calif., "I had physicians at my door - literally." 
Yet they hadn't been able to stop her disease. 

 Altogether, she suffered through 13 different regimens of radiation and 
chemotherapy. Some so enervated her that she would be out of breath after 
climbing a few stairs. Others rendered her vulnerable to infection or caused 
nerve damage to her fingers and feet that still persists after 7 years. What a 
surprise, then, to find no unpleasantness associated with her Texas therapy. 
"Not only did it not wipe me out, but it actually allowed me to begin 
recovering from the aftermath of my last chemotherapy," she says. 

 With her cancer finally in check, she says, "there's nothing I wouldn't do." 
Last Christmas, she "skied like crazy and hiked." This therapy, she insists, 
"has given me my life back." 

 Spenceley's treatment represents a new and evolving wave of nuclear medicine 
that's letting physicians target increasing amounts of radiation against 
disease, while reducing the toxic effects on patients. Explains Huibert M. 
Vriesendorp, the radiation oncologist spearheading the trial that Spenceley is 
participating in, the overall goal is not only to improve the efficacy of 
cancer treatment but finally to make it "patient-friendly." 

 Other clinicians are applying the strategy to heart disease and arthritis ().

 Most of these new therapies rely on an expanding arsenal of antibodies chosen 
for their ability to find and bind to some cell surface protein peculiar to a 
patient's cancer. When injected into the patient, the antibody attaches to the 
cancer cells and, because it is linked to a radioisotope, becomes a lethal 
weapon. As the isotope decays, emitting pent-up energy in the form of ionizing 
radiation, the cancer gets hammered. 

 These new nuclear therapies minimize harm to normal tissue both by using 
antibodies to ferry the isotopes specifically to cancer cells and, 
increasingly, by employing isotopes that emit beta or alpha particles (see 
sidebar below). Because they can travel only short distances in tissue - 
typically 5 millimeters or less for betas and less than one-thousandth that 
distance for alphas - there's far less risk than with X rays that these types 
of radiation will spill over to cancerfree tissue. 

 Ultimately, the goal of many of these new therapies is to match the scope of 
the high-powered but short-range radioactive particles to the size of the tumor 
being targeted, explains Thomas S. Tenforde of the Energy Department's Pacific 
Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in Richland, Wash. 

 To target clumps consisting of no more than a few cells, typical of leukemias 
or wandering metastatic seeds of solid tumors, alphas might be the preferred 
choice. For larger tumors, physicians might choose the more penetrating betas. 
One day, doctors may even be able to select from a family of beta emitters with 
different energies - and therapeutic ranges - to tailor the radiation's reach 
to a particular cancer's size.

 A radioisotope is a single atom of an unstable element. An antibody is a much 
larger, Y-shaped protein. Neither has any intrinsic interest in entering a 
permanent relationship with the other. To bring together the reluctant mates 
chemically, biologists and chemists have had to engineer molecular-scale 
matchmakers-cages and linker molecules. 

 The idea is to trap isotope atoms within molecular cages, then use the linker 
molecules to bond one or more cages onto each antibody. The challenge, explains 
Tenforde, whose team is working to create new radiopharmaceuticals, has been 
building cages that exhibit a strong attraction for a specific isotope - 
indeed, a preference for it over any chemically related kin that might be found 
in the body. 

 For instance, in early April, Darrell R. Fisher of PNNL finally constructed a 
cage for the alpha emitter radium-223, a decay product of actinium-227. "It's a 
major scientific breakthrough that will finally make it possible to use this 
[very short-lived] alpha emitter," Fisher declares. He points out that the 
achievement was realized "only after 10 years of work, including 7 years of 
synthesizing compounds and running stability tests on them." 

 So far, just a small number of successful isotope-antibody marriages have been 
arranged. Some of the earliest bind iodine-131, an isotope that emits 
low-energy gamma radiation along with a beta particle. 

 Dana C. Matthews of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle has 
been exploring this isotope for 6 years in teenagers and adults scheduled to 
receive bone marrow transplants to arrest advanced leukemias. Her therapy uses 
an antibody that targets the CD-45 protein on white blood cells and most 
leukemias. 

 The standard treatment for these patients includes whole-body irradiation with 
an external beam of gamma rays. In a study begun several years ago to test how 
well the new therapy would be tolerated, 30 patients with advanced leukemia 
were given the maximum tolerable amount of external radiation, along with 
enough antibody-linked radioisotope to deliver 30 to 90 percent more radiation 
to the cancerous tissue. Though 5-year survival for patients with such an 
advanced cancer would ordinarily be around 25 percent, "we've gotten almost 50 
percent survival," Matthews says. 

 Her group is planning studies to see whether isotopes without gamma radiation 
might offer even greater benefits. 

 While the iodine's gamma radiation is not high, Matthews notes, it does 
require that treated patients remain isolated in lead-insulated rooms for 4 to 
10 days until the radioactive iodine decays to a point at which it no longer 
poses a health risk to hospital staff or visitors. Adult patients may be able 
to gain sufficient comfort from talking to family by phone or across chest-high 
shields at the door, but young children need a parent's touch, she says. "So as 
a pediatric oncologist, I'm very interested in getting away from the gamma 
component." 

 One gammafree isotope under investigation is yttrium-90. Over the last 8 
years, Vriesendorp has been using this isotope, which emits solely betas, to 
treat some 130 Hodgkin's patients who have failed to benefit from all previous 
therapies. His regimen delivers two injections of the isotope, 1 week apart, on 
an outpatient basis. Even in these advanced cases, he notes, "we get a very 
good tumor response in two-thirds [of the patients]. The tumors shrink." 
Vriesendorp uses radioisotope purified from nuclear waste (see sidebar at 
right). 

 At the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, David A. Scheinberg 
has turned to bismuth-213, which emits only alpha radiation, to treat leukemia 
(SN: 2/22/97, p. 117), again on an outpatient basis. 

 For nearly a decade, he had tried iodine-131, but high doses killed 
blood-making cells, necessitating a bone marrow transplant. "That's not a 
feasible scheme for the majority of patients, who are either too old or lack a 
marrow donor," he says. 

"The beauty of the alpha particle," he observes, "is that it travels only about 
50 microns - which is approximately three to five cell diameters." Though his 
initial trial is designed to identify maximum tolerable doses for treatment, 
not to assess efficacy, "we've already seen significant antileukemic activity 
in the patients we've treated," he told Science News.

 To date, these antibody therapies have been directed primarily against 
leukemias and lymphomas, Vriesendorp notes. Not only are these cancers 
generally smaller and more sensitive to radiation poisoning than solid tumors, 
they're also bathed in the blood that can ferry the injected isotopes. 

 Programs are now under way to adapt these treatments to solid cancers. The 
Arlington team, for instance, is marrying yttrium-90 to a large antibody known 
as IGM. 

"IGM is so big that it will not leave the bloodstream," Vriesendorp notes, "so 
it's not good where you need to use the vascular system to get into a tumor." 
It does show promise for destroying metastases in confined spaces, such as 
ovarian tumors that have spread to the peritoneal cavity. The soluble 
IGM-isotope pair can also be injected directly into a tumor. Using nude mice, 
"we've put it in the middle of a cancer," he says, "and over the next day or 
two it diffused throughout the tumor." 

 The IGM therapy is slated to be tested on people later this year, initially in 
patients with breast, colon, ovarian, or head and neck cancers. In a year or 
two, Scheinberg hopes to begin human trials with antibody-directed 
alpha-emitting isotopes targeted to tiny metastases from breast, prostate, or 
other solid cancers. 

 Antibodies aren't necessary for the beta therapy to relieve suffering in 
patients with tumors growing in bone. Radiologist Edward Silberstein of the 
University of Cincinnati Medical Center has been investigating a host of 
radionuclides with a natural affinity for bone, including samarium-153, 
strontium-89, and rhenium-186. Yttrium-90 and others are being tested in 
Europe. 

 His studies on about 150 patients indicate that each of the isotopes he's 
tried, "though not a cure," appears "quite effective" - reducing up to 80 
percent of pain. 

"We sometimes reduce the pain before the tumor [shrinks]," so some of the 
radiation's palliative effects must come from destroying white blood cells or 
other biological agents responsible for causing or signaling pain, he says.

 Compared to cancers, normal tissues tend to be more sensitive to radiation and 
chemotherapy. Thus, Vriesendorp notes, oncologists have adopted a "no pain, no 
gain" philosophy. Internally targeted radiation promises a new alternative, he 
says-"therapies that don't have to be given at such an industrial strength that 
they bring the patients to the intensive care unit and close to death." 

 Indeed, Spenceley argues, "if you could learn you had cancer - as horrible as 
that is - and know that this treatment option was available, then the diagnosis 
would not be as ugly as it is today." 


