Science News Online (7/26/97): Internet congestion stirs up data storms

 July 26, 1997 

 Internet congestion stirs up data storms

by I. Peterson

 The worldwide network of computer networks known as the Internet handles an 
enormous amount of traffic every day. At any given moment, hundreds of 
thousands of users are sending messages or browsing the 80 million or more 
pages of the World Wide Web. Congestion has become such a problem (SN: 3/23/96, 
p. 181) that some sites provide daily Internet "weather reports," detailing 
average delays in reaching sites at different times in various parts of the 
world. 

 Groups monitoring Internet traffic have observed spikes of extremely high 
activity-or data storms-that appear quickly, then subside. A congestion spike 
may result from a specific event, such as the recent landing of a spacecraft on 
Mars (SN: 7/12/97, p. 20), or from network failures, as happened last week. At 
other times, however, a spike appears to have no discernible cause.

 Researchers now suggest that intermittent congestion spikes punctuating 
routine traffic are inevitable because the Internet is essentially a public 
resource whose users are generally not charged fees according to the amount of 
data exchanged. "We can connect human behavior at an individual level with the 
global behavior of the Internet," says physicist Bernardo A. Huberman of the 
Xerox Palo Alto (Calif.) Research Center.

 Huberman and his colleague Rajan M. Lukose describe their findings in the July 
25 Science.

 In the mathematical model developed by Huberman and Lukose, the usefulness of 
the Internet is proportional to the speed with which users can access 
information at remote sites. At the same time, because they usually do not pay 
costs linked to consumption, users don't differentiate between activities that 
require the transfer of large amounts of information, such as downloading 
graphic files and browsing Web sites, and those that require much less, such as 
electronic mail, or E-mail.

 Thinking their actions have little effect on the overall performance of the 
Internet, users get greedy, Huberman argues. When they expect or discover 
congestion and noticeable delays, however, they alter their behavior.

 Typically, users who experience congestion tend to believe that others do so 
as well and expect that if they try again later, the network is likely to be 
less congested. Those who encounter little delay tend to take advantage of the 
apparent lull in activity.

 Depending on the situation, Web surfers can switch very rapidly from no use or 
restrained use to heavy use and vice versa. Such switches reflect different 
needs and amounts of impatience in obtaining information, the researchers say.

 Their equations representing this system show that the collective effect of 
these individual decisions, made independently and in the context of 
uncertainty about the true state of the Internet at any given time, produces 
wide, unpredictable fluctuations in activity from moment to moment, highlighted 
by intermittent congestion spikes.

 To determine whether such spikes actually occur in Internet traffic, Huberman 
and Lukose recorded the round-trip times of standard messages, known as pings, 
sent between a computer at Stanford University and one in the United Kingdom. 
To focus on short-term fluctuations in activity, they sent nearly 10,000 
messages over the course of about 45 minutes. The data clearly indicated the 
presence of frequent congestion spikes, in the form of unusually long delays, 
occurring at random times and lasting a fraction of a second. The spikes are 
superimposed on a noisy background.

 The researchers obtained similar results in tests between computers in 
different parts of the United States and even in just the San Francisco Bay 
Area. "The bursts of congestion skew the [overall Internet] statistics," 
Huberman says, making the calculated average delay meaningless. "What's 
important is not the spikes but what happens in between," he adds. Most of the 
traffic goes through promptly.

 To avoid congestion, users ought to be charged in proportion to the amount of 
data transmitted, Huberman contends. Such charges would make people more 
directly aware of their role in overtaxing the capacity of the Internet.

"Both the present congestion of the Internet and technologies for improved 
performance in the future Internet are active subjects of study," says Mark A. 
Luker, who manages the network connections program at the National Science 
Foundation in Arlington, Va.

"I think pricing schemes are a wise and sound approach," says economist Jeffrey 
K. MacKie-Mason of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, one of the first 
researchers to investigate pricing mechanisms in response to Internet 
congestion. Various network pricing schemes are now being tested, he says, and 
the measurements and traffic analysis made by Huberman and Lukose are a useful 
contribution.


