Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/16/97

 August 16, 1997 

 United neighbors take a bite out of crime

by B. Bower

 Scientists often explore the roots of violent crime by tracking individual 
qualities linked to such behavior. Kids, especially black males, who grow up in 
poor families headed by a single parent garner close scrutiny in this regard.

 A new investigation suggests that collective characteristics of certain 
neighborhoods help keep their crime rates down. Murders, physical assaults, and 
other violent acts occur less frequently in neighborhoods where residents know 
and trust one another, show a willingness to supervise children in public 
places, and take other steps to maintain social order, researchers report in 
the Aug. 15 Science.

 Neighborhoods that go begging for residents with a sense of unity and public 
duty incur the most numerous incidents of violent crime, regardless of the 
community's racial composition or average income, contends a research team 
headed by sociologist Robert J. Sampson of the University of Chicago. Sampson's 
group devised a measure of these neighborhood attributes, which they call 
collective efficacy.

"We're drawing attention to a collective influence on crime that makes common 
sense but is understudied and underappreciated," holds Felton Earls, a public 
health psychiatrist at Harvard University who participated in the new study. 
"If we can figure out how to strengthen collective efficacy, it may lead to 
substantial reductions in violent crime."

 The study drew on a 1995 survey of 8,782 adults, recruited at random from 343 
Chicago neighborhoods. Neighborhoods were defined on the basis of census 
tracts, local conventions, and geographic landmarks. About 8,000 people inhabit 
each one.

 Many of the neighborhoods contain large majorities of white, black, or Latino 
residents. A small proportion features a mix of races and ethnic groups. 
Volunteers reported on community efforts to maintain social control by noting 
the extent to which their neighbors could be counted on to intervene if 
children skipped school and loitered on a street corner, if youngsters showed 
disrespect to an adult, if a fight broke out in front of their house, and if a 
local fire station faced budget cuts.

 Participants estimated community cohesion and trust by indicating the extent 
to which neighbors were close-knit, helped others, inspired trust, worked to 
get along with others, and shared the same values.

 From these responses, the researchers calculated levels of collective efficacy 
in each neighborhood.

 After controlling for race, age, measurement errors, and homicide rates in 
prior years, researchers found that collective efficacy rose sharply in 
neighborhoods with the lowest crime rates (obtained from 1995 police data on 
homicides and volunteers' reports of violent victimization in their 
neighborhoods). Collective efficacy influenced violent crime within 
neighborhoods more strongly than did widespread poverty, large numbers of 
first-generation immigrants, or transient occupancy of residences. Considerable 
residential transience does tend to erode collective efficacy, however, the 
researchers note.

 An unpublished analysis of the data also indicates that property crimes 
decline in neighborhoods identified as high in collective efficacy, Earls adds.

 The researchers plan to track collective efficacy and other factors, such as 
school truancy, thought to be related to violent crime in the same Chicago 
neighborhoods over the next 8 years. Discussions with residents will also delve 
into their ideas about how to stimulate collective efficacy, Earls says. 
Although neighborhood efforts aimed at encouraging trust and social control may 
make streets and homes safer, other social factors -- poverty, unemployment, 
lack of affordable housing -- exert crucial influences on violence in local 
communities, the Harvard scientist remarks.

 Investigators have long held that efforts at social control within 
neighborhoods influence violent crime rates, comments sociologist Richard B. 
Felson of the State University of New York at Albany. The new report takes an 
unusual position by analyzing social control as part of a collective trait 
rather than as a collection of individual behaviors, Felson asserts.

"We hope other researchers will now examine collective efficacy in the 
neighborhoods of different cities," Earls says.


