Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/23/97

 August 23, 1997 

 Navy Recruits Report Abusive Legacy

by B. Bower

 About 5 years ago, a rash of sexual assaults on female recruits by U.S. Navy 
drill instructors led Navy officials to initiate a mandatory education program 
to deter such activity. Soon thereafter, many women complained to classroom 
instructors that the program stirred up disturbing reminders of childhood 
sexual abuse and later incidents of sexual assault.

 Concerned by those reports, Navy officials commissioned an unprecedented 
survey of prior physical and sexual abuse in their new male and female 
recruits. Initial results portray the Navy, and perhaps the other military 
services also, as saturated with people who have either endured or committed 
such acts.

 The findings suggest that physical and sexual violence will continue to occur 
at higher rates among Navy personnel than in the population at large, according 
to the team of researchers who presented the results at the annual meeting of 
the American Psychological Association in Chicago last week. "These are pretty 
powerful findings," says psychologist Stephen A. Thornton of the Bureau of 
Naval Personnel in Washington, D.C., who did not participate in the data 
analysis. "We need to ask whether we're attracting an unusually large number of 
abuse victims and perpetrators [to the Navy]."

 In 1994, researchers surveyed a total of 1,891 women and 1,885 men entering 
the Navy's Recruit Training Command in Orlando, Fla. Recruits, who averaged 20 
years of age, completed questionnaires on their parents' child-rearing styles, 
childhood sexual experiences, dealings with romantic partners, and experiences 
with sexual aggression.

 A second study in 1996 surveyed 1,522 female and 1,530 male recruits. Overall, 
the 1994 data indicate that 41 percent of the women and 39 percent of the men 
had sustained by age 18 at least one instance of slapping, punching, or other 
parental physical violence beyond spanking. Childhood sexual abuse was reported 
by about 28 percent of women and 8 percent of men.

 More than 40 percent of both sexes said that a romantic partner had physically 
attacked or harmed them, according to team member Jacquelyn W. White of the 
University of North Carolina at Greensboro. About half of the women and 
one-third of the men reported having acted violently toward an adult partner. 
Women may be more willing than men to admit to this behavior or may rank a 
larger class of behaviors as violent, White notes.

 Around 36 percent of the female recruits indicated that they had been raped 
after age 14, and another 9 percent reported attempted rapes. Most of these 
incidents involved physical threats or the use of force by perpetrators. More 
than half of the women reporting childhood sexual abuse cited a subsequent 
rape, compared to one in five of those reporting no early sexual abuse. The 
reasons for the "scary" inflation of rape rates among those who had suffered 
sexual abuse are unclear, remarks co-investigator Steven R. Gold of Northern 
Illinois University in DeKalb.

 Of male recruits, 11 percent acknowledged having committed a rape after age 
14, and nearly 4 percent more said they had attempted rape. Rape perpetrators 
often used physical threats or force and also tried to get victims drunk. 
Proportions of female rape victims and male rape perpetrators in the Navy 
recruits substantially exceed rates among college students, working women, and 
community samples in the United States and Canada, says team member Mary P. 
Koss of the University of Arizona Health Sciences Center in Tucson.

 Of further concern are reports of past alcohol abuse in two-thirds of the 
female and three-quarters of the male Navy recruits, remarks Lex L. Merrill of 
the Naval Research Center in San Diego, who helped to instigate the surveys. 
The 1996 survey yielded similar findings, adds John Briere of the University of 
Southern California in Los Angeles.

 The phenomenon of youth with troubled backgrounds enlisting in the military 
has long been known, remarks project coordinator Sandra G. Rosswork of the 
Bureau of Naval Personnel. The new surveys begin to illuminate those troubles, 
she says.

 Researchers plan to track the surveyed recruits throughout their Navy stints. 
The effectiveness of new sexual assault prevention programs for recruits will 
also be assessed.


