Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 8/23/97

 August 23, 1997 

 Mob Action

 Peer pressure in the bacterial world

 By EVELYN STRAUSS 

"Team player" is not a phrase that usually comes to mind when thinking about 
bacteria. Rather, these single-celled creatures seem to excel at independence. 
Each individual can survive in a changing and often harsh world, where the 
difference between life and death is one cell.

 These rugged individualists live a streamlined life, in which the drive to 
reproduce appears to rule. As soon as one cell divides into two, each strikes 
off on its own, foraging for food, seeking safety, and trying to become two 
once more.

 Bacteria often seem so single-minded and self-reliant, they hardly merit 
consideration as potential members of community organizations. Yet scientists 
have gradually realized that diverse bacteria form coalitions to accomplish 
feats that individuals cannot perform.

 Once considered an oddity, this organizational ability appears to be a common 
occurrence. Evolution seems to have distributed a standard kit of two genes to 
a variety of unrelated bacteria. Armed with these tools, the various species 
exploit a similar tactic for mobilizing mass production of useful molecules. 
Each member of an assembly is counted, and the bacteria wait until the crowd 
has gathered enough members -- a quorum -- to render success likely. Then each 
bacterium begins to work toward the common goal.

"This is a radical concept," says Kendall M. Gray of the University of South 
Florida in Tampa. "They're single-celled organisms, but they exhibit complex 
behavior. They're not only communicating, they're coordinating their behavior 
so that they behave in a uniform manner."

 Scientists first glimpsed this process, called quorum sensing, in the late 
1960s. J. Woodland Hastings, then at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, and his colleagues observed an odd characteristic of Vibrio 
fischeri, a luminescent bacterium that inhabits squid. While growing V. 
fischeri in the laboratory, the scientists noticed that although the number of 
cells increased during the first few hours, the sample remained dark. 
Luminescence shot up when the population reached a relatively high density and 
the microorganisms were about to run out of nutrients.

"One bacterium can devote all its energy to making light, but it's still 
essentially invisible," says Gray. "If it waits until there are a billion cells 
before it turns on the power, it has something useful."

 Similarly, many bacteria secrete enzymes that help them survive. Each 
bacterium transports a relatively small amount of an enzyme to the outside 
world. It can no more change the concentration of that enzyme in the 
environment than a person could dye the ocean red with a drop of food coloring. 
If there are many bacteria -- particularly in a confined area -- the enzyme 
would be available in a high enough concentration to do some good.

 During the past 30 years, scientists have figured out the fundamentals of 
quorum sensing, using V. fischeri as their primary subject. Each bacterium 
produces a small, diffusible molecule that passes freely out of and into cells, 
explains microbiologist E. Peter Greenberg of the University of Iowa in Iowa 
City, who has spearheaded this work.

 As the population of bacteria increases, so does the concentration of this 
signaling molecule. Once the concentration in a bacterial cell has reached a 
threshold, the signaling molecules can grab onto proteins called LuxR. This 
embrace enables LuxR to bind to specific stretches of DNA and turn on the 
adjacent genes. In V. fischeri, some of these genes provide blueprints for the 
molecular apparatus that produces light.

 In the early 1990s, scientists found that other bacteria possess communication 
systems similar to that of V. fischeri. In each species, the signaling 
molecules are constructed from a common module by an enzyme called an inducer 
protein. Inducer proteins customize this module by adding different chemical 
groups to it. The signaling molecules bind to a responsive protein, such as 
LuxR, and together they turn on a gene. Scientists have now identified genes 
for pairs of responsive-inducer proteins in over a dozen species of bacteria.

"It's a very general phenomenon, and it's likely to be a key to the life of 
microorganisms in many settings," says Barbara H. Iglewski of the University of 
Rochester (N.Y.) School of Medicine and Dentistry. "If the bacteria can't talk 
amongst themselves, they're not able to survive."

 The discovery of quorum sensing tuned biologists in to the world of bacterial 
communication. They have since found a variety of ways in which bacteria 
coordinate their activities.

 Most bacteria that use quorum sensing systems inhabit an animal or plant. The 
microorganisms benefit from the process, but the host organism may or may not. 
V. fischeri, for example, lives symbiotically in squid. It generates light that 
prevents the squid from casting a predator-alerting shadow while searching for 
food in the moonlight, and in return, the squid provides it with a home (SN: 
9/14/96, p. 167).

 Other bacteria produce molecules that damage their host. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa -- which causes lung disease in people with impaired immune systems 
or cystic fibrosis -- produces enzymes that degrade tissue and allow the 
bacterium to escape from the lungs into the bloodstream. The bacterium waits in 
the lungs until its population reaches a critical density before beginning to 
churn out these agents of destruction. Luciano Passador, also at Rochester, 
likens P. aeruginosa's strategy to that of an army that amasses its troops 
quietly and invades only when it can overpower its opponent.

"So many bacteria get into the bloodstream simultaneously that the immune 
system doesn't stand a chance of fighting them off," he says. Furthermore, if 
the bacteria produced molecules early in infection, they might stimulate the 
host to make antibodies that would inactivate the enzymes when the bacteria 
tried to use them later, Greenberg reasons.

 P. aeruginosa has many homes in addition to the human lung. It lives in the 
soil, water, "everywhere," says Passador. Presumably, it needs different 
proteins in different environments.

"A soil bacterium that also infects people wouldn't necessarily want to 
increase production of its tissue-degrading enzymes when it is reaching high 
population densities in dirt," he says.

 According to this theory, bacteria are doing more than just counting 
themselves. They sense particular chemical and physical cues that help them 
respond to different environments.

 For instance, outside the lung, P. aeruginosa can grow as a film on many 
surfaces, including implanted medical devices. These sources of infection are 
hard to eradicate because the films resist antibiotics and detergents that 
would kill individual bacteria. Greenberg and his collaborators have recently 
shown that P. aeruginosa strains with defective quorum sensing systems form 
abnormally thin films that succumb to detergents, he says.

 Scientists have found that particular compounds in the environment stimulate 
quorum sensing. Agrobacterium tumefaciens, an organism that causes tumors in 
plants, directs its host to make certain substances. In addition to providing 
nutrition for the bacterium, the host chemicals spur A. tumefaciens to produce 
a responsive protein. This, in turn, enables individual bacteria to detect the 
presence of their neighbors.

 Scientists say other bacteria probably use a similar scheme for figuring out 
where they are. This tactic ensures that they invest in the equipment with 
which to sense population density only under specific conditions.

 For the most part, scientists have focused on the detailed mechanics of quorum 
sensing. Only recently have they begun to move their studies from the 
laboratory into the field. Leland S. Pierson III of the University of Arizona 
in Tucson has developed a system for listening in on bacterial conversations in 
a natural setting -- the roots of a wheat plant.

 Pierson studies Pseudomonas aureofaciens, a bacterium that infects and 
benefits wheat plants. In large numbers, it makes an antibiotic that inhibits 
the growth of a fungus that causes take-all disease, which can ruin entire 
wheat harvests.

 Pierson engineered a strain of P. aureofaciens that was incapable of making 
its own signaling molecule but could respond to messages from other bacteria. 
He inserted into this strain a gene that makes an easily detectable protein 
rather than the usual machinery for antibiotic production. When the bacterium 
experiences conditions that would normally trigger antibiotic output, it 
manufactures this protein instead, thus alerting the researchers that it has 
received a signal.

 When Pierson added a strain that produces the signaling molecule to roots that 
had been infected with the strain that lacks the signal, production of the 
protein increased dramatically. These results indicate that distinct bacterial 
populations can talk in the "real world," he says.

 Now Pierson wants to find out whether bacteria of one species can hear 
unrelated organisms. Most bacteria in the water, soil, plants, and people live 
in neighborhoods composed of diverse members, raising the possibility that 
there are conversations between different species. If so, this might allow 
bacteria to find out who else is present and modify their behavior accordingly.

 An organism could eavesdrop on its neighbors in several ways. Signaling 
molecules from distinct species are not always unique, so a bacterium has an 
opportunity to sense the presence of strains that mimic its own dialect. 
Furthermore, while some responsive molecules are very picky, others are 
promiscuous. They can recognize a variety of signaling molecules, although they 
tend to function most effectively when supplied with the type made by their own 
inducer gene.

 Although scientists have not yet examined communication between species in the 
natural environment, they have gathered laboratory evidence suggesting that it 
occurs. Burkholderia cepacia is associated with fatal lung infections in people 
with cystic fibrosis. It infects human lungs -- but almost always after they've 
been colonized by P. aeruginosa.

 Researchers have found that B. cepacia apparently has a way of intercepting 
messages from P. aeruginosa. First, scientists grew P. aeruginosa in laboratory 
broth, then disposed of the bacteria. When the investigators added this broth 
to B. cepacia, the bacterium increased its manufacture of molecules thought to 
be necessary for it to survive and spread within a person.

 In a second experiment, the scientists added broth from a P. aeruginosa strain 
that makes only small amounts of its signaling molecule. This broth triggered a 
much weaker response by B. cepacia, indicating that B. cepacia is responding to 
P. aeruginosa signals, the researchers argue.

 The ability of different species to communicate with each other appears 
widespread. In 1979, Greenberg showed that 19 of 28 marine bacteria he tested 
produced factors that induced V. harveyi, a luminescent marine bacterium, to 
generate light. Last year, Pierson tested about 40 wheat root bacteria and 
found that approximately one-third sent a recognizable signal to P. 
aureofaciens.

 Bacterial messages may reach organisms more complex than bacteria. One of the 
P. aeruginosa signaling molecules suppresses key activities of the mammalian 
immune response, according to an unpublished report by David I. Pritchard and 
his colleagues at the University of Nottingham in England.

 Pierson wonders whether the conversations are always friendly, even among 
bacteria. In principle, these microorganisms could manipulate each other by 
interfering with one another's quorum sensing systems.

"What a great way to compete -- control the other organism's genes," he says. 
No one knows yet whether this happens in nature, but it is possible. In the 
laboratory, scientists have found ways to confuse bacteria. In V. fischeri, 
foreign signaling molecules can bind to LuxR and prevent it from functioning 
normally, even in the presence of its usual signaling molecule.

 Furthermore, scientists have found hints that a species of algae fouls up 
communication among the microbes. These algae, which are particularly 
successful at defending themselves against bacterial colonization, produce 
natural inhibitors of bacterial quorum sensing, reported Staffan Kjelleberg of 
the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, and his colleagues in 
the November 1996 Journal of Bacteriology.

 These findings reveal a possible chink in the bacterial armor. Scientists 
would like to crack the code, as these algae seem to have done, and use the 
information for therapeutic and agricultural purposes.

"Once we've figured out how to scramble messages, we'll know a lot more about 
how bacteria communicate," says Passador. "Then we should be able to infiltrate 
bacterial organizations and undermine their activities."


