Science News Online (8/16/97): Biological Pest Control Harms Natives

 August 16, 1997 

 Biological Pest Control Harms Natives

by C.Mlot

 In theory, biological pest control is a clean and green technology, friendly 
to the environment and to the farmer alike. In place of a manufactured 
pesticide, a natural enemy attacks the pest, usually by eating it. 

 In practice, that's often how biological control works. The right control 
organism with a selective appetite can generally disperse itself and suppress 
damaging populations of a weed or a crop-feeding insect, even on a large scale 
(SN: 7/26/97, p. 56).

 Yet ecologists have worried about what the numerous new control organisms may 
be doing to native plants and insects. Control organisms, which typically come 
from other parts of the world, have traditionally been screened primarily for 
their impact on agriculture. The landscape is littered with reminders -- from 
the gypsy moth to kudzu and purple loosestrife -- that organisms let loose in 
new environments can turn into menacing invaders.

 Now, Svata M. Louda of the University of Nebraska in Lincoln and her 
colleagues have documented what ecologists have been warning about. They found 
that a weevil imported to control exotic weeds has been attacking native plants 
-- to the point where extinction threatens.

 The possibility of such effects has been known, but Louda's work "is the most 
complete assessment of nontarget effects in biological control to date," says 
ecologist Peter B. McEvoy of Oregon State University in Corvallis. Her data 
fill a void, he adds, in a hotly debated issue.

 Louda reported the findings this week at the Ecological Society of America 
meeting in Albuquerque, N.M.

 She and her coworkers happened upon the weevil and its effects unexpectedly. 
As an ecologist, Louda studies the long-term dynamics of native plants and 
insects at two prairie reserves in the Nebraska sandhills.

 In 1993, the researchers were surprised to find a new insect they had not seen 
in their previous 9 years of monitoring the prairies. A handful of the insects 
turned up on native thistles, whose large seed heads are food for goldfinches 
and other creatures. One of the plants, the Platte thistle (Cirsium canescens), 
is unique to the sandhills.

 The insect did not disappear. "In 1994, we started getting 20 instead of 3. 
Then in 1995, we got hundreds of them," Louda recalls.

 Curious about the newcomer, they had the insect identified. It turned out to 
be the flowerhead weevil (Rhinocyllus conicus), a European species imported by 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture to control European weed thistles in pasture 
and rangelands. Louda says it was released in Nebraska in 1972. None of its 
target thistles grows on the prairie sites.

"In 1996, the numbers went up even more," says Louda. At that point, the 
researchers' curiosity turned to concern, and they reanalyzed their monitoring 
data. "We found exponential growth of this weevil on the Platte thistle at both 
sites."

 The weevil is not just an innocent bystander, says Louda. "There's a 
significant impact on seed production," a decrease of about 80 percent. In 
earlier work, Louda says, she has shown how such decreases have dire 
consequences for the thistle population.

"The thing that really hit me hard here was the magnitude of the effect," says 
Louda. Given its only habitat is the sandhills, the Platte thistle could be 
facing extinction, she says. A related plant in the Great Lakes region, 
pitcher's thistle (Cirsium pitcheri), is already on the federal endangered 
species list and could be at greater risk if the weevil expands its range. 
Louda has found that a native insect -- a pictured wing fly -- that feeds on 
thistle seeds has been affected as well. "Its population on the Platte thistle 
crashed at the same time that the weevils increased."

 Ray Carruthers, who oversees the Agricultural Research Service's biological 
control program in Beltsville, Md., says the agency does screen control 
organisms to avoid unwanted ecological effects. "There are always some side 
effects" of any form of pest control, he notes, but the benefits may be worth 
it.

 The weed thistles, says P. Charles Quimby Jr. of the USDA in Sidney, Mont., 
can overwhelm native species. "If you've ever seen a stand of musk thistle, you 
have no biodiversity there."

 Louda says such dense invasions are rare. Both she and McEvoy think the 
weevil, which was known to feed on a wide range of thistles, should not have 
been released in the first place and that there is much room for improving 
other biological control programs.

"Biocontrol can work," says Louda, "but we have to be more judicious about the 
selection of agents that are released."


