Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/23/97

 August 23, 1997 

 Brain doubles up on marijuanalike agents

by J. Travis

 As neuroscientists have slowly lifted the veils from the chemistry of the 
brain, they've realized that many powerful, and illegal, psychoactive drugs 
mimic natural compounds used by the nervous system.

 Take marijuana, whose primary active ingredient is 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, also known as THC. In 1992, researchers found 
that THC and anandamide, a naturally occurring brain chemical, bind to the same 
proteins on the surface of brain cells (SN: 2/6/93, p. 88).

 Investigators now report that the brain makes a second THC-like compound, 
called sn-2 arachidonylglycerol, or 2-AG, and it does so in much greater 
quantities than anandamide. Moreover, the scientists offer several pieces of 
evidence suggesting that 2-AG plays a role in memory, which may help explain 
the short-term memory loss often produced by smoking marijuana.

 The new study is not the first to bring 2-AG to neuroscientists' attention. In 
1995, a research group in Israel and another in Japan discovered that 2-AG 
binds to the same surface proteins -- the cannabinoid receptors -- on brain 
cells as anandamide does, but not as tightly.

 Yet doubts remained as to whether the brain uses 2-AG. While the Japanese 
group had offered some evidence that the brain employs 2-AG, the Israeli group 
found the compound in intestinal tissue, not in the nervous system.

 Danieli Piomelli of the Neurosciences Institute in San Diego recalls that he 
was very skeptical that 2-AG played any role in the brain. In what he expected 
would be a short task, he asked his research group to demonstrate that 2-AG is 
not present in the brains of rats.

 Instead, as the group reports in the Aug. 21 Nature, 2-AG turned out to be 170 
times more abundant than anandamide.

 The researchers believe that 2-AG can prove difficult to detect in the brain 
because the compound degrades rapidly after death. Piomelli's team avoided that 
problem by quick-freezing brain tissue within 10 seconds of a rat's death and 
then analyzing the tissue.

 Other investigators, including the leader of the Israeli group, have also 
established that the compound is made by the central nervous system. "It's in 
the brain in high amounts," says Raphael Mechoulam of the Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem.

 The existence of 2-AG may help account for some aspects of marijuana 
biochemistry that anandamide cannot explain. The smoking of marijuana can 
produce many effects, including pain relief, motor impairment, appetite 
stimulation, and loss of recent memories.

 Investigators have struggled to link anandamide to memory formation, notes 
Piomelli. In contrast to anandamide, 2-AG is made by the hippocampus, a brain 
region crucial to memory. The investigators also observed in test-tube 
experiments that 2-AG inhibits a phenomenon called long-term potentiation, a 
strengthening of links between brain cells that may help memories form.

 While this finding may suggest at first glance that 2-AG impairs memory 
formation, Piomelli notes that people do not normally store every fact related 
to a particular memory. The brain forgets all aspects of a memory except those 
it somehow deems crucial, he says. The chemical 2-AG may play a role in that 
deliberate forgetting, speculates Piomelli.

 Through studying 2-AG and anandamide, scientists hope to develop drugs that 
ease pain or muster other therapeutic, marijuanalike actions without the 
accompanying memory loss or motor impairment. "Our goal is understanding the 
underlying biology in order to make more selective drugs," says Piomelli.

 The influence of 2-AG may go beyond the brain. In addition to intestinal 
tissue, "we have found it in the spleen and pancreas," says Mechoulam, noting 
that cells in all three sites also have cannabinoid receptors.


