Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 7/5/97 July 5, 1997

 Community study traces bulimia's origins

by B. Bower Young women afflicted with bulimia nervosa careen between feast and 
famine. Frantic binges of food consumption alternate with fasting, self-induced 
vomiting, and other efforts to shed weight.

 Many potential culprits have been proposed to explain why 1 to 3 percent of 
females in many Western nations develop bulimia as teenagers or young adults. 
But a new study, which takes a rare look at this eating disorder among women 
not being treated by mental health clinicians, has considerably narrowed down 
the factors implicated in bulimia's emergence.

 Current bulimia sufferers often viewed themselves with extreme disdain during 
childhood, had encountered certain types of conflict with their parents, and 
had grappled with obesity early in life, assert psychiatrist Christopher G. 
Fairburn of the University of Oxford in England and his coworkers. Bouts of 
depression or other psychiatric conditions often preceded their bulimia, the 
researchers add.

"This is a terribly important study," says psychologist Kelly D. Brownell of 
Yale University. "It's the best analysis by far of risk factors for bulimia."

 Prior research on eating disorders had mainly focused on anorexia nervosa, 
which is marked by self-starvation and occurs much less often than bulimia.

 Fairburn's group interviewed women and girls, ages 16 to 35, selected from the 
patient lists of general practitioners in urban and rural parts of southern 
England. The investigators compared 102 participants who were diagnosed with 
bulimia with two other groups: 102 individuals displaying some other 
psychiatric disorder (mostly depression or severe anxiety) and 204 volunteers 
who exhibited no psychiatric problems and cited no past mental disorders.

 Many traits distinguished the bulimia group from psychologically healthy 
controls, the scientists report in the June Archives of General Psychiatry. 
These included childhood physical and sexual abuse, severe physical health 
problems, perfectionism, and parents who had suffered from depression.

 However, only a few characteristics separated bulimia from other psychiatric 
conditions. These consisted of several risk factors for obesity and dieting -- 
childhood or parental obesity, current dieting by other family members, and 
critical comments from family members about shape, weight, or eating habits.

 Bulimia also developed more frequently in women who had begun to menstruate by 
age 12 than in those who began later. Early changes in body shape associated 
with puberty may represent another spur to dieting, Fairburn's team suggests.

 Bulimic women said that their parents maintained minimal contact with them, 
expressed high expectations for their daughters' achievement, and had often 
abused alcohol. Self-esteem reached particularly low levels in the bulimia 
group.

 Moreover, about two-thirds of those diagnosed with bulimia had first suffered 
from another psychiatric disorder.

"Our findings suggest that bulimia nervosa is most likely to develop in dieters 
who are at risk of obesity and psychiatric disorder in general," the 
investigators conclude.

 The new study provides a "preliminary glimpse" at the forces underlying 
bulimia, writes Katherine A. Halmi, a psychiatrist at Cornell University 
Medical College in White Plains, N.Y., in an accompanying comment.

 Limitations of the British project, according to Halmi, include its reliance 
on women's self-reports of prior behavior, rather than data gathered from 
childhood into young adulthood, and its failure to interview family members.

 A long-term study of bulimia's onset is sorely needed but unlikely to be 
conducted anytime soon because of its cost, Halmi notes.

 For now, school programs aimed at quelling widespread dieting among girls may 
need to focus on those exhibiting high risks for obesity and psychiatric 
disorders in general, Fairburn and his coworkers propose.


