Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 8/16/97

 August 16, 1997 

 A Green Clean

 New detergents dissolve obstacles to pollutionfree solvents

 By CORINNA WU 

 Water, despite its benign reputation, can wreak havoc on clothing -- as anyone 
who has ever ignored a "dry clean only" label can attest. Consequently, piles 
of clothing get lugged to the local dry cleaner, for fear of turning another 
silk dress into a rag or shrinking still more wool sweaters into garments for 
the family dog.

 Dry cleaning involves no water. Instead, clothes are treated for stains, then 
tumbled in perchloroethylene, a volatile, nonflammable organic liquid. Concerns 
that perchloroethylene -- or perc, as it's commonly known -- may be a human 
health hazard have inspired tighter controls on its use. Perc is regulated as 
an air pollutant under the Clean Air Act and constitutes an environmental 
contaminant when found in soil and water. Dry cleaners and other businesses 
that use perc must dispose of it as hazardous waste.

 Stricter regulation is pushing researchers to find alternatives to perc and 
other polluting solvents (SN: 6/21/97, p. 391). Recently, a method designed to 
be less harmful to the environment has been developed. It uses detergents, 
steam, and precisely controlled temperatures.

 Some scientists, though, are taking a different approach. They are dry 
cleaning with carbon dioxide, the compound that forms dry ice. No one disputes 
its safety. Carbon dioxide puts the fizz in soda pop, is exhaled in our breath, 
and is present as a small component of the air around us.

 Dry cleaning technology using liquid carbon dioxide made its debut at a recent 
cleaners' trade show in Las Vegas. Soon, carbon dioxide may prove useful not 
only as a dry cleaning agent but also as a degreaser for industrial machinery 
and as an alternative solvent in a variety of manufacturing processes.

 About 80 percent of the dry cleaners in the United States use perc, mostly 
because it works so well. In the 1960s, it replaced petroleum-derived compounds 
as the cleaning agent of choice. It doesn't burn, and it dissipates from 
clothes easily.

 Perc and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) have related industrial uses. They are 
used to clean metal parts during manufacturing and as solvents for synthesizing 
chemicals and polymers, an industry that is "ten times bigger than dry 
cleaning," says Joseph M. DeSimone of the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill. Thirty billion pounds of these organic solvents are used each year 
worldwide.

 Despite its utility, perc has drawbacks. Studies have linked prolonged perc 
exposure to liver and kidney damage and cancer. Short-term contact can cause 
dizziness, headaches, nausea, and irritation of the skin, eyes, nose, and 
throat.

 A person bringing home a load of freshly cleaned clothes isn't exposed to much 
perc, as long as the clothes have been properly aired. Concern is greater, 
however, for workers in dry cleaners or factories and even for those who live 
in urban areas close to dry cleaners. Perc is coming under increasingly strict 
regulation, says DeSimone, and many states are considering outright bans. 
"There's lots of writing on the wall." Some companies have already redesigned 
dry cleaning machines to improve their ability to recapture perc and prevent 
its release into the environment.

 The rapid phasing out of CFCs, which chemically degrade Earth's protective 
ozone layer, prompted companies to get a head start on their search for 
alternatives to perc. "Most companies are interested in being good stewards of 
the environment," says Paul T. Anastas of the Environmental Protection Agency's 
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics. Moreover, companies generally find 
that developing alternatives is economically beneficial in the long run, he 
notes.

 Many signs point to carbon dioxide as a practical alternative to current 
solvents. One advantage is that it can be used as a supercritical fluid, a 
phase that occupies a no-man's-land between liquids and gases. When vapors are 
compressed, they tend to condense into liquid. If a vapor is heated above a 
critical temperature, however, it does not condense, no matter how much it's 
compressed. Carbon dioxide has a low critical temperature, 31@C, that makes its 
supercritical fluid easy to work with. Moreover, the fluid's properties can be 
tuned by adjusting temperature and pressure.

 When choosing a solvent for a specific application, among the most important 
characteristics to consider are density and viscosity, says William A. Peters, 
associate director for fuels and environmental research at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology's Energy Laboratory. "In supercritical carbon dioxide, 
those properties can be varied greatly by changing temperature and pressure. 
They give you handles you can turn readily, especially on a commercial scale." 
Carbon dioxide's safety makes it a choice solvent for the food industry, which 
already uses it on a large scale, notably for decaffeinating coffee. As coffee 
beans move through huge vats filled with supercritical carbon dioxide and a 
little water, the caffeine leaches out for later extraction and recovery. 
Carbon dioxide can also remove cholesterol and fat from milk and meat (SN: 
7/23/88, p. 63; 4/15/89, p. 238).

 For most industrial applications, however, operating at lower temperatures and 
pressures reduces energy costs, says DeSimone, making liquid carbon dioxide a 
better option.

 Carbon dioxide is cheap and abundant. "There's no shortage of carbon dioxide 
in the world," says Anastas. Moreover, it can be collected from the waste 
generated by industrial processes such as ammonia manufacture, DeSimone says. 
No special disposal procedures are necessary because carbon dioxide can be 
easily recaptured and reused. In industry, fugitive emissions from leaky valves 
and gaskets are often difficult to eliminate, but with carbon dioxide, "there 
are fewer adverse consequences if recovery is less than perfect," says Peters.

 Despite its rosy profile, carbon dioxide suffers from some drawbacks that have 
hampered its usefulness for cleaning. It doesn't dissolve most polymers, oils, 
waxes, proteins, and salts. Of course, water doesn't clean everything either, 
and it needs help from soaps or detergents. The trick, then, is to find 
detergents that enhance carbon dioxide's ability to dissolve a laundry list of 
other substances.

 DeSimone had been looking at ways of synthesizing polymers in carbon dioxide 
when he realized that the same techniques could be applied to cleaning. In 
1990, he began investigating polymers that could be used as detergents.

 Last year, he and his colleagues discovered a class of polymers that work as a 
detergent. For his efforts, DeSimone was awarded one of the 1997 Presidential 
Green Chemistry Awards, which recognize new technologies that help to reduce 
pollution (SN: 7/13/96, p. 22).

 Traditional detergents consist of long molecules that stick to dirt and grease 
on one end and water on the other. They cluster around dirt particles, forming 
little spheres that water can escort away. The challenge for DeSimone was to 
find molecules that would form these spheres, called micelles, in carbon 
dioxide instead of water.

 His team met that challenge by synthesizing copolymers, molecules that consist 
of two polymers joined together. One end needed to be soluble in carbon 
dioxide, the researchers had reasoned, while the other end should attract oils 
and waxes. Finding polymers that dissolve in carbon dioxide was the hard part, 
DeSimone notes, because most polymers shun these molecules.

 Fluorinated acrylate polymers are an exception, dissolving well in carbon 
dioxide. Taking this cue, DeSimone and his colleagues engineered detergent 
molecules by joining an acrylate with polystyrene, a polymer that binds to oils.

 Using a technique called small-angle neutron scattering, the researchers could 
see that the molecules effectively huddle together to form micelles. In these 
micelles, the polystyrene segments point toward the core -- away from the 
carbon dioxide -- while the acrylate segments hold the spheres suspended in the 
carbon dioxide.

 They tested the would-be detergent further to see if it could suspend dirt 
particles in supercritical carbon dioxide. In their experiment, short 
polystyrene molecules served as the dirt.

 Sure enough, the newly synthesized detergents surrounded them with micelles. 
The detergent could take up as much as 20 percent of its own weight in 
polystyrene. DeSimone and his colleagues described the results in the Dec. 20, 
1996 Science.

 MiCELL Technologies in Raleigh, N.C., is marketing the new detergents. Another 
company, the American Dryer Corp. in Fall River, Mass., has made a 100-gallon 
dry cleaning machine to use the detergents in liquid carbon dioxide. The 
machine, which "looks like a bank vault," DeSimone says, cleans about 50 to 70 
pounds of clothes at a time. At about 900 pounds per square inch of pressure, 
the clothes tumble about with the carbon dioxide and about 5 ounces of 
detergent.

 After the wash and rinse cycles, all the carbon dioxide is distilled and 
re-collected. The process leaves the dirt and grime in a container to be 
disposed of without any special precautions.

 Since the process is carried out at room temperature, there's no need to 
identify stains before cleaning. Because conventional dry cleaning operates at 
high temperatures, stains must be pretreated so that the heat won't set them 
permanently. The lower operating temperature also saves energy.

 Leather and suede, which are not amenable to standard dry cleaning, can be 
cleaned with the new method because liquid carbon dioxide is a milder solvent 
than perc.

 Another research group, at Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory, has also 
developed a dry cleaning machine based on liquid carbon dioxide. "Preliminary 
experiments showed that supercritical carbon dioxide was too good a solvent," 
says Craig M.V. Taylor. He and his colleagues discovered that it dissolves 
fabric dyes and finishing agents and changes the structure of clothing fibers. 
Liquid carbon dioxide tends to stay on the surface of the fibers, he says, 
instead of diffusing in, as the supercritical version does.

 What detergents offer, says DeSimone, is "the opportunity to enhance the 
dissolving power, so what could only be done in supercritical carbon dioxide 
can be done by dropping the temperature and pressure." The milder conditions 
avert the problem of dissolving dyes and finishes that should stay in the 
fabric.

 The actual detergents used in the dry cleaning machine are made by joining 
silicone polymers, which can dissolve in carbon dioxide, and segments that 
attract either oils or water-soluble dirt.

 The Los Alamos group, in conjunction with Hughes Aircraft Co. in El Segundo, 
Calif., is also investigating detergents. The team combines several substances 
to attack the dirt on clothes: proteases to break down proteins, agents to 
mediate the amount of humidity, and soap to move dirt away from the fabric.

 Not much detergent is needed to do the job. In powdered products for home 
washing machines, Taylor says, "70 to 80 percent of it is just filler" because 
consumers expect to need a cup or so of detergent. Dry cleaners, on the other 
hand, already subscribe to a less-is-more philosophy.

 The power of carbon dioxide is coming to bear on other applications, such as 
the synthesis of polymers. Many polymer reactions require solvents that don't 
contain hydrogen because it interrupts the synthesis, leaving short polymer 
fragments of low molecular weight. "If you need an organic solvent without 
hydrogen, what does that leave you with?" DeSimone asks. CFCs, one of the few 
chemical alternatives, are now banned.

 Furthermore, some applications naturally call for benign solvents. For 
example, organic solvents are used to make contact lenses, Taylor says, but if 
any solvent remains in the material, it could leach out and irritate the eye. 
For these reasons, carbon dioxide seems like an attractive alternative to 
traditional solvents. Numerous researchers are examining the basic behavior of 
chemical reactions in carbon dioxide. They hope that carbon dioxide can 
eventually replace other organic solvents on a large scale in the chemical 
manufacturing industry, Peters says.

 Taylor sees the development of dry cleaning technology as research for "the 
mom and pop shops" that, unlike large companies, don't have the wherewithal to 
come up with replacement solvents.

 The infrastructure for delivering carbon dioxide is already in place. Many 
restaurants have large storage reservoirs of carbon dioxide for carbonated 
beverages; these units are filled from tanks on delivery trucks. Both DeSimone 
and Taylor envision that such deliveries could easily be made to dry cleaners, 
too.

 With that in mind, what's left is to see if the new, green dry cleaning 
machines catch on -- or fizzle out.


