Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/9/97

 August 9, 1997 

 PCBs linked to rise in lymph cancers

by J. Raloff

 The incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas -- a family of cancers that attack 
the body's infection-fighting lymph system -- has mushroomed since World War 
II. Because the dramatic rise has occurred globally, even in areas with 
traditionally very low rates of the disease, epidemiologists have been 
examining whether exposure to one or more environmental agents might be 
propelling the cancer's climb.

 A new study has found provocative evidence that polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs) -- banned but still ubiquitous oils used to insulate electric 
transformers and other equipment beginning in the late 1930s -- may be one such 
agent.

 Several studies of agricultural workers had suggested a link between DDT and 
lymphomas, so Nathaniel Rothman of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, 
Md., and his coworkers decided to investigate this possibility. They tapped 
into the Campaign Against Cancer and Stroke study, sponsored by Johns Hopkins 
University in Baltimore, Md., which had enrolled nearly 26,000 healthy 
participants in 1974.

 Over the years, 74 of the volunteers had developed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 
Rothman's team identified two healthy study participants matching the age and 
sex of each cancer patient and then measured DDT and other organochlorines in 
samples of blood serum that had been collected from these individuals some 20 
years earlier.

 To our surprise, Rothman says, "we saw no DDT link." Instead, they observed an 
unexpected correlation between PCBs and the disease. In the July 26 Lancet, his 
team reports that people with PCB concentrations of more than 1,050 parts per 
billion (ppb) in their blood's fat globules have a 4.5 times greater risk of 
this cancer than people with 250 to 650 ppb.

"The size of this effect is bigger than what we see in a lot of epidemiology 
studies," Rothman says, but it needs to be confirmed -- with more patients. 
Oncologist Lennart Hardell of the Orebro (Sweden) Medical Center Hospital 
offers support for the link, though in a far smaller population. Last year, his 
team reported data from 28 people with the lymphoma and 17 healthy individuals. 
Compared to the healthy people, the cancer patients tended to have higher PCB 
concentrations in body fat but equivalent amounts of DDT.

 Does such a link make sense biologically? "I think most people would say yes," 
argues NCI epidemiologist Patricia Hartge. Several studies have indicated that 
PCBs can suppress the immune system, she notes. Moreover, a number of small 
studies by Hardell and others have turned up hints that other organochlorines 
might pose a non-Hodgkin's risk.

 Finally, she observes that although AIDS, organ transplantation, and certain 
rare genetic disorders appear to predispose individuals to developing 
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, these risk factors "couldn't begin to explain the 
level of increased incidence that has occurred throughout the world." For 
instance, in white U.S. men, the annual rate rose from 6.9 cases per 100,000 
before 1950 to 17 per 100,000 by 1988.

 The new U.S. study also hints that active infection with the Epstein-Barr 
virus greatly exacerbates the cancer risk of PCBs. "It's a hypothesis I 
suggested several years ago," Hardell notes, and one he plans to probe further 
in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients.

 Some researchers worry that the PCB link indicates the cancer may also be 
associated with dioxins -- ubiquitous chemicals structurally similar to PCBs. 
Some PCBs resemble dioxins in their effects on health, but Rothman's new study 
did not measure conventional dioxins, notes Linda S. Birnbaum of the 
Environmental Protection Agency in Research Triangle Park, N.C. So it's unclear 
whether the link between PCBs and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma traces to activation 
of the cell receptor where dioxins attach. To understand how PCBs work, she 
notes, "you'd like to be able to rule that out."


