Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/2/97

 August 2, 1997 

 Fetal cells may trigger autoimmune disease

by K. Fackelmann

 Researchers got a jolt some years ago when they tested the blood of a young 
female laboratory technician. A powerful molecular technique detected the 
presence of genetic material from the Y, or male, chromosome. The researchers 
feared something had gone wrong with the test.

 Once they realized the technician was 6 weeks pregnant, however, that solved 
the mystery, recalls Diana W. Bianchi, a pediatric geneticist at the New 
England Medical Center in Boston. The test had homed in on male DNA in fetal 
cells that were circulating in the woman's bloodstream.

 That 1992 observation suggested that researchers could find a few fetal cells 
very early in a pregnancy. Then, in 1996, Bianchi's team made a dramatic 
discovery. Fetal cells can linger in the maternal bloodstream, sometimes for 
decades after childbirth (SN: 2/10/96, p. 85).

 Now, Bianchi has hints that this biological legacy may be linked to an 
autoimmune disorder in the mother.

 After the 1996 report, the team wondered whether lingering fetal cells in the 
mother's bloodstream might, in some cases, incite her immune cells to attack 
her own tissue. The team focused on scleroderma, a sometimes deadly autoimmune 
disorder in which degeneration of skin, lungs, and internal organs occurs. 
Middle-aged women suffer most frequently from this disease.

 The team found male DNA circulating in the bloodstream of women with 
scleroderma who had given birth decades ago to at least one son. When the 
researchers looked at healthy women who had teenage or adult sons, however, 
they at first found no sign of fetal cells. Subsequent, more sensitive tests 
revealed small numbers of fetal cells in some of these women. Healthy women 
either don't have such cells or have few of them, Bianchi concludes.

 She reported the findings on July 21 at Press Week 1997, a meeting sponsored 
by the Jackson Laboratory and Johns Hopkins University and held in Bar Harbor, 
Maine.

 Male fetal cells aren't likely to be the only culprits in such diseases. The 
research team looked for male DNA because of the ease of finding the Y 
chromosome in a woman's blood, Bianchi says, but female fetal cells may also 
underlie autoimmune attacks.

 During the trauma of labor and delivery, hundreds of thousands of fetal cells 
surge into the mother's bloodstream, Bianchi says. The researchers believe that 
the immune system usually clears most of those cells from the mother's body. In 
some cases, however, large numbers of fetal cells persist. The mother's immune 
system then may recognize the cells as foreign and begin a blitz that 
eventually runs amok and leads to scleroderma or another autoimmune disorder, 
Bianchi speculates.

 The team now plans to turn its attention to other autoimmune disorders, such 
as Sjogren's syndrome. "There are a whole host of diseases that are much more 
common in women," Bianchi says. "Most of those diseases have been explained on 
the basis of hormonal differences." The new work hints at another mechanism, 
however, one that involves the lasting legacy of pregnancy, she says.

 Although the unpublished study demonstrates the existence of fetal cells in 
the blood of women with scleroderma, it doesn't prove that such cells directly 
lead to disease in the mother. Additional research must be done to discover 
whether the fetal cells or other factors actually kick off the damaging 
autoimmune reaction, comments David L. Valle of the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.

 The study raises some tantalizing possibilities for the treatment of 
autoimmune disorders in women, Valle says. If additional work confirms the 
notion that fetal cells trigger disease, then physicians might work to develop 
a treatment that would facilitate clearance of fetal cells at the time of 
delivery, he says. Such an approach might prevent the development of an 
autoimmune disorder decades later.


