Science News Online (8/30/97): Freeze! Insect proteins halt ice growth

 August 23, 1997 

 Freeze! Insect proteins halt ice growth

by C. Wu

 In cold climates, cars often need an infusion of antifreeze to survive the 
winter. Many fish, insects, and plants are no different, but they produce their 
own protection -- proteins that prevent their insides from turning to ice. 

 Scientists have studied fish antifreeze since the 1960s, but now researchers 
from Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, have isolated and analyzed 
antifreeze proteins from insects. Virginia K. Walker, Peter L. Davies, and 
their colleagues collected the proteins from the spruce budworm, which is a 
moth larva, and from the common mealworm, a pest that feeds on grain.

 The budworm protein is up to 30 times more potent than fish proteins, and the 
mealworm protein is up to 100 times stronger, the group reports in the 
September Nature Biotechnology and the Aug. 21 Nature, respectively.

"These are some of the most active antifreezes we have encountered so far," 
says Choy L. Hew, a biochemist at the University of Toronto who studies fish 
antifreeze proteins. Collecting enough protein from larvae was quite a feat, he 
adds.

 If put in frozen foods, fish antifreeze proteins could help prevent ice from 
recrystallizing, as it does, for example, in ice cream left in the freezer too 
long. Scientists are also exploring the use of antifreeze proteins in 
preserving organs and tissues for transplants (SN: 3/21/92, p. 189). The 
greater potency of the insect proteins suggests that they could be used in 
lower concentrations, says Laurie A. Graham, a coauthor of the Nature study. 
Unlike conventional antifreezes, such as the ethylene glycol commonly used in 
cars, the proteins create a phenomenon called thermal hysteresis: They lower 
the freezing point of water below 0@C without changing the temperature at which 
ice melts as it is heated. The insect proteins lower the freezing point a 
maximum of 5.5@C.

 No one knows exactly how the insect antifreeze proteins work, but they seem to 
bind to the surface of tiny ice crystals and inhibit their growth, Graham says 
(SN: 11/26/86, p. 330). The proteins contain many repeated sequences of the 
amino acids serine, threonine, glycine, and cysteine. The arrangement of these 
hydrophilic, or water-loving, amino acids may match well the arrangement of 
water molecules in ice.

 Determining the three-dimensional structure of the proteins will provide more 
clues to how they work, says Hew. "We have solved the structure for fish 
antifreeze, so we know how it binds to ice, but it doesn't mean that the insect 
ones will bind in the same manner."

 The Queen's University group does know that the insect proteins affect the 
growth of ice crystals differently than fish proteins do, says Daniel Doucet, a 
coauthor of the Nature Biotechnology study. Ice crystals grown in the presence 
of the fish protein form pointy spicules with sharp edges. Grown with the 
budworm protein, however, the ice crystals look like smooth, hexagonal disks, 
which would cause less damage to cells preserved with antifreeze, he suggests.


