Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/30/97

 August 23, 1997 

 Ancient Animal Sheds False Identity

by R. Monastersky 

 Call it a case of fossil duplicity. For decades, a group of ancient oval 
impressions has bamboozled paleontologists by masquerading as the squashed 
remains of jellyfish. Now, a treasure trove of finds in northern Russia has 
exposed the true identity of the fossil as one of the earliest complex animals 
to appear on the planet, report two scientists.

 The fossil, with the lyrical name of Kimberella, is preserved in 
550-million-year-old rocks from the late Precambrian era, which immediately 
preceded the burst of animal evolution known as the Cambrian explosion. When 
paleontologists first found Precambrian fossils at a site called Ediacara in 
Australia in the 1940s and 1950s, they interpreted Kimberella and many others 
as jellyfish, one of the simplest types of animals.

 The new vision of Kimberella arises from more than 35 specimens recently 
unearthed along the White Sea in Russia and described by Mikhail A. Fedonkin of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow and Benjamin M. Waggoner of the 
University of Central Arkansas in Conway. In the Aug. 28 Nature, the authors 
provide evidence that Kimberella had a strong, limpetlike shell, crept along 
the seafloor, and resembled a mollusk -- the phylum that includes snails, 
clams, and squids. Kimberella lacks key characteristics, such as a radula, or 
raspy, tonguelike organ, that would classify it as a true mollusk. Yet the 
fossils, which range from 3 to 105 millimeters in length, may offer information 
about how complex invertebrates arose.

"This may be our first good look at what was going on before the Cambrian 
explosion, because the mollusks in the Cambrian didn't come out of nowhere. 
Kimberella may be a look at what those ancestors were like," says Waggoner. The 
fossils of the late Precambrian represent the first large organisms to appear 
after nearly 3 billion years of microscopic life. Despite the importance of 
these fossils, paleontologists have made little headway in understanding how 
they relate to later creatures. Researchers today have abandoned most of the 
original interpretations, leaving little agreement over what these fossils 
were. In the 1980s, Adolf Seilacher of Tubingen University in Germany suggested 
they were not animals, but an extinct kingdom of organisms built like 
fluid-filled air mattresses. Others identified them as lichens (SN: 7/8/95, p. 
28).

"It's hard to use these fossils in evolutionary studies if you can't figure out 
what the darn things were. Kimberella is pretty unambiguously an animal and a 
fairly complex one -- more complex than a jellyfish or a flatworm," says 
Waggoner.

 Douglas Erwin, a paleontologist at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, 
D.C., agrees with the new interpretation of Kimberella as something that crept 
along the seafloor, using a muscular foot like that on the underside of snails. 
"To me, it's the first animal that you can convincingly demonstrate is more 
complicated than a flatworm," he says.

 The distinction is important, he explains, because flatworms and the simpler 
jellyfish lack a coelom -- an internal body cavity that houses organs and makes 
possible a complex repertoire of movement. Kimberella is the first known animal 
that paleontologists can be sure had a coelom, he says.

 Guy M. Narbonne of Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, welcomes the 
reinterpretation of Kimberella. While studying Precambrian sediments in 
northwest Canada in the 1980s, Narbonne found tracks in the ancient seafloor 
that he attributed to mollusks. Australian researchers now have Precambrian 
seafloor tracks with radula-style scratches. Both suggest that large mollusks 
lived before the Cambrian.


