Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 8/2/97

 August 2, 1997 

 Whistling a superfluid quantum melody

by I. Peterson

 For physicists probing the curious quantum behavior of superfluids, "Whistle 
While You Work" is a highly appropriate theme song.

 By detecting a high-pitched whistle, researchers have obtained the first clear 
indication that helium-3 atoms can shuttle back and forth between two 
containers separated by a thin membrane perforated with tiny holes. Instead of 
flowing from one container to the other in response to a slight difference in 
pressure, the helium-3 superfluid oscillates at a characteristic frequency.

"The discovery is fundamental to our understanding of superfluids and, by 
analogy, of the phenomena we observe in superconductors," says physicist 
Richard E. Packard of the University of California, Berkeley. Packard, James C. 
Davis, and their coworkers report their findings in the July 31 Nature. This 
represents "a beautiful, direct demonstration of quantum mechanics in action on 
the macroscopic scale," says Peter McClintock of Lancaster University in 
England.

 Physicists first observed such oscillations in an electric current passing 
between two superconductors separated by an extremely thin layer of 
electrically insulating material. Named the Josephson effect for Brian D. 
Josephson of the University of Cambridge in England, this phenomenon serves as 
the basis of various electric devices, including the world's most sensitive 
detectors of magnetic fields.

 More than 30 years ago, theorists predicted that analogous oscillations would 
occur when a minuscule aperture connects two reservoirs of the same superfluid 
at different pressures. A superfluid is a state of matter in which all atoms 
belong to the same quantum state and move in a coordinated manner, allowing the 
liquid to flow without resistance.

 Researchers expended considerable effort looking for the predicted effect. 
Earlier experiments by Packard's team and by Oliver Avenel of the Centre 
d'Etudes de Saclay in Gif-sur-Yvette, France, and his collaborators failed to 
furnish unambiguous evidence of oscillations.

 The researchers made a fortuitous decision to connect headphones directly to 
the detector to listen for the oscillations rather than attempt to view the 
signal on an instrument. When they did the experiment, they could hear, above 
the background noise, a distinct, though faint, high-pitched whistle -- the 
helium-3 oscillations. As the pressure difference decreased, the pitch dropped, 
just as theory predicted.


