Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 9/20/97

 September 20, 1997

 The Tissue Issue

 Losing oneself to science?

 By EVELYN STRAUSS 

 Once a physician has removed cells from a person's body, who owns them? Who 
decides who can use them and for what purposes? Is the person's control over 
his or her tissue severed along with the cells themselves?

 In the late 1950s, pathologist Oscar Auerbach nailed down the link between 
smoking and lung cancer by examining tissue taken from the airways of several 
hundred people during autopsies. When he compared his observations with 
information gathered during interviews with relatives of the deceased, he 
discovered that lung cells reflect smoking habits: the more cigarettes, the 
greater the damage (SN: 8/19/61, p. 120). Surgeon General Luther L. Terry cited 
Auerbach's findings in his first report on the dangers of smoking, and many 
people credit that research with motivating the warnings that cigarette 
packages carry to this day.

 Auerbach's studies would raise concerns in the 1990s, however. The people 
whose tissue samples he examined never agreed to participate in the project. 
Furthermore, researchers these days can look for inherited as well as acquired 
bases of disease (SN: 11/5/94, p. 298; 12/17/94, p. 408).

 Suppose a researcher found a correlation between the presence of a certain 
gene and lung cancer. Should he or she tell family members who may be at risk? 
Even if there's no way to prevent or cure the disease? And knowing that their 
health insurance companies or employers might misuse such information (SN: 
10/26/96, p. 262)? What about people who might not want to contribute their 
tissue, even after death, to some kinds of research projects -- such as 
searches for possible genetic roots of sexual orientation?

"Because of the power of genetics, you can study these materials and find out 
secrets about a person and his or her relatives," says Arthur L. Caplan, 
director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania in 
Philadelphia. "The old rules for taking tissues aren't cutting it anymore." The 
issue comes down to how much control an individual should retain over the use 
of material from his or her body and the information derived from it. 
Researchers, ethicists, advocacy groups, legislators, and others are wending 
their way through the labyrinth of dilemmas surrounding appropriate research on 
tissue.

 Although most participants in the debate seem to agree on the goals -- 
providing protection and respect for individuals while continuing to support 
research -- recipes for success differ. Many ethicists and others proclaim that 
tighter control is essential to ensure personal privacy and autonomy, while 
many biomedical investigators envision their research mired in excessive cost 
and administrative burdens.

"The legal and ethical issues about the use of stored tissue are probably the 
most profound, complex, and troubling of any ethical issue we have in science 
today," says Lawrence O. Gostin, a professor of law at Georgetown University in 
Washington, D.C. "It pits two fundamental values against each other, and 
there's no easy resolution."

 Federally funded research on tissue that can be linked to living persons is 
tightly regulated. The individuals must give specific consent for the research, 
or the investigation must meet certain criteria, such as imposing minimal risk 
upon the subjects. Decisions governing whether projects fulfill these 
conditions fall to groups called Institutional Review Boards (IRBs), which 
consist of scientists and other representatives of the local community.

 Despite the regulations, plenty of room for controversy remains. Various IRBs 
interpret the guidelines differently, and people disagree about whether these 
groups should wield more or less power than they do now. Furthermore, because 
people who have died are not technically "human subjects," the rules don't 
apply to many stored samples, says J. Thomas Puglisi of the Office for 
Protection from Research Risks in Rockville, Md. -- even though investigations 
on such materials may reveal information that could affect surviving relatives.

 Policy makers have begun proposing, and in some cases passing, legislation 
aimed at protecting individuals. Many researchers say that some of the 
regulations would erect unnecessary barriers between themselves and the tissues 
they rely on for medical research. "People are in so much of a rush to 
legislate, they're writing things with language that's so sweeping, it has all 
kinds of unintended consequences," says David Korn, senior vice president for 
biomedical research at the Association of American Medical Colleges in 
Washington, D.C.

 Several states have enacted legislation that deals specifically with the use 
of tissue in research. A 1995 Oregon law, amended last July, grants ownership 
of tissue, as well as the information derived from it, to the person from whom 
it was taken. In contrast, the California supreme court ruled that a man whose 
cells were used to make a valuable commercial product could not claim a share 
of the proceeds. The court did find that the doctors had violated the man's 
rights by not informing him of what they were doing with the tissue.

 Senator Pete V. Domenici (R-N.M.) has introduced a bill aimed at tightening 
the rules about use of tissue in genetic research. Even trying to define words 
such as "genetic" presents problems, says Korn. "You can get genetic 
information by all different approaches -- family history, a variety of lab 
tests, or directly looking at DNA."

 The National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC) will make recommendations 
regarding the use of human tissue in research in January 1998, says NBAC 
genetics subcommittee chairman Thomas H. Murray.

 Human tissue enters the research domain by two main routes. In one, 
investigators ask volunteers to provide samples for a research project. In the 
other, pathologists collect and store material left over from medical 
procedures.

"Since microscopes began being used to study tissue samples, these tissues have 
provided the knowledge base on which our current understanding of medicine 
rests," says Korn.

 Current regulations aim to inform patients about what will happen to their 
samples, at least if investigators use them in federally funded studies. Anyone 
undergoing a medical procedure must indicate that they understand the possible 
risks and benefits by signing a form. Many institutions incorporate into their 
consent forms a request for permission to use surplus tissue for research. 
These documents and the process of requesting such approval have come under 
close scrutiny in the last several years.

"The forms stink," says Caplan. "People don't read them because they're in 
language that's too difficult." The general language about research may be too 
imprecise to provide meaningful -- and legally binding -- permission, adds 
Gostin. People can't agree to a use if they don't know exactly what they're 
agreeing to, he continues.

 Most forms do not reveal how researchers intend to handle the information they 
obtain in terms of confidentiality and privacy, says Robert F. Weir of the 
University of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City. Weir published a study on 
informed consent in the July-August and September-December 1995 issues of Irb. 
How much information should potential tissue donors receive? Covering all of 
the possibilities may not be realistic. "At the time the tissue is being 
removed, there's no way to tell the patient what kind of technology may come up 
in the future," notes Korn.

 Furthermore, many people -- not just investigators -- worry that too much 
information might overwhelm potential research subjects, thereby interfering 
with volunteer recruitment or education. "People get freaked out about a 
five-page consent form," says Iowa's Richard G. Lynch, head of the Federation 
of American Societies for Experimental Biology committee that's addressing 
ethical issues in biomedical research. "They say, 'Leave me alone. Just tell me 
where to sign.'"

 At the same time, more informative consent forms may strengthen research 
projects because "better-informed subjects will probably feel like they're 
really partners," says Mary Ann Wilson, consumer staff representative at the 
Alliance of Genetic Support Groups in Chevy Chase, Md. "They're more likely to 
continue in the project."

 The National Action Plan on Breast Cancer (NAPBC) in Washington, D.C., has 
developed a prototype consent form in which participants make a few general 
choices. They indicate whether scientists may use their tissue for research on 
cancer. In a separate question, they can grant permission for use of the tissue 
in studies of other health problems. The form also asks people to specify 
whether they want to be invited to take part in future research. "If it's a 
preventable disease, a lot of people want to know the results of sample 
testing," says Abbey S. Meyers, president of the National Organization for Rare 
Disorders in New Fairfield, Conn., "but most conditions are not treatable -- 
like Alzheimer's, for example."

"When people give samples, they should be able to say, 'Use this to save the 
world but leave me out of it,'" says Mary Jo Kahn of the Virginia Breast Cancer 
Foundation in Richmond. She points out that even being offered the choice of 
knowing can disturb people. "Someone can say, 'I know something about you that 
you don't know; do you want to know it?' You're either going to freak out and 
wonder forever or just ask.

"It's wonderful that we have the chance to develop good policy before there is 
widespread [genetic] testing and before we make a lot of mistakes," Kahn 
continues. "It just takes one 60 Minutes show to make it so no one will sign a 
consent form."

 Even if people develop wise guidelines, many dilemmas will remain. What should 
researchers do with the millions of tissue specimens currently stored in 
pathology labs around the country? Most of these samples are not accompanied by 
adequate consent forms because the tissues were collected long before people 
became as sensitive to the issues as they are today.

 Researchers should either go back and get consent or start a new study, says 
George J. Annas, a medical ethicist at Boston University School of Public 
Health. Annas has drafted model federal legislation for the use of human tissue 
in research. "It's not right for you to know more about people than they do 
without their consent," he says.

 The issue should be resolved on a case-by-case basis, argues Elizabeth J. 
Thomson, program director of clinical genetics research at the National Human 
Genome Research Institute in Bethesda, Md. "Researchers should ask, 'Do I need 
to use archival tissue when I know that consent was less than adequate?'" she 
says.

"If the sample's been there for 50 years, it's absurd to request permission," 
says Ellen W. Clayton, associate professor of law and pediatrics at Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center in Nashville. "But if it was last week and you know 
where the patient is, it would be pretty hard to argue not to ask."

 Many scientists contend that demanding consent for every purpose would result 
in squandering a valuable resource. "Say I want to look at outcomes of 
different treatment regimens on people who have a particular mutation," says 
Mark E. Sobel, chief of the molecular pathology section of the National Cancer 
Institute in Bethesda, Md. "If I can't use old material and I want to look at 
outcomes, it'll be at least 5 years before I start getting information and 
another 5 until it's really useful."

 Korn suggests setting up a system whereby scientists can tap into follow-up 
information. "I don't need to know who the patients are, but I need to know 
what happened to them."

 In principle, confidentiality can be achieved if someone strips the samples of 
names and gives them numbers instead, retaining the key so researchers can 
obtain information later in order to interpret their findings. IRBs review 
proposals for such research and decide whether they meet the requirements for 
waiving consent. Among other criteria, the board requires that it must not be 
"practicable" to obtain informed consent. "That means almost impossible," says 
Puglisi. "It's more than just inconvenient."

"Many of us would like to see a broader interpretation that would permit the 
review board to waive informed consent for coded samples more easily in some 
cases," says Sobel. Annas disagrees. "The IRB can grant exceptions, and that's 
a problem," he says. "They're the weak link in the current set of regulations."

 Weak link or not, IRBs don't always get the chance to deliberate on research 
use of stored tissue, says Clayton. "It's really easy to pull up the medical 
records for everyone admitted to the hospital with condition X," she says. 
"Then you can go look at those people's tissues. It isn't allowed [without IRB 
approval], but it's as common as pig tracks."

 Coded samples create a fundamental security problem: The person with the key 
can put everything together. "A lot of these problems have been solved in the 
banking industry," says Lynch. "I can go to the same ATM as you and get into my 
account but not yours. I think we should be preventing misuse, not preventing 
getting at information."

 Federal regulations regarding informed consent do not apply to these so-called 
anonymized samples as long as they were stored before a study began and cannot 
be linked with the donor -- a condition not easily met, says Puglisi. Such 
research comes at a cost, however: It can deprive participants of medical 
information that might someday benefit them.

 Although participants in the debate over who should control tissue have made 
great strides in understanding and responding to each others' concerns over the 
last several years, many issues remain unresolved.

"The problem at the beginning was that people were at different tables, coming 
up with proposals to deal with the thing they were legitimately concerned 
about," says Lynch. "Since they didn't know about the other concerns, they 
created problems. Now we're all sitting at the same table."

 Murray suggests that solutions won't necessarily require a strict trade-off 
between benefits for society and protection for individuals. "This isn't a 
zero-sum game," he says. "There may well be some creative responses that will 
maintain what we care about most with respect to both research and privacy."


