Science News Online (9/27/97): The Rise in Toxic Tides

 September 27, 1997 

 The Rise in Toxic Tides

 What's behind the ocean blooms?

 By CHRISTINE MLOT 

 In 1984, a small herd of cows in Montana collapsed and died 10 minutes after 
drinking from a pond coated with a pea green film. 

 In 1987, three people died and more than 100 became ill after eating blue 
mussels from Prince Edward Island.

 In 1996, 149 manatees perished mysteriously off the coast of Florida. 
Autopsies of these endangered marine mammals revealed biological poisons in 
their brains and other tissues.

 In the last 2 months, thousands of fish have sickened and died in tributaries 
of the Chesapeake Bay. The kills resemble a decade-long pattern in North 
Carolina estuaries, where a billion or more crabs and fish, especially 
menhaden, have been killed.

 Researchers and the news media have recorded an increasing number of 
water-related poisonings of both wildlife and people worldwide since the 1970s. 
The culprits have turned out to be potent toxins produced by any of several 
single-celled aquatic organisms -- some well known, others completely new and 
dumbfounding in their biology.

 A droplet of pond or ocean water contains myriad numbers and species of these 
organisms. They live in an ancient microscopic realm that is neither wholly 
bacterial nor animal nor plant, even though they are often classified with 
algae.

"There's clearly been an increase in both the frequency and extents of harmful 
algal blooms in coastal waters," says Frances M. Van Dolah of the National 
Marine Fisheries Service in Charleston, S.C. The question is, why?

 The toxins causing the Chesapeake and North Carolina fish kills have come from 
Pfiesteria, an organism that has attracted the attention of scientists only in 
this decade. Its treacherous ways have recently caught the public's attention 
as well. Last week, in an interim report, a medical team appointed by Maryland 
Governor Parris N. Glendening linked intensive exposures to toxic 
Pfiesteria-containing waters with memory and health problems in 13 people. 

 Yet Pfiesteria is only one of the toxin producers that are dramatically making 
their presence known. These organisms have traditionally been called algae or 
plankton, specifically phytoplankton. When they reproduce into large 
populations, they are informally known as tides or harmful blooms. Recent 
textbooks call most of these single-celled microorganisms protists. During 
evolution, protists gave rise to macroscopic plants and animals.

 Pfiesteria, with its 24-stage life cycle, defies neat categorization. At some 
stages, it swims about powered by two flagella and so is considered a 
dinoflagellate.

 Dinoflagellates are key players in aquatic ecosystems. Large numbers of them 
live only in the pores of ice, for example, where they photosynthesize and 
provide food for other organisms. Pfiesteria can photosynthesize, but only if 
it has stolen the green organelles called chloroplasts from true algal cells. 
It uses a hoselike attachment to acquire these "kleptochloroplasts."

 Although Pfiesteria can subsist in this way, says JoAnn M. Burkholder of North 
Carolina State University in Raleigh, it changes its eating habits depending on 
what's available. When fish are around, it can turn into a predator. It 
abandons its usual swirling swim pattern and makes a beeline for its prey in 
response to an unknown cue, perhaps in fish oil or excrement.

 Then Pfiesteria churns out its toxic cocktail. It emits at least one compound 
that seems to kill the fish and another that opens up the fish's skin, allowing 
Pfiesteria to feed on the tissue inside (SN: 9/6/97, p. 149). Burkholder, a 
codiscoverer of Pfiesteria, has personally experienced its toxic effects and 
knows the organism inside out. "It's plant- and animal-like," she says.

 The dinoflagellates responsible for so-called red tides behave more like 
plants. The pigments they use in photosynthesis can tint the water red during a 
bloom. Beachcombers notice red tides in other ways -- airborne toxins sting the 
insides of their noses and throats. 

 Red tides have been around at least since biblical times. In Exodus, a plague 
turned the water bloodred and destroyed fish. In recent times, such tides have 
become more frequent and more noticeable. In 1972, New England experienced its 
first red tide, with devastating effects on the shellfish industry. In Florida, 
where red tides usually last from 3 to 5 months, one persisted for 18 months, 
culminating in the manatee deaths in 1996.

 Another group of plankton, surprisingly, was responsible for the Prince Edward 
illness. Canadian researchers traced the outbreak to a toxin, domoic acid, 
produced by a diatom. Until then, diatoms had been known mainly as benign 
photosynthesizers. Lacking flagella, they tumble about in the surf or waves, 
protected by often spectacular filigrees of silica.

 In 1991, dozens of California pelicans and cormorants died after feeding on 
anchovies found to contain the toxin from these diatoms. The toxic diatoms have 
since been found around the world.

 The cows' demise was less mysterious. They were felled by toxins from the 
oldest photosynthesizers on earth, cyanobacteria, formerly called blue-green 
algae. They are not always blue-green. One kind blooms frequently in the Red 
Sea and is probably responsible for its name. Other cyanobacteria grow into 
bright green films, like the one on the lethal lake in Montana. 

 As efficiently as the cows were killed, they were hardly the bacteria's 
intended target, says Hans Paerl of the University of North Carolina at 
Morehead City. Almost nothing threatens these bacteria. "The cyanobacteria are 
not worried about cows, they're not worried about humans, they're not worried 
about anything except the microbes that they're very intimately associated 
with."

 Like gardeners, cyanobacteria cultivate some bacteria and weed out others by 
leaking certain compounds, including some that happen to be toxic to animals, 
Paerl says. One such cyanobacterial toxin is microcystin. It locks onto and 
shuts down phosphatase enzymes, which are common to all organisms. Some toxic 
marine dinoflagellates target the same phosphatase enzymes.

 Red tide dinoflagellates produce toxins that target a protein channel in 
muscle and nerve cells that allows signals to be passed along. Called 
brevetoxins, they are long, sinuous molecules of connected carbon rings -- what 
Daniel G. Baden of the University of Miami calls "polychicken wire." They 
conform to specific receptors on the channels and keep them open too long, 
resulting in paralysis.

 Other dinoflagellates that live in association with seaweeds on coral reefs 
produce ciguatoxin, which takes a similar shape and attacks the same channel. 
Small reef-dwelling fish ingest the toxin, which becomes concentrated in large 
predators, such as barracuda, further up the food chain.

 The increasing popularity of snapper, amberjack, and other reef fish in 
temperate markets is widening the risk of ciguatera poisoning. The Food and 
Drug Administration and other groups are working on ways of detecting this 
powerful poison. A single dinner of fish can bring on the gastrointestinal and 
neurological effects of ciguatera, but it takes 170 kilograms of fish to 
extract just 100 micrograms of the toxin -- about a sesame seed's worth from a 
dinghy full of fish.

 Mussels and other shellfish that feed on diatoms and dinoflagellates can 
accumulate toxins with no apparent effect, but when people eat shellfish 
harvested during a toxic tide, the result can be unpleasant -- even lethal. The 
usually colorless toxins are difficult to detect, and they withstand the heat 
of cooking. They can produce gastrointestinal effects, dizziness and confusion, 
memory loss, or paralysis.

 Researchers understand in exquisite detail the molecular workings of these 
powerful toxins once they're ingested. They know far less about why the 
microorganisms produce them and what, if anything, can be done to suppress 
toxic blooms. In August, the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C., sponsored a meeting that may signal 
new support for investigation of the environmental and ecological aspects of 
the toxin-producing organisms. 

 For now, researchers have a handful of possible explanations for the increase 
in toxic tides.

 At least some of the toxin producers seem to be responding to increases in the 
amount of nitrogen (SN: 2/15/97, p. 100), phosphorus, and other nutrients 
washing off the land from fertilizers and animal wastes. As Hong Kong 
experienced a sixfold increase in population between 1976 and 1986, the 
concentrations of nutrients in its harbor more than doubled, and the annual 
count of red tides increased from 2 to 18.

 Pfiesteria outbreaks, too, seem to be connected to nutrients, which stimulate 
the growth of the algae that Pfiesteria feed on, says Burkholder. In North 
Carolina, "75 percent of the kills that we've observed have occurred in 
nutrient-overenriched areas."

 At the same time, some of the toxin producers seem to respond to pollution 
controls. In Japan's Seto Inland Sea 4 years after sewage and effluent controls 
were implemented, the number of red tides leveled off at about half their peak 
of 300.

 In other places, dams may contribute to changes in nutrients. In the March 27 
Nature, European researchers reported that a dam on the Danube River has 
altered the Black Sea's chemistry, in turn skewing the major species in the 
plankton community from diatoms to dinoflagellates.

 Some researchers believe that a global change in the complex interaction of 
climate, ocean, and temperature is affecting marine plankton (SN: 9/30/95, p. 
220), as well as other organisms (SN: 4/6/96, p. 218).

 Increased traffic on the world's oceans may be another factor in seeding new 
blooms, according to several scientists. Water used as ballast in ships has 
transported and introduced animals into new waters; exotic microorganisms are 
probably being introduced as well, says Fred C. Dobbs of Old Dominion 
University in Norfolk, Va.

 Finally, the increased frequency of the blooms may be partly an effect of 
heightened interest in these events, expanding fish farming, or improved 
methods of detecting toxins that had previously gone undiagnosed or unnoticed. 
"There are toxic and nontoxic blooms all the time," says Jeffrey L.C. Wright of 
the National Research Council of Canada in Halifax, Nova Scotia. "If you don't 
have blooms, you don't have life. They are part of the natural ocean processes."

 Today's oil deposits in the North Sea and elsewhere are the remains of bygone 
blooms that settled and accumulated into massive amounts of carbon on the ocean 
floor.

 The causes of the increase may be the focus of study and debate, but there is 
one thing on which researchers agree: Other, as-yet-undetected microorganisms 
or their toxins will eventually make their presence known. 

 Of the rash of blooms and poisonings in the last 2 decades, several have 
involved unknown toxins or organisms (see sidebar, p. 203). When farm-raised 
salmon died recently in Washington State, researchers found microcystin, but 
they have yet to find the producer.

 In the case of Pfiesteria, the most infamous of the newly discovered 
microrogues, researchers are trying to figure out how its toxins act. The 
secrets of the organism itself haven't been completely cracked either (see ). 
Pfiesteria seems to be a complex of at least four species, according to 
Burkholder, although only P. piscicida has been named.

 The water world these organisms occupy is huge, much of it unexplored, and 
they've been concocting toxins for eons. "In terms of biological interactions 
and biological warfare, they've seen it all," says Paerl.

 Through a range of activities, humankind has simply waded into the crossfire.


