Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/13/97

 September 13, 1997 

 Drug sensitivity varies with ethnicity

by C. Wu

 For centuries, people of different cultures have used opiates to relieve pain. 
Now, it appears that sensitivity to the opiate codeine varies with ethnic 
background, according to a recent study. These findings could help doctors 
treat pain more effectively in different individuals.

 Codeine's analgesic properties stem mainly from the body's ability to 
metabolize it into morphine, a much more potent opiate, says Alastair J.J. Wood 
of Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville. His research 
indicates that further reactions contribute to the pain-killing response. Wood 
and his colleagues examined the effects of codeine in men of European 
extraction and in Asian men. Both groups transformed codeine into morphine 
similarly, but the Asian men experienced significantly weaker effects from the 
drug.

 Wood presented the findings this week at a meeting of the American Chemical 
Society in Las Vegas.

"It's a nice piece of work," says Wendel L. Nelson of the University of 
Washington in Seattle. Researchers had suspected that morphine is responsible 
for the pain relief provided by codeine, but the current study "is the clinical 
piece that really nails it down."

 Previous studies have shown that some people lack an enzyme called CYP2D6 that 
chemically alters codeine into morphine. The same enzyme metabolizes many drugs 
used to treat high blood pressure, heart arrhythmias, and depression. About 8 
percent of whites, 6 percent of blacks, and 1 percent of Asians do not produce 
CYP2D6.

 Currently, doctors tend to think that patients who don't respond to a 
pain-killing drug need higher doses. "Here's an example where a portion of the 
population will get no effect, and increasing their dose a lot more will still 
produce no effect," Wood says. "It's not that they're wimps or their pain is 
worse than [that of] other people."

 All of the people in the current study, 10 white men from the United States 
and 8 men from China, possessed CYP2D6. Pain control is difficult to measure, 
so the researchers monitored how codeine affected breathing, blood pressure, 
and pupil dilation. Consistently, codeine affected the Chinese men less than 
the U.S. men. Their bodies cleared morphine faster and increased metabolism of 
codeine through enzymes other than CYP2D6.

 No one knows whether the results shed any light on understanding addiction to 
opiates, Wood says. At first, he hypothesized that people who abuse codeine 
would possess CYP2D6, but his group realized that it would be difficult to find 
appropriate subjects.

 Scientists once thought that ethnic differences in rates of alcoholism might 
have a biochemical basis. About half of Chinese and Japanese people flush 
uncomfortably after consuming alcohol because they lack the enzyme aldehyde 
dehydrogenase. Now, most scientists believe that social factors account for the 
alcoholism difference.

 Not many researchers consider ethnicity when testing drugs, Wood says. Based 
on clinical studies of a "small, homogeneous population, we extrapolate dosage 
and toxicity with breathtaking confidence to worldwide use." In the case of 
codeine, the differences in metabolism aren't large enough to make toxicity a 
concern, says Nelson.

 Knowledge of the important enzymes involved in metabolism, however, does spur 
drug companies to screen potential compounds very early, he says. "If the 
company is going to invest money in developing a drug, it wants to know if it 
won't work in a large percentage of the population."


