Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/20/97

 September 20, 1997 

 Anticancer agent sprouts up unexpectedly

by J. Raloff 

 There's good news for George Bush and others who detest broccoli. Without ever 
downing another forkful of the green veggie, they can naturally enrich their 
diets with its most potent anticancer constituent. All they need to do is 
sprinkle a few tablespoons of sprouts on a salad -- broccoli sprouts, that is. 

 Paul Talalay and his coworkers at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in 
Baltimore surprised cancer researchers in 1992 when they isolated sulforaphane, 
a compound in broccoli and its botanical kin that inhibits the development of 
cancer (SN: 3/21/92, p. 183). The compound works by turning on detoxifying 
phase-2 enzymes. 

 The hoopla over sulforaphane soon died down, however. Researchers realized 
that to get enough of the compound even from broccoli, its richest source, a 
diner would have to consume unrealistic amounts each week -- about 2 pounds of 
the brassica, which some people find bitter (SN: 7/12/97, p. 24). 

 Undeterred, Talalay's team began testing broccoli throughout its life cycle to 
find how sulforaphane forms and when. "To our surprise," Talalay says, "we 
found that the seeds were extraordinarily high in [phase-2] enzyme activity." 
So were 3-day-old broccoli sprouts, which he says are considerably more edible 
than the seeds. "The sprouts aren't bitter and don't taste like broccoli," he 
says, though they do possess "a little zing." 

 Both seeds and sprouts contain a compound that is turned into sulforaphane 
when their cells are crushed during chewing. As the plants grow, this initial 
store of sulforaphane's precursor becomes diluted. Indeed, mature plants 
contain only 2 to 5 percent as much per gram as sprouts do. Even the 
sulforaphane precursor dramatically inhibits chemically induced cancers in 
rats, Talalay's team reports in the Sept. 16 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences. 

 Though diets rich in vegetables inhibit cancer development, Talalay's group is 
one of the few to execute "the very difficult, nitty-gritty studies" of the 
mechanisms, says Lee W. Wattenberg of the University of Minnesota in 
Minneapolis. Such work raises the prospect of mining broccoli for extracts that 
might be administered as cancer-fighting dietary supplements, he says. 

 Talalay is developing a center to certify that any sprouts ultimately marketed 
contain high quantities of the sulforaphane precursor. 


