Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/27/97

 September 27, 1997 

 New chemistry from tropical corals

by C. Mlot

 It's a long way -- geographically and taxonomically -- from a shrub in the 
forests of the Pacific Northwest to a coral on a reef off western Australia, 
but the two share some unusual chemistry. Like the anticancer drug Taxol, 
derived from the Pacific yew, a compound manufactured by the rare Eleutherobia 
coral gums up the internal scaffolding of a cell.

 The coral compound, eleutherobin, joins a select class of chemicals known to 
exert such an effect. Researchers from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
in La Jolla, Calif., and Bristol-Myers Squibb in Princeton, N.J., describe the 
compound's structure in the Sept. 17 Journal of the American Chemical Society. 
Although eleutherobin's basic structure is built of five-carbon rings, as is 
Taxol's, the compounds have no further similarities, says William H. Fenical of 
Scripps.

 Eleutherobin is the latest of numerous new drug candidates that have been 
extracted from marine organisms in recent years (SN: 4/8/95, p. 212; 11/27/93, 
p. 358). The diverse organisms that have coevolved on a coral reef are prime 
targets in biochemical prospecting. Many can't flee from predators, so they 
ward them off with chemicals that may be adapted for therapeutic uses. So far, 
eleutherobin has been tested only on human cell lines grown in the laboratory, 
but it seems to be extremely potent against breast, renal, ovarian, and lung 
cancer cells, says Fenical. Details of its biological activity are slated for 
publication in Cancer Research, he adds.

 Fenical collected the yellow or red pinkie-size coral on a 1993 trip to study 
chemical defenses. "We weren't looking for cancer drugs," he says, but a 
routine screening indicated that something in the corals could kill cells. 
Corals are a known source of anti-inflammatory agents -- one is marketed in a 
skin cream. Patented in 1995, eleutherobin is licensed to Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
which markets Taxol.

 Eleutherobin's ability to gum up a cell's microtubules and thereby stop it 
from dividing is a "very intriguing activity," says David J. Newman of the 
National Cancer Institute in Frederick, Md. However, few of the natural 
compounds that show promise in the lab make it through animal and human testing 
onto the market. Eleutherobin, says Newman, "has overcome a major hurdle, but 
it's got a long way to go."

 Rarely is a specific natural product of pharmaceutical interest, says Newman: 
"We're not looking for drugs, we're looking for structures." The basic 
structure of the AIDS drug AZT, for example, was identified in a sponge, he 
notes.

 Marketability may be a gamble, but the novelty of coral chemistry is a sure 
bet. Researchers from Vanderbilt University in Nashville and their colleagues 
report the unusual structure and function of another chemical, from a Caribbean 
sea whip, in the Sept. 26 Science. That enzyme may be involved in the coral's 
synthesis of compounds resembling prostaglandins, hormones that exist in minute 
amounts in people but make up 2 to 3 percent of the coral's dry weight. Their 
function in coral is unknown.


