Science News Online - This Week - Feature Article - 9/6/97

 September 6, 1997 

 A Silent Cool

 Thermoelectrics may offer new ways to refrigerate and generate power

 By CORINNA WU 

 At night, when all is quiet, a sound emerges from the kitchen: the faint, 
unmistakable hum of the refrigerator, working hard to keep the ice cream frozen 
and the milk cold. That sound comes from a compressor that repeatedly forces 
the evaporation and condensation of a fluid, often a chlorofluorocarbon. As the 
liquid boils, it absorbs heat from inside the refrigerator. Then, when the gas 
condenses, it dumps its heat outside, creating cool on the inside.

 Someday, new materials may make clunky refrigerators more like old-fashioned 
iceboxes quiet, reliable, and energy efficient. Many researchers hope that 
better thermoelectrics materials that change temperature when an electric 
current passes through them and that also generate electric currents when heat 
is applied could replace today's compressors with systems that have no moving 
parts and use no gases that deplete the ozone layer.

 Thirty years ago, after a flurry of research failed to bring about the 
revolution that many had expected, some critics declared the field of 
thermoelectrics dead. Recent interest in more environmentally friendly 
refrigeration has reinvigorated the area. Moreover, advances in materials 
science during the last few decades signaled to many people that after 25 
years, "there ought to be something they haven't tried," says Cronin B. Vining, 
a consultant based in Auburn, Ala., and president of the International 
Thermoelectric Society.

 With thermoelectrics experiencing a rebirth, increasing numbers of researchers 
have set their sights on new classes of materials as well as new structures of 
the old ones. These new thermoelectrics could find their best applications in 
places where traditional vapor compression doesn't work, such as in cooling 
microelectronics or laser diodes. Thermoelectric materials are also being 
tapped as a way to convert the waste heat generated by car engines into usable 
power.

 Still, scientists are proceeding cautiously, mindful of the previous 
disappointments. "It's not that we're going to save the world," says Hylan B. 
Lyon, vice president of research at Marlow Industries in Dallas, "but once 
[thermoelectrics] finds its niche, it will stay there a long time."

 Even though the thermoelectric properties of certain materials were described 
as early as 1828, the big excitement didn't come until the 1950s. 
Thermoelectric studies rode on the coattails of the burgeoning semiconductor 
research, since thermoelectric materials and semiconductors share many of the 
same characteristics.

 At the time, scientists had high expectations for these novel materials. 
Almost every major research institution worldwide had projects going, Vining 
says. He recounts that in 1958, one prominent scientist set a short-term goal 
of reaching 25 percent of the theoretically possible efficiency in a 
thermoelectric material's ability to heat or cool. Asked why he chose that 
number, the scientist replied, "because I want to be conservative." But today, 
Vining observes, efficiencies have risen no higher than about 10 percent.

 The enthusiasm of those early days was fueled by successes with bismuth 
telluride, still the best thermoelectric material known. Vacationers, for 
example, now use it in the portable beverage coolers that plug into a car's 
cigarette lighter.

 The way such thermoelectric refrigerators work is analogous to the strategy 
behind a conventional refrigerator. Instead of using a gas to absorb and 
release heat, however, a thermoelectric device expands and compresses 
electrons, Vining explains.

 Each unit of a thermoelectric cooler consists of a pair of segments made up of 
two forms of the material one with an excess of electrons and the other with a 
deficiency. The segments are connected at the ends, forming two junctions.

 What happens at the junctions is the key: As current travels around the 
circuit, electrons undergo expansion and compression as they move between 
materials having different electron concentrations. The changes cause one 
junction to cool down while the other heats up.

 Despite a few practical uses of bismuth telluride, there had been no 
significant advances in efficiency by the mid-1960s, so labs cut back on their 
research. Thermoelectricity, many say, collapsed under the weight of inflated 
hopes.

 Without breakthroughs to cheer researchers along, basic research in 
thermoelectrics lay stagnant for nearly 30 years. By the 1990s, researchers 
"thought they'd done everything that could have been done," says Vining. Part 
of the frustration of finding suitable materials arises from the combination of 
properties necessary for good thermoelectrics. The heart of a thermoelectric 
refrigerator would be a material that generates a significant temperature 
gradient in response to an applied voltage, explains Terry M. Tritt of Clemson 
(S.C.) University.

 The greatest cooling efficiency comes from thermoelectrics that conduct 
electricity well but heat poorly. Unfortunately, "only a handful of materials 
fit in this category," Vining says. Often, optimizing one property sends the 
other one plummeting.

 Scientists who work with thermoelectrics have devised what they call a figure 
of merit, or ZT, which combines a material's electric and thermal 
conductivities with a measure of its capacity to generate electricity from 
heat. Bismuth telluride, still state-of-the-art after 40 years, has a ZT of 
about 1. For a thermoelectric material to come close to replacing the 
compressors in standard refrigerators, Lyon says, it would need a figure of 
merit of 4 or 5.

 In a car, two-thirds of the engine's power is lost as heat through the exhaust 
or cooling systems. Converting some of that heat into usable power could 
potentially improve fuel efficiency for a new generation of vehicles. Materials 
for thermoelectric systems in automobiles would need ZTs of at least 2, General 
Motors' Donald T. Morelli predicted at the San Francisco meeting of the 
Materials Research Society in April.

 Researchers went so long without improving the figure of merit that they began 
to suspect that a ZT of 1 was a natural limit. Whether that's true is "the 
central intellectual question of the field," says Vining. Even though there 
doesn't seem to be any theoretical limit to ZT, perhaps "nature's trying to 
tell us something, and we don't know what it is."

 Besides bismuth telluride, two other materials and their associated 
derivatives came to the forefront during those early research years: lead 
telluride and silicon-germanium alloys. The tried-and-true bismuth tellurides 
operate best between 0 -- and 47@C and rapidly worsen as the temperature 
increases or decreases. Lead telluride operates well at temperatures around 
427@C, making it better for power generation.

 There's also a need for materials that can achieve near-liquid nitrogen 
temperatures, below -70@C, says Tritt. Hafnium telluride, zirconium telluride, 
and other pentatellurides are candidates for low-temperature operation, he says.

 Silicon-germanium alloys, on the other hand, function best at very high 
temperatures, around 727@C, restricting their applicability for cooling and 
power generation to a few specialized applications. For example, the Voyager 
spacecraft launched in 1977 use thermoelectrics heated by radioactive sources 
as a power supply.

"After a quarter of a billion device hours, not one of the 1,200 thermoelectric 
generators on each Voyager has failed," says Vining, who used to work at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.

 In 1993, a pair of studies by Mildred S. Dresselhaus, Lyndon Hicks, and Ted 
Harman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology jump-started the field. 
They showed theoretically and experimentally that ZT increases above 1 for thin 
semiconductor films constituting so-called quantum wells, in which electrons 
can move only within a confined layer. Their results suggested that quantum 
wells could lead to thermoelectric devices competitive with conventional 
technology.

 Subsequent modeling studies by Thomas L. Reinecke at the Naval Research 
Laboratory in Washington, D.C., and David A. Broido at Boston College in 
Chestnut Hill, Mass., suggest that putting several quantum wells together in a 
practical device may not yield a greatly improved figure of merit. One recent 
analysis appeared in the May 26 Applied Physics Letters.

 Meanwhile, scientists and engineers on the industrial side of thermoelectric 
research had also begun scheming to push ZT higher. In 1972, Raymond Marlow 
formed Marlow Industries as a spin-off of Texas Instruments, catering to niche 
markets and supplying thermoelectrics to the military.

 In the early 1990s, customers began asking him why ZT was stuck at 1. His 
interest piqued, Marlow began prodding researchers to improve their theoretical 
understanding of the problem and to renew their search for materials that might 
break this barrier.

 One set of materials newly discovered to have significant thermoelectric 
properties are the skutterudites, named after a mineral found in Skutterud, 
Norway. Skutterudites consist of metals such as iridium, cobalt, or rhodium 
combined with phosphorus, arsenic, or antimony. Their structure, first 
described in 1928, contains large, open voids, and "it's the ability to 
populate these voids [with other atoms] that makes them useful 
thermoelectrics," says Glen A. Slack of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 
Troy, N.Y.

 The ideal material would conduct electrons as well as a metal does and resist 
the passage of heat as well as a glass does, Slack says. Putting atoms of 
another element in the skutterudite voids makes the materials more glasslike. 
The caged atoms rattle around and disrupt vibrations of the crystal that carry 
heat energy. So far, rare earths such as lanthanum, neodymium, and gadolinium 
seem to work best; they are small enough to fit in the voids, yet heavy enough 
to absorb big vibrations.

 Skutterudites "are truly interesting materials," says Vining, especially 
because there are hundreds of possibilities to test.

 Another group that seems to fulfill all the necessary requirements for good 
thermoelectric materials is the quasicrystals (SN: 10/12/96, p. 232). Unlike 
true crystals, whose structures consist of small, repeating units, 
quasicrystals form orderly, complicated structures without a long-range 
pattern. Their electric conductivity can be tuned by changing their chemical 
composition, says Tritt, while their thermal conductivity remains inherently 
low.

 This combination of properties spurred Tritt and his team to search for 
thermoelectric materials among quasicrystals. They are looking at compounds of 
aluminum-palladium-rhenium and aluminum-copper-iron. "This is one of the few 
applications for quasicrystals," he says. Last week, Tritt presented his 
group's recent work at a meeting of the International Thermoelectric Society in 
Dresden, Germany.

 With a variety of materials in hand, engineers might design refrigerators that 
cool in stages, with different materials sandwiched together to take a computer 
chip, for instance, to extremely low temperatures.

 Those who have spent a long time in the thermoelectrics field welcome its 
rejuvenation. "One of the milestones along the pathway is when new blood shows 
up," says Lyon. "That's happening. You're going to see a whole new bunch of 
faces. They don't have to accept the old ZT as a limit."

 Still, researchers caution that a lot of work remains to be done to make 
thermoelectrics truly practical. "They're not looking for a small improvement," 
says Vining.

 If history repeats itself, many researchers could be in for dashed dreams. On 
the other hand, if new approaches to an old problem produce significant 
advances, then perhaps kitchens will hear the sound of silence instead of the 
familiar, persistent rattle and hum.


