Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/27/97

 September 27, 1997 

 Transgenic plants provoke petition

by S. Perkins

 Genetically modified crops will have a tough row to hoe if some organic 
farmers and environmentalists have their way.

 On Sept. 16, more than 20 groups and individuals filed a petition with the 
Environmental Protection Agency in a first-of-its kind bid to rescind approvals 
of a group of plants genetically engineered to produce a particular pesticide. 
The agency began limited registrations of the plants in early 1995. This year, 
farmers planted those transgenic crops, including corn, cotton, and seed 
potatoes, on more than 3 million acres in the United States.

 The critics, including Greenpeace International, the Sierra Club, and the 
International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements, also want to block 
future approvals of similar plants. In the petition, they charge EPA with the 
"wanton destruction" of what they contend is the world's most important 
biological pesticide. The opponents fear that some insect pests will develop 
resistance to the pesticide; in addition, cross-pollination between the 
transgenic plants and their wild relatives could produce wild plants containing 
genes for the pesticide, possibly leading to resistance in other insects as 
well.

 The plants at the heart of the controversy have been genetically engineered to 
manufacture one of a group of natural toxins produced by the bacterium Bacillus 
thuringiensis (Bt). Organic farmers commonly treat their crops with the 
bacterium, which has been registered with EPA as a spray pesticide since 1961, 
because its toxins have no known detrimental effects on fish, birds, or 
mammals. Bt toxins also degrade readily in the environment, mainly through 
exposure to sunlight.

 The principal toxins in commercial preparations of Bt are found in protein 
crystals formed when the bacterium produces spores. The toxins are activated 
only by digestive enzymes in an insect's gut.

 The petitioners contend that the transgenic plants are a threat because they 
continuously produce massive doses of a modified, already active version of a 
single Bt toxin, which could lead to the development of resistance in insects 
within 2 to 10 years. This resistance would make Bt useless, the critics say, 
forcing farmers to change to harsher chemical pesticides.

 Paul Clarke of Greenpeace in New York says the organization considers EPA 
approvals of transgenic plants to be "an assault upon the genetic diversity of 
native plants." Field tests of other transgenic crops have resulted in 
significant migration of the engineered genes into nearby crops or into the 
transgenics' wild, weedy relatives, he says.

 Albert J. Heier, an EPA spokesman, says scientists spent considerable time and 
effort during the original approval process addressing the potential for 
development of pesticide resistance. "We used agency experts, as well as 
outside experts, and we looked at all the data we had," he says.

 Heier says registrants of the transgenic Bt plants, typically the companies 
that developed them, must put together a program that educates growers about 
how to delay or prevent resistance among pests (SN: 7/8/95, p. 21). Registrants 
also must monitor insect populations for Bt resistance and submit annual 
reports to EPA.

 Nevertheless, participants in last week's action contend that EPA's efforts 
have been inadequate. Clarke says that if 90 days pass without a "substantive" 
response, the petitioners will file suit to force EPA to cancel current 
registrations of Bt transgenics, as well as hold up future approvals, until the 
agency completes further study.


