Science News Online (10/17/98): Dogs and Cats in Their Dotage

 October 17, 1998 

 Dogs and Cats in Their Dotage

 Do aged pets get their own type of Alzheimer's, and will a new drug help them?

 By SUSAN MILIUS

 Zappa made a big impression on Bill Ruehl when he was a student. That's not 
the rock icon of the 1960s but one of his lesser-known contemporaries, a 
much-loved, mixed-breed dog belonging to Ruehl's roommate.

 Zappa (the dog) did not age gracefully. Despite having for years competently 
differentiated outdoors from in, Zappa lost his house-training. He also stopped 
sleeping normally and paced during the night. He got stuck in familiar rooms as 
if he couldn't work out the route past a chair or sofa. At least once a day, 
Ruehl or his roommate had to rescue the dog because he'd wandered to a 
neighbor's and been unable to find his way home.

 Today, veterinarian William W. Ruehl is vice president of scientific affairs 
for Deprenyl Animal Health in Overland Park, Kan. The company has applied to 
the Food and Drug Administration to market what would be the first drug in the 
United States approved to treat behavior troubles of older dogs like Zappa.

 Just the possibility that something could perk up doddering pets is stirring 
discussion of the mental problems of aged animals. The drug application has 
called attention to years of research exploring whether canine troubles 
resemble Alzheimer's disease in humans and whether drugs that affect human 
brain chemistry can help old animals.

 Pets, like people, live longer now, thanks to advances in medicine and 
nutrition. The American Veterinary Medical Association estimates that the 
United States alone has more than 7.3 million dogs aged 11 or older, 
representing some 14 percent of the canine pets in the country. As the number 
of four-legged senior citizens grows, Ruehl and other veterinarians predict 
more age-related brain problems in pets, much like the rise in Alzheimer's 
disease in people.

     

 Today, Zappa's diagnosis would be "cognitive dysfunction," but veterinarian 
Katherine A. Houpt remembers when such complaints were described as "fear of 
dying" in old pets. As director of Cornell University's Animal Behavior Clinic, 
she has seen a number of dogs whose behavior changed sadly in old age. Like 
Zappa, they soiled floors, paced at night, and got lost in their yards. Many 
eventually failed to recognize their owners.

 These animals' personalities changed, too. One malamute-size dog refused to 
eat from a bowl anymore and hid under furniture. Formerly stouthearted sorts 
developed terrible thunder phobias. Another patient slept all day in the shower 
stall and spent the night digging around in closets and tearing at the 
furniture, acting like a dog left alone even though the whole family occupied 
their usual beds.

"It's really heartbreaking," Houpt says.

 Like Alzheimer's disease in people, the diagnosis for cognitive dysfunction in 
dogs and cats comes after excluding other medical causes. Ruehl describes a 
hypothetical schnauzer who seems frequently disoriented and has started to 
circle in one spot for no apparent reason. Is its brain giving way?

 It's a tempting diagnosis, Ruehl admits, but suppose the alert owner realizes 
the dog seems worst after meals. The schnauzer could easily have not a 
cognitive problem but a liver disorder that allows buildup of toxic by-products 
that cloud its brain.

 David S. Bruyette of VCA/West Los Angeles Veterinary Medical Group has run 
across the opposite problem, people blaming what are cognitive problems in 
their pets on physical maladies. When owners tell him that old dogs are going 
deaf because they fail to respond to commands, Bruyette suggests an easy 
hearing test: Turn on the electric can opener. That's one of the last sounds a 
pet's dysfunctional brain fails to process, he says.

 To estimate how many dogs develop cognitive dysfunction, Ruehl and Benjamin L. 
Hart of the University of California, Davis surveyed owners of nearly 140 dogs 
between the ages of 11 and 16 that had no known ailments. Sixty-two percent of 
the dogs showed at least one sign of cognitive decline, the researchers 
reported in Psychopharmacology of Animal Behavior Disorders (1998, Nicholas H. 
Dodman and Louis Shuster, eds., Blackwell Science). The survey probed four 
categories of complaints: failures in house-training, changes in sleep 
patterns, disorientation, and changes in sociability.

 Such a breakdown in brainpower can be just as life-threatening as failures in 
other organs, Bruyette points out. He made a presentation on cognitive 
dysfunction to the American Animal Hospital Association at this year's annual 
meeting in Chicago, and he has conducted clinical trials for Deprenyl Animal 
Health.

"Most commonly in veterinary medicine, [cognitive dysfunction] becomes a fatal 
disorder because the bond between the client and the pet has been broken," he 
says. "It's not the same pet anymore. The owner just gets frustrated." And the 
pet gets euthanized.

 Are these symptoms inevitable on the last lap of normal aging in dogs, or does 
cognitive dysfunction mean the dog has an injured or diseased brain? "Nobody 
has the data to answer that question," says Gary M. Landsberg of Doncaster 
Animal Clinic in Thornhill, Ontario. Senility does not strike all dogs, he 
points out. "We have graceful agers-whether people or animals."

     

 The search for physical signs of aging, or of age-related disorders, in dog 
brains dates back as far as 1914. In recent years, some of the most-discussed 
work has come from Brian J. Cummings, Carl W. Cotman, and their colleagues at 
the University of California, Irvine (UCI). After examining preserved dog 
brains, the researchers in 1993 described plaques of a nerve-harming protein 
called beta-amyloid often appearing in old brain tissue. The protein gobs in 
dogs resemble the denser plaques of beta-amyloid that are characteristic of the 
brains of Alzheimer's patients. However, dogs fail to develop the second major 
kind of brain deposit seen in Alzheimer's, knots of material called 
neurofibrillary tangles.

 Even without tangles, plaques may correlate with behavior changes in dogs. 
Research by Elizabeth Head, also at UCI, and others shows that dogs whose 
brains hold lots of plaques are more likely to flub certain learning tests. 
Ability to remember locations declines, as do scores on tests that require dogs 
to associate a food reward with one stimulus but not another. Also, dogs with 
more plaques make more mistakes in so-called reversal learning, in which the 
animal learns that an action will earn a food reward and then must learn to 
perform the opposite action to get the reward.

 Cummings has suggested that these older dogs could be useful for researchers 
studying the early stages of a human brain sinking into Alzheimer's.

 Lary C. Walker of Parke-Davis Pharmaceutical Research in Ann Arbor, Mich., 
notes that dogs may have been the first animal known to develop brain plaques 
with age, but researchers have found similar deposits in monkeys and even polar 
bears. They have also genetically engineered mice that build up brain plaques.

"I hate to throw cold water on these things," Walker says, "but there is no 
animal that completely models Alzheimer's disease." None of the animals 
examined seem to develop tangles in their brains. As far as animal behavior 
goes, "there's nothing that reaches the degree of decline in humans."

 However, Walker argues, canine senior citizens can help researchers study 
another condition intertwined with Alzheimer's. Beta-amyloid also accumulates 
within blood vessels in the brain, boosting the risk of strokes. Dogs, he 
notes, make great laboratory models for this buildup.

 So far, no evidence shows one breed more at risk than another for plaque 
buildup, Ruehl says. Yet researchers aren't ready to dismiss genetics as 
contributing to cognitive dysfunction. Michael Russell of the University of 
California, Davis found that laboratory beagles whose brains built up a lot of 
plaque were likely to have littermates with the same trait. And beagles with 
cleaner brains had similar littermates.

     

 Cat geriatrics has lagged behind dog studies, but Landsberg presented informal 
survey results about cats at this year's annual meeting of the American 
Veterinary Medical Association in Baltimore. He conducted clinical trials of 
Deprenyl Animal Health's new drug for cognitive dysfunction in dogs and then 
asked owners of 32 older cats if they had noticed similar declines.

"Many of the behavior changes of cognitive dysfunction seen in dogs also occur 
in elderly cats, but at perhaps an older age of onset," he concluded. Most 
people didn't bother to talk to the vet about these symptoms because they 
assumed there was nothing they could do.

 And is there anything? The two drugs approved in the United States for 
Alzheimer's in people are not in veterinary use. The United Kingdom has 
approved a drug called nicergoline for old dogs' behavior, and pet owners 
everywhere have been experimenting with other medications, such as extracts of 
the ginkgo tree.

"Anything you hear on the news, people are going to put into a pet," Bruyette 
remarks.

 In early 1997, Canada approved Deprenyl Animal Health's version of a 
Parkinson's disease medication for humans called l-deprenyl, or selegiline, for 
use in addled, elderly dogs. The dog drug goes by the trade name Anipryl. It 
had earlier won approval for use in canine Cushing's disease, a hormonal 
imbalance, in both Canada and the United States.

 In a controlled clinical trial of l-deprenyl involving nearly 200 dogs, owners 
reported improvements in behavior in 70 percent of the pets, Ruehl told the 
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine meeting this May in San Diego. 
Behavior changes started showing up within a week to a month of the start of 
drug treatment.

 As for cats, Landsberg knows of no published study on l-deprenyl use. He has 
prescribed it for 13 cats, aged 14 or older, and he says that 10 of the owners 
reported improved behavior in their pets.

 The l-deprenyl bandwagon is rolling through the veterinary community, building 
interest in the treatment, observes Nicholas H. Dodman, a behavioral specialist 
at Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine in North Grafton, Mass. "I 
remain probably the most skeptical of my group," he says.

 The proposed explanation of how the drug works leaves Dodman with questions. 
l-deprenyl keeps the enzyme monoamine oxidase B from playing its normal role in 
breaking down dopamine in the brain, and Ruehl has suggested that the drug 
perks up old pets largely by increasing dopamine levels and activity.

 Dodman, however, points out that one of the drug's breakdown products is an 
amphetamine, a stimulant. He asks if enough is produced to explain the 
increased alertness of an ailing pet receiving the drug. Ruehl responds that 
"at the relatively low, recommended doses, [breakdown products'] contribution 
is likely minimal."

 Whatever the mechanism by which l-deprenyl acts in pets, "there does appear to 
be some therapeutic efficacy," Dodman acknowledges. "I understand it's only 
temporary-you can allow their candle to burn for a little longer."

 As canine and feline America continues to gray, more pet owners will confront 
the question of just what that candle stub of animal companionship is worth.

     

               

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 16, October 17, 1998, p. 252. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


