Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/6/97

 September 6, 1997 

 Spacecraft probes beneath sun's surface

by R. Cowen

 Glimpsed by the naked eye, the sun's surface appears smooth and uniform. Solar 
astronomers, however, see it as a witch's cauldron, belching blobs of hot gas 
and energetic radiation far into space. Data from a spacecraft now allow 
scientists to dig deep under the surface, probing the turbulent motions that 
power these eruptions.

 By watching the rise and fall of gas at the surface, motion generated by sound 
waves emerging from the deep interior, researchers over the past 2 decades have 
begun mapping the flow of gases thousands of kilometers below (SN: 4/3/93, p. 
213). The latest maps, compiled from data collected by an instrument aboard the 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft, may provide new insight 
into the origin of sunspots, concentrated magnetic fields that appear from 
Earth as dark blemishes.

 The data, presented last week at a NASA press briefing in Washington, D.C., 
highlight the sun's diversity. Ground-based observations taken more than a 
decade ago had indicated that the sun is ringed by bands of gas moving at 
different speeds. The observations from SOHO, launched in late 1995 and now 
poised 1.5 million kilometers sunward from Earth, confirm the existence of 
these bands and reveal that they extend far beneath the surface, penetrating at 
least 19,000 km.

 Each belt is a swath, more than 64,000 km wide, of charged gas that travels 
about 16 km per hour relative to its surroundings. Researchers liken the belts 
to the trade winds circling Earth's equator or the colorful bands of gas 
ringing Jupiter. Intriguingly, note SOHO investigators Craig DeForest and 
Jesper Schou of Stanford University, the boundaries between neighboring belts 
are precisely where sunspots form.

 The change of speed across the boundaries could twist and intensify magnetic 
field activity inside the sun, suggests solar astronomer Douglas O. Gough of 
the University of Cambridge in England. At the surface, such activity could 
generate a sunspot. Alternatively, notes SOHO researcher Philip H. Scherrer of 
Stanford, cause and effect may work the other way around: The intense magnetic 
field may present an obstacle to the flow of gas, giving rise to the bands.

 In either case, the link between the bands and magnetic field activity 
provides "an inroad to understanding the 11-year sunspot cycle, which has been 
puzzling us for centuries," DeForest says. As the sunspot cycle progresses, the 
sites where these short-lived features originate move from the north and the 
south toward the equator. Like the illusion of sinking stripes on a barber 
pole, "the bands that we see are also slowly migrating toward the equator, at 
just the same rate as the sunspots," says Gough.

 This movement, he adds, is complicated by another global pattern detected by 
SOHO. Data taken over the past year show that the sun's outer layer, to a depth 
of at least 24,000 km, displays an overall flow of gas from the equator to the 
poles of about 80 km per hour.

"That's quite different from Earth, and that is something we have yet to 
understand," says Gough.

 Another SOHO discovery ranks as an even bigger surprise, says Schou. Data 
compiled by the craft's Michelson Doppler imager show evidence of jet streams 
near the poles. Within several flattened oval regions that ring the sun at 75@ 
latitude, gaseous material moves about 10 percent faster than the surrounding 
gases. Moreover, these streams are entirely submerged. Gough theorizes that the 
feature may be temporary, a signpost of the new solar cycle that began about 
1.5 years ago.


