Science News Online (10/17/98): Infections May Underlie Cerebral Palsy

 October 17, 1998 

 Infections May Underlie Cerebral Palsy

 By N. Seppa

 For more than 150 years, most doctors have believed that cerebral palsy-a form 
of brain damage that impairs movements-results from a difficult birth that 
temporarily deprives a fetus of oxygen.

 While asphyxia may indeed be a cause of cerebral palsy, a new study provides 
evidence that the brain damage might often arise from some other, as yet 
unidentified assault on an unborn child. Molecular clues now lead to 
inflammatory infection as a possible culprit, says Karin B. Nelson, a pediatric 
neurologist at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke in 
Bethesda, Md.

 Nelson and her colleagues report in the October Annals of Neurology that some 
cytokines, proteins that direct immune cells' responses against foreign 
microbes and perform other duties, are abundant in newborns who were later 
diagnosed with cerebral palsy.

 A placental infection and its potentially harmful effects might send a fetus' 
immune system spinning into action making cytokines, Nelson says. Little is 
known about this risk because after supervising a birth, obstetricians seldom 
examine the placenta for signs of inflammation, she adds. Also, an infection in 
the mother could ship potent toxins through the placenta.

 Using blood taken from infants immediately after delivery, the researchers 
compared 31 children who showed symptoms of cerebral palsy several months after 
birth with a control group of 65 children without cerebral palsy. All the 
births were full-term. By testing for dozens of immune-system compounds, the 
team found that all the stricken children harbored greater concentrations of 
five cytokines than any of the controls.

 The cytokines may indicate a subtle attack on the fetus, says Nelson. "This 
may not be an acute, overwhelming infection at the time of birth," she says. 
"It may be a long-standing infection [in the mother] that has had a chance to 
march through the placenta."

"This is very important and perhaps novel work that hopefully will redirect 
thinking about causes of brain damage and, ultimately, cerebral palsy," says 
Karl C. Kuban, a pediatric neurologist at Tufts University School of Medicine 
and the Floating Hospital for Children in Boston. The new study supports other 
work suggesting that in cerebral palsy, "something went awry in development 
rather than delivery," he says.

 The study also reveals that the children with cerebral palsy were much more 
likely than those in the control group to have excess amounts of several 
proteins that regulate blood clotting. Moreover, blood from three children with 
cerebral palsy, but none from the control group, contained an anticoagulant 
associated with lupus. This hints that the autoimmune disease, in which the 
body's immune cells attack its own tissue, might have been present in the 
mother or child. Thus, in addition to raising a red flag for infections, the 
data suggest an autoimmune reaction in some of these fetuses.

 Although the cause of cerebral palsy remains hidden, previous research has 
suggested that both premature birth and maternal infections can boost the risk 
of the disorder. Nelson and study coauthor Judith K. Grether of the California 
Birth Defects Monitoring Program in Emeryville reported in 1997 that mothers 
with a fever at birth were more likely to have a child with cerebral palsy than 
healthy mothers. However, roughly half of children with cerebral palsy are born 
full-term to outwardly healthy mothers.

 Despite vast improvements in obstetrics that have made childbirth safer,the 
frequency of cerebral palsy hasn't dropped in recent decades. About 500,000 
people in the United States currently have the disorder.

 Researchers are working their way back from the symptoms of cerebral palsy to 
its possible causes. After discovering that fever and acute infection seem to 
place neonates at risk, the scientists have now identified excess cytokines. 
"It may be that, as we move backward, [the cause] may not have much to do with 
cytokines directly," Kuban says. "It may involve other factors." 

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 16, October 17, 1998, p. 244. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


