Science News Online (10/10/98): Fossil jaw tells tale of whale evolution

 October 10, 1998 

 Fossil jaw tells tale of whale evolution 

 By R. Monastersky

 Paleontologists have unveiled the fossilized lower jaw of an ancient whale 
from India that, they claim, pushes the origin of these marine mammals back 
before 53.5 million years ago, earlier than previously thought. This primitive 
species provides new information on the profound evolutionary transformation 
that turned a group of four-legged land mammals into modern cetaceans-the 
whales, dolphins, and porpoises inhabiting the ocean today-say the researchers.

 Other paleontologists, however, question the dating of the Indian fossil and 
whether it adds much to the story of whale origins.

 Indian scientists found the controversial jaw bone more than 12 years ago in 
the Subathu rock formation of northern India, but they failed to finish an 
analysis of the animal. Sunil Bajpai of the University of Roorkee in India and 
Philip D. Gingerich of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor collaborated on 
the current study. They described the animal, unofficially named Himalayacetus, 
at a meeting of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology in Snowbird, Utah, last 
week.

 The oldest accepted fossil whale, called Pakicetus, comes from rocks in the 
Indian subcontinent dated to 50 million years ago. Gingerich had previously 
calculated that there were scant odds of finding any other species prior to 52 
or 53 million years ago.

 Bajpai and Gingerich dated Himalayacetus using the shells of one species of 
tiny marine organisms called foraminifera, found in the same rock formation. 
The species of foraminifera suggests that the whale lived during the early 
Eocene epoch, whereas Pakicetus fossils have come from middle Eocene rocks.

 Other researchers contend the dating rests on thin evidence. The foraminifera 
in the Subathu formation lived near the seafloor and provide less accurate age 
information than do surface foraminifera, says paleontologist Hans Thewissen of 
the Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine in Rootstown. "The 
dating question is rather critical," he says.

 Nonetheless, the find extends the geographic range of known whale fossils. 
Thewissen, Gingerich, and others have found whale remains in Pakistan, central 
India, and Kashmir but not in Himachal Pradesh, the home of Himalayacetus.

 If Bajpai and Gingerich are correct about Himalayacetus, the Indian fossil 
would shift ideas about when whales invaded the oceans, says paleontologist 
Mark D. Uhen of the Cranbrook Institute of Science in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.

 Paleontologists believe that Pakicetus and other early cetaceans were furry, 
four-legged creatures that lived mostly on land, venturing into the water to 
feed on fish. According to current thinking, the earliest whales hunted in 
rivers and were unable to feed in salt water. Indeed, Pakicetus is found in 
river sediments, and the mixture of oxygen isotopes in its bones suggests it 
swam in fresh water.

 The Indian fossil, however, came from marine sediments containing oysters and 
other ocean species, indicating that Himalayacetus swam in salt water. The 
ratio of oxygen isotopes in its bones supports this interpretation.

"Before, we might have thought that [these early whales] were restricted to 
fresh water, but here is a record from a marine environment," says Gingerich.

 Despite its marine predilection, Himalayacetus apparently lacked key 
adaptations to aquatic life. Later whales developed enlarged canals in their 
lower jaws that improved their hearing underwater. Himalayacetus, though, had 
the small jaw canals of a land mammal, reports Gingerich. It appears that the 
Indian whale had already gained adaptations for feeding in salt water even 
though it could not hear well in that environment, he says.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 15, October 10, 1998, p. 229. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


