Does Light Have a Dark Side?: Science News Online, Oct. 17, 1998

 Does Light Have a Dark Side? Nighttime illumination might elevate cancer risk

 By J. Raloff

 Since life began, one pattern has dominated Earth's natural environment-a 
daily rhythm of intense sunlight alternating with nights of near-total 
darkness. As a source of heat and energy, sunlight powers a majority of the 
planet's biological activities. When that light disappears, much of the world 
rests.

 Humans, the grand manipulators, have not been content to cede control of their 
activity cycle to the heavens, however. People have spent eons developing ever 
better means to artificially extend the day. Thanks to widespread 
electrification and color-corrected, high-watt lightbulbs, synthetic sunlight 
can now bombard city dwellers around-the-clock.

 This attempt to erase the night-or at least to confine it to small, 
artificially defined windows-may come with a price. At a minimum, it can lead 
to a chronic lack of sleep, diminishing the effectiveness of the body's immune 
system. Some new studies, however, suggest the possibility of an even more 
worrisome threat.

 Exposure to light at night can disrupt the body's production of melatonin, a 
brain hormone best known for its daily role in resetting the body's biological 
clock (SN: 5/13/95, p. 300). Secreted primarily in the brain, and at night, 
melatonin triggers a host of biochemical activities, including a nocturnal 
reduction in the body's production of estrogen. Some researchers have 
speculated that chronically decreasing nocturnal melatonin production-as with 
light-might increase an individual's risk of developing estrogen-related 
malignancies, such as breast cancer.

 Two studies in Nordic populations now offer tentative support for this idea.

 According to neuroendocrinologist Russel J. Reiter of the University of Texas 
Health Science Center at San Antonio, the emerging science indicates that, 
functionally, "light is a drug"-and that "by abusing it, we risk imperiling our 
health."

 Light entering the eye allows our brains to sense the shape, size, color, and 
motion of objects around us. It also summons, albeit imperceptibly, a cadre of 
other biological sentinels. These go on to trumpet light's presence to distant 
tissues-organs and cells lacking the means to detect illumination directly.

 When these biochemical fanfares occur late at night, they can alter the timing 
of melatonin's peak output, as a landmark study in 1980 showed. Alfred J. Lewy 
and his colleagues at the National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md., 
shut down melatonin production in men by waking and exposing them to 2,500 lux 
of white light at 2 a.m., when synthesis of the hormone was at its peak. (For 
perspective, 100 lux may be found in a comfortably dim living room, whereas 
sunlight at high noon on a cloudless day can blast the eyes with 100,000 lux.) 
At the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland, 8 years later, Lewy and 
George C. Brainard, now at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, found 
that just 50 lux could do the same trick-if it is green light.

 At about the time this work was going on, Richard G. Stevens of the Energy 
Department's Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Wash., was 
developing a controversial theory now known as the melatonin hypothesis. It 
holds that long-term environmental perturbations in natural rhythms of 
melatonin secretion-by exposure to electromagnetic fields (SN: 1/10/98, p. 29) 
or to light at night-might increase cancer risk, especially in the breast, by 
increasing estrogen exposure.

 Since the theory's debut, researchers have shown in animals that melatonin 
also functions as an antioxidant (SN: 8/14/93, p. 109) and an anticarcinogen. 
Some rodent studies have also demonstrated that certain nascent cancers grow 
more rapidly when the animals encounter even low levels of light at night (see 
sidebar).

 The first preliminary evidence linking light to cancer in people emerged 8 
years ago in a report by Robert A. Hahn of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention in Atlanta. After combing statistics from a national survey on women 
who had been hospitalized between 1979 and 1987-including some 11,700 with 
breast cancer-he computed the incidence of this malignancy in blind and sighted 
women. If light alters cancer risk through some disruptive effect on melatonin, 
the epidemiologist reasoned, people whose eyes can't detect light should prove 
resistant. As a further test, he looked at heart-disease incidence, where 
melatonin should play no role.

 In the May 1991 EPIDEMIOLOGY, Hahn reported that although the profoundly blind 
women proved as likely as the sighted women to get heart disease, they appeared 
only half as prone to develop breast cancer.

 Probing this idea in more detail, Maria Feychting and her colleagues at the 
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm have just compared cancer incidence in 1,600 
profoundly blind men and women with that in 13,000 people having severe visual 
impairment. Because members of the second group could still perceive light, 
Feychting explains, they should resemble sighted people in terms of any light 
effects on melatonin.

 In the September EPIDEMIOLOGY, her team now reports finding that, as 
predicted, cancer incidence among the visually impaired individuals was 
virtually identical to that in Sweden's general population. People who were 
unable to detect light faced only 70 percent of that cancer risk.

 Among profoundly blind men, the lower incidence showed up largely in cancers 
of the prostate, stomach, colon, rectum, skin, and lung. Among profoundly blind 
women, less cancer occurred in the breast, ovaries, and stomach.

 The variety of cancers affected was unexpected. Feychting had anticipated that 
any change in cancer rates would trace to melatonin's influence on the body's 
production of estrogen (SN: 7/3/93, p. 10). High lifetime exposure to estrogen 
can spur the development of certain cancers, notably breast cancer. Instead, 
she now observes, melatonin may have a more general cancer-suppressing role.

 A new Finnish study also compares cancer incidence among profoundly blind 
people with rates in visually impaired men and women. Slated for publication in 
the November CANCER CAUSES AND CONTROL, the study found an even more sharply 
reduced incidence of breast cancer among people unable to perceive light than 
was seen in the Swedish study. It also found that cancer incidence rates in 
people with minor visual impairment "were rather close to those in the general 
population," notes Eero Pukkala, an epidemiologist with the Finnish Cancer 
Registry in Helsinki and one of the report's authors.

"Throughout the visual categories, we also see a nice trend of decreasing 
breast cancer risk with decreasing vision," he says. Indeed, this would make 
sense, argues Stevens, if the eyes of the more visually impaired individuals 
actually take in or sense less light-as occurs in many eye diseases.

 However, in sharp contrast to the Swedish analysis, Pukkala notes, profoundly 
blind individuals in his study showed no reduction in cancer risk for sites 
other than the breast. Because the Finnish study analyzed the same types of 
data as the Swedish study, and in a group of comparable size, he is perplexed 
by the dissimilarity in their findings for sites other than the breast.

 Although the findings of both studies are consistent with the premise that 
melatonin disruption by light promotes at least breast cancer in humans, 
Feychting and Pukkala acknowledge that both analyses fall far short of proving 
it. Their new studies are merely an initial probe of the potential link. 
Pukkala now plans a larger analysis, pooling data on blind and visually 
impaired individuals throughout the Nordic countries. He's hoping it will at 
least home in on the reasons for the discrepancies between the current 
studies-which he suspects trace to "differences in life habits" between Swedes 
and Finns such as nutrition, medical care, or social factors.

 Such discrepancies also might arise because some blind people may respond to 
light-even though they did not perceive it-by altering their 
melatonin-production cycles. Similarly, some sighted people may have abnormal 
rhythms. Neither Nordic study had the resources to measure each participant's 
daily cycle of melatonin production-a lengthy and cumbersome procedure that 
requires frequent, round-the-clock sampling of blood or urine.

 Steven W. Lockley, a chronobiologist at the University of Surrey in England, 
and his colleagues have made such measurements. And in the November 1997 
Journal of CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGY AND METABOLISM, they noted that melatonin 
cycles in the blind are anything but predictable.

 His group recruited 49 legally blind individuals to participate in a roughly 
month-long trial. Each collected his or her urine over a 48-hour span each 
week. The scientists then measured a melatonin byproduct in the urine.

 Among the 30 people unable to perceive light, 57 percent had a free-running 
rhythm-a cycle longer or shorter than 24 hours. "This included every single 
subject that we've studied who has had their eyes removed," he notes. Another 
23 percent had a normally cycling clock, with melatonin reliably peaking at 
night. The remainder had abnormal or unclassifiable cycles.

 Even among the 19 people in the study who could perceive light, 26 percent 
exhibited abnormal rhythms, with melatonin production peaking at times other 
than the middle of the night.

"So one can't assume that the melatonin rhythm in all blind people . . . is 
free-running-or that its peaks in light-sensitive individuals will be normal," 
observes neuroendocrinologist David E. Blask of the Mary Imogene Bassett 
Research Institute in Cooperstown, N.Y.

 Blask's studies of rats suggest that an abnormal timing of melatonin peaks can 
have a powerful effect on cancer.

 He administered cancer-causing chemicals to rats and then over subsequent 
weeks injected the animals daily with melatonin. The injections were timed to 
produce peaks during daylight hours, when melatonin concentrations should have 
been negligible.

 When those injections occurred mid-morning, tumors grew at the same rates seen 
in animals not receiving injections. However, in animals that received the 
hormone during the afternoon, "we see an inhibitory effect of the hormone on 
tumor growth, not only in liver cancers, but also in breast cancers."

 The findings suggest "that there is a rhythm of sensitivity within tumor 
tissues or in cells susceptible to becoming tumors," he told Science News. "And 
maybe in people who can't perceive light, the oscillating cycle of their 
biological clock causes their melatonin peaks to coincide with the inhibitory 
period of tumor cells more often than they do in light-sensitive people."

 The growing body of data on melatonin, light, and cancer suggests that certain 
populations, such as shift workers or others who regularly work in bright light 
at night, could face unusual risks, Blask argues. Certainly, he says, "the data 
are suggestive enough to raise eyebrows and prompt further serious study."

 William S. Baldwin and J. Carl Barrett of the National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C., agree that such 
theories should be tested-by probing the most likely mechanisms of light's 
effects. "When the melatonin hypothesis was first presented," the pair notes, 
"no putative melatonin receptors [on cells] were known." Since then, three 
types have been identified.

 In the March MOLECULAR CARCINOGENESIS, they lay out the molecular basis for 
concerns that light at night might prove an endocrine disrupter with the 
potential to increase cancer risk. They note that recent findings in several 
laboratories working with cells and with tissues removed from animals indicate 
that a reduction of melatonin can alter the production of other hormones, may 
suppress the immune system's ability to recognize and respond to newly emerging 
cancers, and appears to spur the growth of at least some tumor tissues.

 By studying which cells possess melatonin receptors and how cells use them to 
respond to the hormone-as Barrett's team and others are now doing-science may 
resolve whether night-time illumination truly threatens health, and if so, how 
much and in whom.

 Studies now under way are also testing which wavelengths-or colors-are most 
biologically active. For instance, blue and green light appear especially 
effective at inhibiting melatonin synthesis in healthy young men, according to 
studies by Brainard. Indeed, he notes that for some colors, "17 lux was 
sufficient to produce strong melatonin suppression in these men-and some had 
full suppression with exposure to as little as 5 lux." The latter "is a little 
more illumination than what you'd have with full moonlight."

 Brainard notes that the payoff for finding out what wavelengths are most 
hormonally disruptive could be insights on how "to tailor nighttime lighting to 
provide good vision without interfering with the melatonin rhythm." He says 
that "it may also help us develop more effective lights for use in treating 
winter depression and sleep disorders."

 Does Light Have a Dark Side?

 At least in rats, a little light throughout the night can have a dramatic 
impact on cancer, observes David E. Blask of the Mary Imogene Bassett Research 
Institute in Cooperstown, N.Y.

 Tumors can grow especially rapidly in rodents exposed to constant light, he 
notes-presumably because of a near-total suppression of their melatonin. To 
test just how much light was necessary to enhance tumor growth, he implanted 
liver-cancer cells into rats.

 His team housed one group of caged animals in a room illuminated 
around-the-clock with about 850 lux of white light, which is roughly equivalent 
to an office with medium lighting. A second group of animals spent their days 
in 850 lux but their nights in total darkness. A third group encountered almost 
the same light-dark cycle. The only difference: 0.2 lux leaked in at the bottom 
of the door to their room from a hallway outside-illumination well below that 
typical of a moonless night, he says.

 In the October 1997 LABORATORY ANIMAL SCIENCE, Blask's team reported that 
tumors in animals exposed to the crack of light coming under the room's door 
grew almost twice as fast as those in animals getting a night of total 
darkness. Indeed, he says, "animals exposed to the low-level light 
contamination had a tumor-growth rate virtually identical to that in the 
animals exposed to bright, constant light." He has just replicated the findings 
in an experiment in which the lighting was more rigorously controlled.


