Science News Online (10/10/98): Surreal Films

 October 10, 1998

 Surreal Films

 A soapy solution to the math puzzle of turning a sphere inside out

 By IVARS PETERSON

 Note: images for this article may be found at .

 Whether it's a child climbing a fence or a road crossing a mountain range, the 
most energy-efficient way to get from one side to the other is to follow the 
route that passes over the lowest spot.

 Mathematicians have now used a similar energy-saving strategy to provide a 
new, elegant solution to the problem of turning a sphere inside out.

 In principle, a determined beachgoer could invert a beach ball by deflating 
it, pulling the empty bag through its opening, and pumping the ball up again. 
The task for mathematicians is harder yet: The perfect sphere that they work 
with has no orifice, and the rules are different.

 Imagine a ball made of an extremely thin, delicate, ghostly membrane that can 
stretch, bend, and pass through itself. The idea is to turn such a sphere 
inside out without puncturing, ripping, or creasing it.

 You could try simply pushing the poles of a sphere toward each other, as if to 
make them pass through each other and change places. At some point, however, 
the distorted surface would develop a sharp kink that's not allowed, according 
to the mathematician's rules.

 Avoiding such a kink makes the task of exchanging a sphere's inner and outer 
surface-called an eversion-a challenging puzzle.

 In the past decade, after much effort, mathematicians discovered several ways 
to accomplish this feat (SN: 5/13/89, p. 299). The latest answer to the problem 
provides a geometrically optimal path-one that minimizes the energy needed to 
contort the sphere through its transformation.

"It's not just being able to do it, but being able to do it in the most 
efficient way possible," says mathematician John M. Sullivan of the University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

 The optimal sphere eversion, or optiverse, is now the star of a vivid, 
computer-generated video, titled The Optiverse, produced by Sullivan and his 
Illinois colleagues George K. Francis and Stuart Levy. It debuted in August at 
the International Congress of Mathematicians in Berlin.

"The sphere eversion problem is perennially intriguing," says Anthony V. 
Phillips of the State University of New York at Stony Brook. "The optiverse 
eversion is especially satisfying because it is natural. Given the central, 
twisted configuration [at the halfway point], the surface unwinds itself."

     

 Until 1957, mathematicians were unsure whether it is possible to turn a sphere 
inside out without making a hole in or creasing its surface. That uncertainty 
vanished when Stephen Smale, now at the University of California, Berkeley, 
proved a theorem in the field of differential topology demonstrating the 
feasibility of a sphere eversion. The proof furnished no explicit picture of 
how to do it, however.

 The extraordinary difficulty of visualizing the details of a sphere eversion 
made it a tremendous challenge to mathematicians and inspired some of the first 
applications of computer graphics to mathematics.

 One early procedure was discovered in 1967 by Bernard Morin, a blind 
topologist at the Louis-Pasteur University in Strasbourg, France. In 1977, 
Morin's sphere eversion became the basis of an animated film by Nelson L. Max 
of the Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory. To create it, Max 
started with a database of coordinates obtained from wire-mesh models depicting 
11 stages in the transformation.

 Other mathematicians discovered alternative schemes, gradually simplifying the 
steps to make the process easier to follow-in effect, telling the story from 
different geometric points of view (SN: 6/20/92, p. 404).

 William P. Thurston, now at the University of California, Davis, found a 
particularly striking eversion in which the sphere's initially unwrinkled 
surface develops a symmetric set of bulges along its equator. Those ruffles 
enable the sphere to twist around potential kinks as its inside and outside 
surfaces exchange places. The computer-generated video Outside In provided a 
dramatic view of the entire eversion (SN: 9/2/95, p. 155).

 The trouble with these eversions, however, was that they consisted of a series 
of stages that didn't lead automatically from one to the next.

     

 The new approach was inspired by the idea that a mathematical sphere could be 
treated like a rubber ball or soap bubble. Adding a little physics to the math, 
Robert B. Kusner of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in the early 
1980s adopted the notion that such a sphere's surface energy depends on how 
much bending occurs. A smooth sphere has the smallest overall surface energy, 
and distortions of the sphere increase that energy.

 During any sphere eversion, the surface energy rises to a maximum, then falls 
back to its minimum when it achieves the inside-out spherical shape. Moreover, 
topologists have already proved that every eversion must pass through a 
distorted shape in which at least four sections of the surface meet at one 
point.

 Kusner discovered a surface that resembles the halfway point in the original 
Morin sphere eversion, when the inside and outside are equally exposed. This 
shape also has the smallest surface energy of any formation in which four 
surfaces meet at a point. He conjectured that this complicated, 
self-intersecting surface might correspond in terms of energy to a saddle 
point-like a pass through a mountain range. Going downhill from that midpoint 
configuration to surfaces of lower energy, one could travel in one direction to 
end up with the original sphere or in another direction to end up with the 
inside-out sphere.

 In effect, all one would have to do is nudge the intermediate surface, and it 
would automatically snap into its original or inside-out configuration.

 Deciding whether a sphere eversion based on this principle would work, 
however, required additional research. "There were three possible worries," 
Sullivan notes.

 It was possible that the energy of Kusner's surface put it at the bottom of a 
hollow in the middle of a mountain pass. In that case, a big push would be 
needed to get that configuration out of its local depression and on its way to 
the original or the everted sphere.

 Another possibility was that all routes would lead to the original, but not 
the inside-out sphere, or vice versa. Finally, the downhill, energy-minimizing 
route might pass through an illegal, pinched configuration.

     

 When Kusner conceived of his sphere eversion, there was no graphics software 
for modeling the type of energy-driven transformations that he had in mind.

 More than a decade later, the availability of powerful computers and 
interactive software for studying surface shapes finally made it feasible to 
test his approach.

 The Surface Evolver computer program, created by Kenneth A. Brakke of 
Susquehanna University in Selinsgrove, Pa., uses energy-minimizing principles 
to enable researchers to find the contours of soap films, explore the geometry 
of foams (SN: 3/5/94, p. 149), and study how shapes change under a variety of 
circumstances (SN: 12/23&30/89, p. 408). Brakke and Sullivan added constraints 
to the Evolver's procedures, enabling the software to simulate a mathematical 
sphere as it everted.

"We did not know ahead of time that the Evolver would be successful in 
producing a sphere eversion," Sullivan says.

 The program represents surfaces as grids of triangles, and the software 
computes how each of the grid's vertices moves to minimize surface energy. Each 
frame of the resulting video uses from 1,000 to 2,000 triangles to approximate 
the contorting sphere's curved surface.

 Sullivan and his coworkers visualized the eversion in a variety of ways, 
cutting away parts of the surface or making the sphere transparent to reveal 
its inner contortions. The visual effect was unearthly: a weirdly shaped bubble 
performing a surreal gymnastic routine.

     

 Mathematically, the computations and resulting animation provided evidence 
that Kusner's eversion works. The midway surface configuration appears to 
represent a true saddle point.

 Additional computer experiments revealed that the case in which four surface 
sections meeting at one point is just the simplest member of an infinite family 
of eversions, each one characterized by a different number of intersecting 
surface sections at the crucial halfway mark of the eversion.

 The energy-minimizing approach pioneered for the sphere eversion may prove 
useful for other transformations, such as turning the surface of a doughnut (or 
torus) inside out. Maybe, Sullivan suggests, there's an efficient way to 
perform that conversion.

 However, many of the mathematical theorems describing the surface energy of a 
sphere have not yet been fully established for a torus. "I'm not sure where to 
start looking for the unstable critical tori from which I could push off to go 
downhill," Sullivan notes.

 Sullivan can show, for example, that for some starting surfaces, the downhill 
path leads to pinching. "Perhaps it is just luck that the sphere eversion 
avoids this pitfall," he remarks.

 So, the quest for shape shifters isn't over. It's likely that the 
sphere-eversion problem and its variants will continue to serve as a rich 
testing ground for mathematical ideas and computer graphics techniques.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 15, October 10, 1998, p. 232. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.

     

 Note: images for this article may be found at .


