Science News Online (10/10/98): Infrared Camera Goes the Distance

 October 10, 1998 

 Infrared Camera Goes the Distance

 By R. Cowen

 Viewing the world through rose-colored glasses has its advantages. Using its 
infrared camera, the Hubble Space Telescope has peered deeper into space and 
farther back in time than ever before, finding several galaxies that may be the 
most distant known in the cosmos.

 Astronomers estimate that some of the galaxies are so distant that the light 
they emitted more than 12 billion years ago has only now reached Earth. If the 
universe is 13 billion years old-estimates vary-then the images reveal what 
these starlit bodies looked like just 700,000 years after the Big Bang.

 The faint objects are among 300 or so imaged earlier this year when Hubble 
revisited the scene of a previous triumph, a patch of sky near the handle of 
the Big Dipper. For 10 days in late 1995, the telescope's visible-light camera 
stared at the region, dubbed the Hubble Deep Field, and revealed some 1,500 
galaxies (SN: 1/20/96, p. 36). Last January, Hubble reexamined about one-sixth 
of the field in the near-infrared.

 About 100 of the galaxies found in the near-infrared had not been seen in 
visible light. Most are not believed to lie very far away but were hidden by 
dust, which absorbs visible light and reradiates it in the infrared. About 10 
of the faint objects, however, may reside at the edge of the observable 
universe, says Rodger I. Thompson of the University of Arizona in Tucson. He 
and a colleague, Lisa J. Storrie-Lombardi of the Carnegie Observatories in 
Pasadena, Calif., presented the images this week at a briefing in Washington, 
D.C.

 To estimate the distances of the galaxies, Thompson's team relied on a key 
property of hydrogen: This most common of elements readily absorbs ultraviolet 
light. The more distant the galaxy, the more hydrogen lies between it and 
Earth, and the more its ultraviolet emission is dimmed. The expansion of the 
universe slightly complicates the story-it shifts the absorption toward longer 
wavelengths by an amount that increases with the galaxy's distance. For a 
galaxy some 12 billion light-years from Earth, the absorption shifts from the 
ultraviolet into visible light.

 The team found several galaxies that appeared about equally bright at 
near-infrared wavelengths of 1.1 and 1.6 micrometers but didn't show up in the 
visible-light images. "We can't absolutely claim that these are the most 
distant objects [known] in the universe," says Thompson, but they "are very 
good candidates."

 He emphasizes that these galaxies are so dim that measuring their distances 
may require Hubble's successor, the Next Generation Space Telescope, which is 
not scheduled for launch until 2007.

 Finding galaxies that existed so soon after the Big Bang puts a bigger burden 
on theories that seek to explain galaxy formation. "It's entirely plausible 
that we are pushing back the frontier even farther," says James D. Lowenthal of 
the University of Massachusetts in Amherst.

 The new images also solve a puzzle. Each bluish knot of light in the 
visible-light pictures had appeared to be a separate, compact galaxy about 
halfway to the edge of the universe. But there were far too many of these 
objects to square with the relatively small population of such bodies in the 
nearby cosmos. The infrared images reveal that many of these are in fact 
star-forming regions within much larger, older galaxies.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 15, October 10, 1998, p. 228. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


