Science News Online (10/10/98): Stopgap measure could limit stroke damage

 October 10, 1998 

 Stopgap measure could limit stroke damage

 By J.Travis

 When a person suffering a stroke is rushed to a hospital, the problems are 
just starting. The oxygen deprivation caused by an obstructed blood flow to the 
brain slays an initial cluster of nerve cells, but perhaps twice as many nearby 
cells will die over the next day or two. "The later injury is actually what's 
important in stroke," says Maiken Nedergaard of New York Medical College in 
Valhalla.

 What's puzzling about this secondary damage is that the cells that die never 
suffer from a loss of blood flow. "They're not killed by a lack of oxygen," 
notes Nedergaard's colleague Jane H.-C. Lin.

 Laboratory experiments now show that dying brain cells can induce the suicide 
of healthy neighboring cells, even ones deliberately made more resistant to 
cell death, report Lin, Nedergaard, Steven Goldman of Cornell University 
Medical Center in New York City, and their colleagues in the October Nature 
Neuroscience. The command to die seems to propagate outward from the dying 
cells through cell-to-cell conduits called gap junctions, raising the hope that 
physicians may one day minimize stroke damage by blocking the junctions.

 Almost wherever cells crowd together, gap junctions, formed by proteins called 
connexins, link the interiors of abutting cells. These tunnels allow certain 
molecules, such as calcium ions, to diffuse freely between cells. In the heart, 
for example, molecules flowing through gap junctions help synchronize the 
contractions of the organ.

 Lin and her colleagues grew brain cells in the laboratory and then added the 
gene for a connexin. When the researchers forced the cells to the verge of 
death using oxygen deprivation or chemical treatment and then mixed them with 
untreated healthy cells, the dying cells somehow induced the suicide of healthy 
cells connected to them by gap junctions. Even cells genetically engineered to 
resist apoptosis, the form of cell suicide observed by the scientists, fell 
prey to dying neighbors. Cells without the connexin gene didn't harm nearby 
cells, however.

 The researchers also examined the astrocytes-one of the cell types that 
support the signal-processing neurons of the brain-of rodents subjected to a 
strokelike event. They confirmed that the gap junctions among the astrocytes 
remained open during the event. Astrocytes have more than 30,000 gap junctions, 
making them a strong candidate to spread any apoptotic signal, says Nedergaard.

"When we think of apoptosis, we think of cells protecting their neighbors [by 
killing themselves]. This would be a different twist," notes Stuart A. Lipton 
of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. He and his colleague Samantha L. 
Budd, in an accompanying commentary in Nature Neuroscience, suggest that 
apoptosis "could be a 'contagious' process."

 The nature of the death signal remains undetermined, although researchers 
raise calcium ions as a possibility. Ions flowing from dying cells to healthy 
neighbors could trigger apoptosis, they say.

 Whatever the signal or signals, Nedergaard believes that by closing or 
blocking the gap junctions in astrocytes, physicians might one day lessen the 
secondary brain cell death caused by strokes. While several molecules that 
inhibit gap junctions have been identified, they don't specifically target the 
channels. "A big challenge for the future is to develop more efficient gap 
junction blockers," says Nedergaard.

 Nevertheless, she and her colleagues are exploring the possibility of using 
one known gap junction blocker, halothane, on people who have suffered a 
stroke. Halothane is a widely used surgical anesthetic and has already shown 
some ability in animals to protect brain cells from strokelike damage.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 15, October 10, 1998, p. 230. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


