Science News Online (10/24/98): Bright Lights Dim Winter Depression

 October 24, 1998 

 Bright Lights Dim Winter Depression

 By B. Bower

 For the past 15 years, a small group of researchers has argued that people who 
sink into troughs of severe depression every winter can feel much better if 
they receive daily exposure to artificial bright light for at least a week. But 
many mental health clinicians have suspected that, instead, light therapy's 
reported effects reflect depressed volunteers' great expectations about the 
power of indoor illumination.

 Two new studies, both published in the October Archives of General Psychiatry, 
counter this clinical skepticism with demonstrations that light 
therapy-especially if administered in the morning-dampens winter depression 
much more than placebo treatments do.

 Biological mechanisms through which bright lights produce antidepressant 
relief remain poorly understood. A third study in the same issue suggests that 
morning doses of bright light work by moving up by an hour or two the nightly 
secretion of melatonin, a hormone involved in sleep regulation and daily 
biochemical rhythms (SN:10/17/98, p. 248).

"Light therapy should be considered a mainstream antidepressant [therapy]," 
remarks psychologist Anna Wirz-Justice of the Psychiatric University Clinic in 
Basel, Switzerland, in an accompanying comment. "Light is as effective as 
[antidepressant] drugs, perhaps more so."

 Along with feelings of sadness, anxiety, and lethargy, winter depression also 
frequently includes difficulty awakening in the morning, daytime drowsiness, 
cravings for sweet or starchy foods, and big weight gains. An estimated 1 in 10 
people in Alaska and other northern regions-and 1 in 100 people in 
Florida-experience this condition, which is also known as seasonal affective 
disorder (SAD; SN: 7/25/92, p. 62).

 In one of the new studies, a team led by psychologist Michael Terman of 
Columbia University recruited 124 volunteers, ages 18 to 65, who exhibited SAD. 
Over 20 to 28 days, 85 participants received daily 30-minute exposures to 
bright light from a box mounted above the head. Some had light therapy in the 
morning, others in the evening, and some switched from one time to the other 
halfway through the trial.

 The remaining volunteers sat for 30 minutes each morning in front of an 
apparatus called a negative-ion generator, which emitted either low or high 
densities of air ions. These treatments were intended to serve as placebos.

 About 60 percent of those who received morning light therapy displayed marked 
improvement in SAD symptoms, compared with about 30 percent of those on the 
evening light regimen. Winter depression eased in only 5 percent of volunteers 
exposed to low-density ions.

 Lessening of SAD also occurred in 40 percent of those exposed to high-density 
ions, a finding that needs to be explored further, the scientists say.

 The second study, directed by psychologist Charmane I. Eastman of 
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, found that nearly 60 
percent of volunteers diagnosed with winter depression greatly improved after 4 
weeks of daily sessions of morning bright light lasting 90 minutes. The 
proportion of treatment responders reached only 44 percent for those given 
evening bright-light doses and 36 percent for volunteers whose daily regimen 
consisted of sitting in front of a negative-ion generator that made a soft 
hissing sound but, unknown to them, was not turned on.

 Eastman's group studied a total of 96 people diagnosed with SAD.

 A third study consisted of 51 people with winter depression and 49 individuals 
with no psychiatric disorders. Two weeks of 2-hour morning bright-light 
exposures reduced SAD symptoms much more than comparable evening light therapy 
did, report psychiatrist Alfred J. Lewy of the Oregon Health Sciences 
University in Portland and his coworkers. This study contained no placebo 
treatment.

 Morning light therapy also advanced the onset of daily melatonin secretion by 
nearly 2 hours in the SAD patients, a process that may underlie its 
antidepressant effects, Lewy theorizes. Healthy participants exhibited no large 
changes in mood or melatonin secretion.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 17, October 24, 1998, p. 260. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


