Science News Online (10/31/98): Geologists anticipate an oil crisis soon

 October 31, 1998 

 Geologists anticipate an oil crisis soon

 By  R. Monastersky 

 Cheap oil has helped fuel the economic boom of the 1990s. But petroleum prices 
will jump drastically in the near future, as the world starts to feel the pinch 
of tightening hydrocarbon supplies, according to several forecasts. 

 Some see the shock coming in only a few years, while others put it off for 
more than 2 decades. Nonetheless, these pessimistic predictions agree that oil 
production will soon peak and then start sliding downward, even as demand for 
oil continues to climb.

"For over 150 years, mankind has been used to an ever-growing supply of cheap 
and abundant energy," says Colin J. Campbell, a former exploration geologist 
now doing studies for Petroconsultants in Geneva. His analysis calls for 
production to peak in less than a decade. "The implications of this on 
industry, world politics, and economics seems to me to be enormous," he said 
this week at the annual meeting of the Geological Society of America in Toronto.

 Campbell and his colleague at Petroconsultants Jean H. Laherrere reached their 
conclusion by estimating the remaining underground reserves of so-called 
conventional petroleum -- oil that is relatively easy to extract. Such oil 
accounts for 95 percent of the 800 billion barrels of oil that the world has 
burned thus far, says Campbell.

 Going country by country, Campbell and Laherrere started with published 
tallies of oil deposits and made adjustments in cases where industry data 
indicates that nations had inflated their figures. Extrapolating from these 
numbers and past oil-discovery rates, they estimate that roughly 1 trillion 
barrels of oil remain in known and undiscovered fields.

 Production will peak, they hypothesize, when the quantity of oil already 
burned equals the amount yet to be extracted. They expect that point to come 
within a decade but project oil prices to jump even sooner. The economic impact 
will occur when nations in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
gain control of the market after production begins to drop outside the Middle 
East.

 When worldwide production starts falling, nations could tap into 
nonconventional sources of oil, such as heavy oil, tar, and hydrocarbons locked 
in shales. But these will cost more to extract and process, say the researchers.

 Numbers only slightly more optimistic appeared in a March report by the 
International Energy Agency in Paris, which estimates there are 1.5 trillion 
barrels of conventional oil in reserves. The agency predicted that production 
would peak before 2015, so by 2020, demand will exceed supply by 17 million 
barrels a day.

 At this week's meeting, John D. Edwards of the University of Colorado at 
Boulder estimated that 2 trillion barrels of oil exist in known and 
undiscovered fields. Though he pushes the production peak back to 2020, his 
result "should urge us now to consider replacement energies."

 Some energy analysts, however, dispute such worrisome forecasts. Thomas S. 
Ahlbrandt of the U.S. Geological Survey in Denver, who leads an ongoing federal 
effort to estimate global reserves, finds hope in new technologies that allow 
companies to pursue oil in the deep sea and other areas previously unexamined. 
"Since 1990, the area available for exploration has doubled in the world."

 Advances are also helping companies after they locate oil. Three-dimensional 
seismic imaging has improved the mapping of fields, and whereas engineers once 
bored only vertically through Earth's crust, they now can steer their drilling, 
even horizontally.

 In its 1998 International Energy Outlook, the U.S. Energy Information 
Administration concluded that "technologies continue to evolve that 
significantly enhance both exploration and production capabilities." It does 
not forecast production to peak during the time frame of its analysis, which 
runs to 2020.

 Economist Morris Adelman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
challenges the practice of estimating oil reserves. "Nobody knows how much 
hydrocarbon exists or what percentage of that will be recoverable," he says.

 Judging from the histories of other geologic commodities, Adelman sees reasons 
to expect an increasing petroleum supply. "The tendency to deplete [a resource] 
is counteracted by increases in knowledge," he says.   

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 18, October 31, 1998, p. 278. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service


