Science News Online (10/24/98): Atom Tinkerer's Paradise

 October 24, 1998 

 Atom Tinkerer's Paradise

 Innovations to atom-imaging microscopes create labs on tips

 By PETER WEISS

 Maybe it was too big-or too small-a leap for his colleagues to fathom. 
Whatever the reason, the hostility of fellow surface scientists was unvarnished 
when James K. Gimzewski spoke at a 1985 surface-physics meeting about viewing a 
single molecule with a new type of instrument-the scanning tunneling microscope.

"They laughed me off the stage. It was new and they hated it," he says.

 Microscopists were no more welcoming, says Gimzewski, a physicist at IBM's 
Zurich Research Laboratory in Ruschlikon, Switzerland, where the scanning 
tunneling microscope (STM) was invented by his colleagues.

 Heinrich Rohrer, who was to share the 1986 Nobel Prize in Physics with IBM 
colleague Gerd Karl Binnig for his part in the invention, "asked me go to 
Australia and give a lecture at an international conference on microscopy. All 
the TEM [transmission electron microscope] guys were shouting and laughing off 
their heads," Gimzewski recalls.

 A dozen years later, these and other pioneers of STM are having the last 
laugh. The instruments and a host of its offspring, now known collectively as 
scanning probe microscopes, or SPMs, have become standard equipment in research 
labs around the globe.

 While best known-and most often used-for picturing features as small as single 
atoms, these atomic probes have acquired a wealth of other talents. Many of the 
new uses arise from modifications and ingenious tricks devised by determined 
researchers who regarded the microscopes as an invitation to improvise.

 Once skepticism wore off-and the Nobel Prize recognition sank in-scientists 
realized that an inspiring new terrain had opened up before them. In a world in 
which atoms could be studied only on average, they had dreamed of seeing and 
manipulating single atoms and molecules. The ability to touch their objects of 
study had always been denied to atomic-level scientists-along with the insights 
and freedom to explore that touching makes possible. Says Binnig, "Atoms are 
not untouchables anymore."

"What has surprised a lot of people is just how widespread the applications 
have become," says microscopist Phillip E. Russell of North Carolina State 
University in Raleigh. Scientists now can use SPMs to measure a wide variety of 
properties, such as the strength of single chemical bonds. They can also 
manipulate the atomic world in a growing number of ways-for instance, 
developing electronic devices made from single molecules and devising new 
compounds by snipping off atoms.

 As Gimzewski puts it, for the atomic and molecular realm, the scanning probe 
microscope is fast becoming "a laboratory on a tip."

     

 The innovators start from Rohrer and Binnig's basic concepts, now embodied in 
the two main types of scanning probe microscopes: the STM and the atomic force 
microscope (AFM). Binnig, Christoph Gerber of IBM, and Calvin F. Quate of 
Stanford University invented the AFM in 1986.

 The STM employs a very fine tip-only one or a few atoms across-connected to a 
piezoelectric element, a tiny cylinder that lengthens or shortens minutely as 
the voltage on it changes.

 When the probe is within roughly a nanometer of a conductive surface, there is 
a flow of tunneling current-so-called because the rules of quantum mechanics 
allow electrons to defy classical physics and penetrate an energy barrier 
presented by the gap as if they had tunneled through it. The current grows 
stronger if the tip moves closer.

 The instrument is designed so that a measure of the current feeds back to the 
piezoelectric element. The element adjusts its length to maintain a constant 
current and thus keep the tip at a constant height, a few angstroms, above the 
surface. As the tip scans across the surface, it traces a pattern matching the 
topography below. The landscape shows the shape of atoms but not necessarily 
their identity.

 Because the STM can depict only electrically conducting surfaces, its ability 
to investigate many materials, such as biological samples, is limited. AFMs 
overcome that restriction. Like the STM, they use an atomically sharp tip, but 
it is mounted on a cantilever resembling a miniature diving board, which flexes 
as the various electrostatic forces between the tip and atoms in the sample 
push or pull. The AFM maps the atomic surface by adjusting the cantilever's 
height to keep the force on its tip constant.

     

 Many scanning probe microscope innovators have propelled the evolution of the 
instruments by modifying tips or cantilevers. Some have replaced standard 
quartz or silicon tips used for imaging with more exotic materials. At Lawrence 
Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory, for instance, a team led by Miquel B. 
Salmeron uses SPMs with platinum tips to study, on an atomic scale, the 
catalytic reactions that this metal promotes.

 Others have mounted molecules on the tips to interact with the atoms or 
molecules under study in telling ways. To measure the binding forces within and 
between single molecules, for example, Hermann E. Gaub and his colleagues at 
Ludwig-Maximilians University in Munich stick a protein-receptor molecule to an 
AFM tip. They then bob this tip over a carpet of polymer strands studded with 
proteins that are mates for the receptor.

 By lowering and withdrawing the tip, a technique Gaub calls "fly fishing," the 
experimenters eventually snag a polymer molecule by the receptor hook. Then 
they throw the AFM into reverse, using the cantilever not to respond to a force 
but to exert one, tugging against the bond and measuring the force between hook 
and fish until molecules deform or break.

 Getting creative with cantilevers, Gimzewski and his colleagues conducted a 
series of experiments in which they made the tiny levers without tips, instead 
coating the undersides with a layer of material that expands and contracts with 
temperature, causing the cantilever to bend. Positioning such cantilevers above 
chemical reactions between atoms on a surface, the IBM research team was able 
to measure infinitesimal releases of heat from the reactions.

 In another variation of this experiment, they measured humidity by attaching 
absorbent minerals called zeolites to the end of a tip-free cantilever. As the 
zeolite absorbs or gives up water, its mass increases or decreases, changing 
the cantilever's vibration frequency.

 Other modifications to the sensing ends of SPMs have made the instruments able 
to respond to magnetic and electrical fields and flows of ions. Such 
innovations have proven so useful that whole subgroups of SPMs have sprung up, 
including magnetic force and magnetic resonance force microscopes, scanning 
capacitance microscopes, and scanning conducting ion microscopes.

     

 Some researchers have wrung additional performance out of SPMs by expanding 
the range of conditions under which the instruments work-for example, making 
machines that operate in extreme cold, maintain extraordinary stability, or 
make images in the presence of ultrasonic vibrations. Others have combined SPMs 
with other sorts of sensors, such as optical detectors, to enlarge the 
instruments' abilities.

 At Zhifeng Shao's lab at the University of Virginia School of Medicine in 
Charlottesville, researchers have built an AFM that works under freezing 
conditions in which biological molecules become still and relatively stiff, 
like hard rubber. At room temperature, biomolecules ordinarily wriggle and 
writhe, making them the bucking broncos of probe microscopy. The sharp tips of 
SPMs can gouge the often soft surfaces of biological materials, raising 
questions about the fidelity of images. Using "cryogenic AFM," Shao's team has 
made extraordinary snapshots of a number of biomolecules.

 In the laboratory of Cornell University's Wilson Ho, an STM can detect the 
vibrational energy of atomic bonds within a single molecule, which provides a 
way to determine chemical identities. The difficulty has been the need to keep 
the gap between the tip and the sample so precisely constant that voltage 
variations induced by atomic vibrations would stand out.

 To get the first vibrational readings-from acetylene molecules deposited on 
copper -Ho and his coworkers doggedly eliminated disturbances. They had 
calculated that the gap must remain steady to within a thousandth of a 
nanometer, Ho and his colleagues reported in the June 12 Science. In fact, the 
machine did 10 times better, says Ho.

 Instead of banning vibrations, a research collaboration between the University 
of Oxford in England and Hewlett-Packard Laboratories in Palo Alto, Calif., has 
embraced them. In the Aug. 3 Physical Review Letters, a team led by Oxford's 
Oleg V. Kolosov describes a technique of vibrating a semiconductor sample at 3 
megahertz to measure precisely the elasticity of its surface.

 The researchers exploit the dual nature of an AFM cantilever: flexible when 
pushed by a slowly changing force but rigid when the force varies too quickly.

 Because the cantilever can't track the oscillations, it stiffly resists them, 
causing its tip to indent the surface. The cantilever flexes only in response 
to the slowly varying average contact force. Happily, that average force 
indicates the surface's softness.

 Among researchers pushing to blend SPMs with other types of sensors, Andrew 
Downes and Mark E. Welland, both of the University of Cambridge in England, 
have added a light measuring ability. By detecting light emissions from metal 
atoms stimulated by the STM's tunneling currents, the researchers may have 
taken a step closer to the long-desired ability to discern an individual atom's 
chemical identity.

 In the May 25 Applied Physics Letters and Aug. 31 Physical Review Letters, the 
duo described using a sensitive photomultiplier tube and lenses to collect 
light from a metal sample as it was scanned with the STM tip. They succeeded at 
distinguishing gold clusters from silver clusters, each just a nanometer 
across, on the basis of both their emitted light and the voltage across the STM 
tip at which the emissions began.

     

 In some notable innovations, researchers have left the nuts and bolts of their 
SPMs untouched, discovering instead novel ways to apply the instruments.

 Both Ho and Gimzewski have conducted experiments exploring the mechanical 
effects of STM tunneling current on molecules. They have shown that current 
pulses can cause molecules to rotate, possibly enabling researchers to position 
individual molecules precisely for a chemical reaction at a particular bond.

 Gimzewski has also used an STM as an atomic knife, cleaving an atom off the 
four-lobed porphyrin molecule. That technique also holds promise for making 
novel compounds and chemical reactions possible, he says.

 Gimzewski and other researchers have used the STM tip to create some of the 
first ultrasmall electronic devices, using molecules or atoms as circuit 
components. For instance, by pressing on a C60 molecule, also known as a 
buckyball, with an STM tip, Gimzewski induced it to act as a voltage amplifier, 
controlled by the current from the STM tip.

 A number of experiments in biology have used AFM tips to "feel" changes in the 
softness of membranes, Binnig says. His research group, for instance, used AFM 
scans to detect a sudden softening of a cell's walls as a virus penetrated its 
defenses.

 Biology researchers have just begun to recognize that with AFM's ability to 
map contours comes a new way to measure volumes-of sperm heads, for instance. 
Michael J. Allen of Digital Instruments in Santa Barbara, Calif., which 
produces off-the-shelf SPMs, and his colleagues at Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) 
National Laboratory have used AFM to determine that sperm with abnormal heads, 
like 25 to 40 percent of human sperm, have no shortage of DNA and other 
material packed within. These scientists use an unusually long, thin tip and 
tap it along the surface of the sample instead of dragging it as with a normal 
tip.

     

 One yet-to-be-achieved SPM innovation promises what none of the others 
can-atomic imaging in three dimensions and, perhaps, chemical identification on 
that scale as well.

 Magnetic resonance force microscopy (MRFM) applies the same principles used by 
hospital magnetic resonance imaging machines, which provide three-dimensional 
views of internal soft tissues by detecting the spins of quadrillions of atomic 
nuclei at a time. MRFM, however, aims to locate individual atoms this way, 
which means detecting the faint magnetic field of a single, spinning nucleus.

 A team led by Dan Rugar at IBM Almaden Research Center in San Jose, Calif., is 
developing extra-long, thin AFM cantilevers with magnetic tips. Their 
mechanical vibration frequency is expected to change slightly in response to 
the force from a single electron's magnetic spin. While only a millionth the 
force typically measured by AFMs, an electron's spin exerts a thousand times 
more force than the lone nucleus, the researchers' ultimate goal.

"We're quite a ways from the dream of 3-D pictures of molecules," Rugar says. 
"The electron-spin work is a step toward that."

 While seeing individual atoms with MRFM is a distant goal, Michael L. Roukes 
of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena says his lab is striving 
to build a less ambitious MRFM instrument that could be used for examining the 
magnetized layers within read-write heads in computer hard-disk drives. 
Although it would not provide resolution at the atomic scale in all directions, 
it could explore depth with nearly that precision, he says.

 Scanning probe microscopes have enabled discovery at the atomic scale. They 
have also inspired a torrent of toolmaking that has yet to run its course.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 17, October 24, 1998, p. 268. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


