Science News Online (10/24/98): Space-Age Metals

 October 24, 1998 

 Space-Age Metals

 Freed from gravity, materials reveal their mysteries

 By CORINNA WU

 Gravity can be a real drag-

especially to scientists trying to observe how liquid metals mix together (or 
fail to) and how they freeze into solids. Researchers would love to alloy gold 
with rhodium in order to produce high-temperature electrical contacts, for 
example. Others want to study the atom-to-atom interactions of cooling metals 
as they coalesce into the crystal structures that define their solid forms.

 Unfortunately for these materials scientists, the interaction of heat and 
gravity in a sample of molten metal creates currents of rising and falling 
material, preventing some metals from alloying and overwhelming the subtle 
interactions between molecules of pure metals and metals that do mix well.

 On NASA's space shuttle, however, where gravity is only one-millionth as 
strong as on Earth, these bothersome flows disappear. Gravity doesn't separate 
metals, and in droplets of liquid metal floating weightlessly, the atomic 
interactions that lead to a solid's microscopic structure are laid bare.

 Accordingly, materials scientists have taken advantage of this unique 
environment. In various shuttle experiments over the past 3 years, including 
several with disappointing results, researchers have begun to sort out 
previously unexplored factors that determine how metals mix and crystallize. 
Some of the tests use organic substances as surrogates for metals.

 At two meetings held at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, 
Ala., this summer, researchers discussed their recent Shuttle experiments. What 
they've learned may one day help improve the processing of metals on Earth.

     

 Martin E. Glicksman, Matthew B. Koss, and their colleagues at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., have been conducting experiments in 
microgravity to learn about dendrites: branching structures, somewhat like 
snowflakes, that form as a molten metal hardens into a solid. The size, shape, 
and orientation of the interlocking dendrites strongly influence the properties 
of the final material (SN: 12/3/94, p. 375).

 On Earth, "gravity really messes up the data," Glicksman says. The researchers 
can develop better models for dendritic growth by first understanding what 
happens without gravity-driven, or convective, currents to churn up the sample.

"By eliminating convective effects," he notes, "we can see dendritic growth as 
a pure diffusion process. Then, we can go back and check how good the [model] 
is." Scientists try to use models of dendritic growth to predict a metal's 
strength and malleability.

 In their experiments, the researchers substitute two transparent organic 
substances-succinonitrile and pivalic acid- for a wide range of metals. 
Succinonitrile coalesces into the atomic structure called a body-centered 
cubic, like that of iron, whereas pivalic acid takes on the face-centered cubic 
structure of metals that include aluminum and copper. Unlike the metals, the 
organic compounds melt at a low temperature-succinonitrile at 57@C and pivalic 
acid at 36@C-and are transparent, characteristics that allow the researchers to 
videotape the solidification as it occurs.

"It's unusual to have a transparent organic that solidifies like a metal," says 
Glicksman.

 Earth's gravity, by causing convection currents, affects the shape and rate of 
dendritic growth of succinonitrile and pivalic acid crystals. The researchers 
hoped to see a clearer picture than ever before of crystal growth on the 
shuttle. The experiments consisted of placing 100 milliliters of each substance 
in a sealed chamber, keeping it at a precisely controlled temperature just 
below its melting point, then turning on two video cameras and stinging the 
liquid with a cool needle to start dendrite growth.

 The Rensselaer team, controlling the apparatus from the ground, did hundreds 
of such experiments during three flights on the space shuttle Columbia. Two 
experiments using succinonitrile flew in 1994 and 1996 (SN: 3/16/96, p. 165). 
The most recent experiment, on pivalic acid, flew in late 1997. The 
experiments, revealing slower crystal growth than on Earth,

yielded a wealth of information that the scientists are still sifting through, 
Glicksman says.

 The pivalic acid formed some "surprising" dendritic shapes, he reports. Before 
the flight, other scientists had doubts about whether pivalic acid would freeze 
under weightless conditions as metals do. The successful crystallization 
appears to settle that argument. "It worked like a charm," says Glicksman.

     

 Microgravity may allow metals to do things they can't do at all on Earth. 
About 20 years ago, scientists started reexamining a group of metals known as 
immiscible alloys, says Barry Andrews of the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham. Like oil and water, these metal combinations simply don't mix well. 
Try to shake them up and they bead into droplets, eventually settling into two 
separate layers. Consequently, says Andrews, engineers have simply avoided 
combinations such as aluminum with indium, which could be used to make 
wear-resistant bearings.

 Still, he continues, "they have the potential for some outstanding 
characteristics." If they could be thoroughly blended, these immiscible metals 
could yield new superconductors, magnetic materials, or catalysts, he 
speculates.

 Early experiments conducted in low gravity-for example, in brief, 
high-altitude airplane flights (SN: 12/6/97, p. 362)-showed that molten, 
immiscible metals still separate when mixed together, but they do so in an 
unusual way. Instead of the denser metal settling to the bottom of the 
container, one component-and not necessarily the denser-migrates outward toward 
the container walls. The cooled, solidified samples look like hard-boiled eggs.

 Without much gravity pulling one metal downward, the attractive force of the 
container walls takes over. The more adherent metal clings to the sides of the 
container like water sheeting over a pane of glass.

 Andrews decided to look to space to examine this "wetting" behavior more 
closely. He chose to study the kinds of interactions that would occur in a 
mixture of aluminum and indium. "We want to understand the physics behind its 
behavior" to better understand why some other metals won't mix, he says.

 In collaboration with Sam R. Coriell of the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology in Gaithersburg, Md., Andrews designed another low-temperature 
experiment using organic molecules to model the metals. Astronauts on the 
late-1997 shuttle flight mixed the two transparent organic liquids, 
succinonitrile and glycerin, to represent aluminum and indium, respectively. 
The researchers wanted to see whether various combinations of the materials 
would be affected differently by the container walls.

 Like their metal counterparts, the two substances are immiscible. The 
astronauts placed 12 samples with different proportions of succinonitrile and 
glycerin between glass slides, then heated them and let them cool to see how 
they would behave.

 Instead of examining samples after the substances had solidified, as in the 
earlier experiments with the metals themselves, the researchers included in the 
shuttle experiment a videocamera that taped the progress of the solidification. 
At a critical concentration, the videotape showed droplets of succinonitrile 
moving to and coating the container walls. "At 50 percent glycerin, it hit that 
magic transition for perfect wetting," Andrews says.

 Whether these new results mean immiscible alloys could be mixed successfully 
in space or on Earth remains to be seen. "This is one of the first experiments 
on this effect," Andrews says. Ultimately, "we want to understand what's going 
on and maybe learn a few tricks so we can control the process."

 Coriell, who does computer modeling of how metals freeze, and Andrews ran an 
experiment with actual metals in 1996 on Columbia. Using a furnace owned by the 
European Space Agency, astronauts heated and cooled three samples of aluminum 
and indium of different compositions at temperatures over 1,000@C. Preliminary 
experiments done in low gravity had shown that fibers of indium formed inside a 
matrix of aluminum.

 The experiment "did not go as smoothly as we had hoped," says Andrews. Some 
data were lost, and several samples formed bubbles. The researchers are still 
analyzing the unexpected imperfections.

     

 Based on earlier results, Andrews chose an aluminum nitride container for the 
1996 experiments in order to minimize the wetting behavior. Some scientists, 
however, have gotten rid of containers altogether. An apparatus called the 
Electromagnetic Containerless Processing Facility (referred to by its German 
acronym TEMPUS) flew on two shuttle missions in 1994 and the summer of 1997.

 Built for the German space agency, TEMPUS uses an electromagnetic field to 
levitate droplets of molten metal about 7 millimeters in diameter. Scientists 
can then heat and cool the samples and measure their physical properties.

"The sample is completely spherical. This is something that we can only achieve 
in microgravity," says project scientist Ivan Egry of the German Aerospace 
Center in Cologne. Spherical samples can provide more accurate measurements.

 The containerless technique enables scientists to study crystallization over a 
greater temperature range than is possible on Earth. To study the 
crystallization, the scientists melt the sample, then cool it carefully below 
its freezing point. Ordinarily, "any scratch on the container causes it to 
immediately solidify," says Jan R. Rogers, the U.S. project scientist for 
TEMPUS who is based at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The scratches serve as 
nucleation sites, or starting points for the crystal formation.

 Without those imperfections, though, the molten metal globules can cool past 
the freezing point and remain liquid. Then, Rogers says, TEMPUS stabs the 
sample with a needle, triggering crystallization when the scientists are 
prepared to measure it.

 On Earth, containerless processing devices need powerful magnetic fields. 
"Metals have a high density, so it takes a lot of force to lift them up against 
gravity," Rogers says. Those high fields also tend to heat the samples, which 
then have to be cooled with a stream of gas, introducing impurities.

 The first flight of TEMPUS was "not that successful," Rogers says, but the 
1997 flight yielded much useful information. TEMPUS processed 18 samples, 
ranging from individual metals to alloys combining two to five elements. The 
remotely controlled apparatus measured the viscosity, surface tension, and 
other physical characteristics of the liquids at temperatures lower than could 
be achieved on Earth.

 The basic information gleaned from these studies could help scientists develop 
better models to predict the properties of metals and metal alloys, says 
Coriell. Those, in turn, could lead toward ways to improve metal processing- 
increasing its efficiency, reducing its cost, or perhaps creating new alloys 
with interesting properties.

 Could metal alloys be processed commercially in space, considering that 
microgravity allows them to mix in unusual ways? Sure, Andrews says, but "could 
anyone afford to purchase them? Probably not." It seems that even materials 
that are born in space will have to be manufactured on Earth.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 17, October 24, 1998, page 264. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


