Science News Online (10/3/98): Asian DNA Enters Human Origins Fray

 October 3, 1998 

 Asian DNA Enters Human Origins Fray

 By B. Bower

 A large genetic analysis of Chinese citizens and others indicates that modern 
humans, probably originating in Africa, migrated across Asia in a southeasterly 
direction before heading north into what is now China.

 This challenges the long-standing view of Chinese paleontologists, based on 
fossil evidence, that an East Asian branch of Homo erectus independently 
evolved into H. sapiens.

"It is now probably safe to conclude that modern humans originating in Africa 
constitute the majority of the current gene pool in East Asia," holds a 
research team headed by geneticist Li Jin of the University of Texas in Houston.

 The scientists, who come from several institutions participating in the 
Chinese Human Genome Diversity Project, examined genetic relationships among 28 
of China's 56 official ethnic groups, including the majority Han population. 
Analysis focused on short DNA segments, called microsatellites, that over time 
accumulate varying numbers of repeated sequences of nucleotides, the basic DNA 
subunits.

 The researchers first used a computer program to construct an evolutionary 
tree of genetic relationships-based on 30 microsatellites per person-among 14 
East Asian populations, 3 populations from Africa, and 8 from elsewhere in the 
world. This mathematical approach assumes that relatively isolated populations 
branch off from evolutionary precursors in a treelike progression.

 The researchers constructed a second such genetic tree, based on 15 of the 
microsatellites, for 32 East Asian populations (including the 28 Chinese 
groups) and the 11 non-Asian populations.

 Both reconstructions indicate that East Asian populations derived from a 
single lineage in Southeast Asia, Jin and his coworkers report in the Sept. 29 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. This result is consistent with 
the existence of a prior genetic source in Africa, but not with a separate 
emergence of modern humans in East Asia, the scientists contend.

 The new DNA data also show that genetic differences exist between southern and 
northern Chinese groups and that greater genetic variation occurs in the 
southern populations.

 The East Asian findings fit with the theory that humans migrated out of East 
Africa around 100,000 years ago and, perhaps by crossing short stretches of 
sea, traveled along Asia's southern coast before heading into East Asia, says 
geneticist L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza of Stanford University School of Medicine in 
an accompanying commentary. Further studies need to include DNA from mid-Asian 
populations to test for other possible expansion routes, he says.

 However, Alan R. Templeton, a geneticist at Washington University in St. 
Louis, challenges the use of evolutionary trees. Jin's group did not employ 
methods for establishing whether far-flung populations maintained genetic ties 
through interbreeding, which would have undermined the assumption of a 
branching of separate ethnic groups, he says.

 In an upcoming American Anthropologist, Templeton reports that regional 
evolution in areas outside China, which he analyzed using others' data sets, 
occurred within a network of DNA links rather than a tree.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 14, October 3, 1998, p. 212. Copyright C 1998 
by Science Service.

 
