Science News Online (10/17/98): Marginal groups thrive on the Internet

 October 17, 1998 

 Marginal groups thrive on the Internet

 By B. Bower 

 More than 30,000 different Internet newsgroups now exist, allowing members to 
send and receive messages on interests that range from the mundane to the 
weird. Membership in online groups may prove particularly helpful, at least in 
promoting self-acceptance and social support, for individuals whose 
unconventional traits or behaviors make it difficult to find compatriots in 
daily life, a new study finds.

 Internet newsgroup users of this ilk include people with epilepsy, incest 
survivors, and sexual sadists. If the findings hold up, they will indicate that 
people viewed as cultural outsiders can form stable, emotionally supportive 
online groups.

"Whatever position one takes regarding the values of the various [online 
groups], the psychological effects of virtual group participation are 
nonetheless real," contend Katelyn Y.A. McKenna and John A. Bargh, both 
psychologists at New York University. "In all likelihood, they will be an 
increasingly common feature of life in the age of the Internet."

 McKenna and Bargh monitored participation in 12 Internet newsgroups during a 
3-week period. They selected four groups that focus on mainstream interests 
(such as politics), four that concern culturally undesirable but conspicuous 
conditions (such as obesity), and four that focus on culturally "marginalized" 
but concealable behavior (homosexuality, illicit drug use, sexual bondage, and 
sexual spanking).

 Four judges rated original messages and the responses as positive or negative. 
The judges agreed on most of their ratings.

 Online gatherings mattered most to participants in "marginalized but 
concealable" groups, the scientists contend in the September Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology. Members of those groups posted messages far 
more frequently, often after receiving positive feedback online, than members 
of the other groups did.

 The scientists then sent electronic questionnaires to individuals recruited 
from marginalized-concealable Internet groups. A total of 103 participants in 
the homosexual, sexual-bondage, and sexual-spanking groups responded-a majority 
of those contacted. In addition, 49 "lurkers," people who read messages on 
these sites but did not post, completed the electronic questionnaires.

 Another 59 posters to newsgroups concerned with marginal political and 
ideological beliefs returned questionnaires, often only after the researchers 
convinced them that the project was not part of a government plot. These groups 
cater to people concerned with government cover-ups, extraterrestrial visitors, 
white supremacy, and citizen militias. Eighteen lurkers on these sites also 
responded.

 Compared with lurkers, active participants in all these groups considered 
newsgroup membership far more important in their lives, valued other members' 
opinions more, and spent more time in the newsgroup. Many participants said 
that as a result of newsgroup membership, they had revealed to friends or 
family what had been embarrassing secrets about themselves.

"This is the sort of work that needs to be done, examining different types of 
Internet users and different effects of computer use," remarks psychologist 
Robert Kraut of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. Kraut, who also 
studies cyberspace travelers (SN: 9/12/98, p. 168), suspects that all sorts of 
people who have difficulty finding others to identify with-from night-shift 
workers to the physically disabled-will benefit from virtual groups. 

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 16, October 17, 1998, p. 245. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


