Science News Online (1/10/98): Future farmers may collect urine, not milk by S. 
Milius

 January 10, 1998 

 Future farmers may collect urine, not milk

by S. Milius

 The grandchildren who revamp Old MacDonald's Farm years from now may end up 
harvesting a product their forebear ignored. If so, they can thank the first 
researchers to genetically engineer animals that concentrate a pharmaceutical 
product in urine.

 Robert J. Wall of the U.S. Department of Agriculture in Beltsville, Md., and 
his colleagues have developed transgenic mice that produce human growth hormone 
in their bladders. Although the mice produce only a tiny amount, Wall says they 
show that urine farming techniques work.

 The notion of turning livestock into four-footed pharmaceutical factories has 
intrigued researchers for at least a decade, Wall's team notes in the January 
Nature Biotechnology. So far, most of the effort has gone into developing cows, 
sheep, and goats that secrete commercially interesting proteins in their milk. 
No such products have yet reached the market, but Wall says several are now 
being tested in people. The furthest along, he estimates, is a milk-produced 
blood-clotting agent, antithrombin III, developed by Genzyme Transgenics Corp. 
in Framingham, Mass.

 Despite the unappealing image, a drug company already sells natural horse 
estrogen from urine as a hormone replacement. 

 Urine could offer the drug farmer significant advantages over milk, says Wall. 
Both male and female animals urinate, starting soon after birth. The urine of 
large animals carries much less protein than their milk, which could cut the 
processing costs. "The really expensive part is actually the cost of purifying 
the drug," Wall explains.

 Even though creating a transgenic animal is not cheap -- $60,000 for a sheep 
or goat -- standard breeding techniques can then produce an entire herd. "It's 
only that founder cost that is so staggering," he says.

 The possibility of urine farming arose in 1995, when Tung-Tien Sun of New York 
University identified genes that are active only in the bladder. The genes 
encode proteins called uroplakins, which form part of the bladder lining. David 
E. Kerr, then at the Agriculture Department, attached the genetic sequence for 
human growth hormone to the uroplakin gene promoter, which controls where and 
when the gene switches on.

 Mice engineered to carry the new gene have produced up to 500 nanograms of the 
hormone in each milliliter of their urine. Kerr, now at the University of 
Vermont in Burlington, does not recommend mice as commercial sources of drugs 
-- although collecting their urine was easy. All he had to do was hold the mice 
over a piece of plastic wrap.

 Whether urine farming turns out to be economically feasible remains to be 
seen, say Harry Meade and Carol Ziomek from Genzyme. In an accompanying 
editorial, they say the idea "deserves further investigation." However, they 
judge the yields to be "too low to make it a viable alternative at present 
(10,000 fold lower than in milk)." Pumping up yields may be tricky, since gene 
activity in the mice already seemed high. "This could mean that the secretory 
pathway of the bladder is very inefficient," they say.

 Collecting urine from farm animals may also prove challenging, Meade and 
Ziomek warn. Drug farmers may have to keep their herds attached to catheters.

 Wall acknowledges that the bladder does not compare to the mammary gland as a 
secretion powerhouse, but he suggests that bladder yields may improve and that 
the ease of processing urine might make up for the smaller amount of product.

 It's too early to dismiss urine farming, says Henryk Lubon, who directs 
transgenic research at the American Red Cross laboratory in Rockville, Md. Some 
proteins might not be suitable for milk farming because they damage mammary 
tissue, he says, and he hesitates to compare the initial urine results to the 
more mature transgenic milk production. "Ten years ago," he says, "who knew 
that milk was going to work out?" 


