Science News Online (11/14/98): Cholesterol-busting products provoke FDA

 November 14, 1998 

 Cholesterol-busting products provoke FDA

 By J. Raloff

 It spreads like a soft margarine, tastes like a soft margarine, and contains 
the same fats as the most heart-healthy of soft margarines. But is 
Benecol-McNeil Consumer Healthcare Product Co.'s new dietary product-actually a 
margarine? 

 The Food and Drug Administration says it is, and so it must meet stringent 
food-safety regulations. McNeil counters that it's a cholesterol-lowering 
dietary supplement, subject to less strict rules. Last week, this dispute 
ignited intense discussions between the parties. Who prevails will determine 
when Benecol, which has been gobbled up by Finns for the past 3 years, finally 
debuts in North America.

 At the heart of Benecol's challenge is its unique ingredients: stanol esters 
derived from plant relatives of cholesterol (SN: 5/30/98, p. 348). The gut, 
mistaking the compounds for cholesterol, tries to absorb them, but the mimics 
are just different enough from cholesterol that only traces get through the 
intestinal wall. Meanwhile, as the gut tries to absorb the stanol esters, it 
largely ignores any real cholesterol present.

 McNeil, which is based in Fort Washington, Pa., acquired global rights to 
produce Benecol outside Finland and reformulated the spread's recipe. It now 
contains more cholesterol-lowering monounsaturated fats than the original and 
less cholesterol-raising saturated fats. Neither recipe contains trans fats, 
which also can elevate cholesterol.

 McNeil had planned to introduce the spread in Oregon supermarkets last week, 
followed by a national rollout of the product in January. If considered a 
dietary supplement, Benecol wouldn't need FDA approval as long as McNeil 
documented the product's safety and gave 30 days' notice of its intentions to 
market it.

 McNeil supplied data not only on the safety of stanol esters but also on 
Benecol's efficacy. The strongest evidence comes from a 1995 study of Finnish 
men with moderately elevated cholesterol. After using about three pats a day of 
Benecol instead of margarine for 1 year, their blood concentrations of 
low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, the so-called bad cholesterol, fell 
by as much as 14 percent.

 More recently, Tu T. Nguyen and his colleagues at the Mayo Clinic in 
Rochester, Minn., demonstrated that McNeil's recipe performs comparably. At the 
American Dietetic Association meeting in St. Louis last month, they showed that 
it lowers LDL concentrations by an average of 22 milligrams per deciliter of 
blood, or again 14 percent. Indeed, Nguyen observes, "we got the same response 
in 8 weeks that [the Finnish study] got at 1 year."

 FDA probably wouldn't have challenged the stanol esters if they were packaged 
as a pill. But delivering them in a margarine substitute makes Benecol a food, 
FDA says, and federal law prohibits the sale of foods containing additives that 
the agency has not approved as safe. Not only is the safety standard for such 
additives higher than that for supplements, but FDA must pre-approve any 
additive before it is sold-as it did the fat substitute olestra 2 years ago 
(SN: 2/3/96, p. 69).

 McNeil has argued that consumers are unlikely to shell out $16 a pound for 
Benecol merely to flavor their bread. Lowering cholesterol would have to be a 
primary concern. This distinction points out why Benecol is less a food 
substitute than a supplement delivered in the guise of a food, explains McNeil 
spokeswoman Amy Weiseman.

 Last May, FDA mounted a slightly different challenge to Cholestin-capsules of 
rice fermented with a red yeast. Since April 1997, Pharmanex of Simi Valley, 
Calif., has marketed this product as an all-natural, cholesterol-lowering food 
supplement. Though FDA doesn't quibble with the capsules' efficacy, it argues 
that their active ingredient is the natural analog of a cholesterol-lowering 
prescription drug.

 Charging that this makes Cholestin a drug, FDA ruled 6 months ago that the 
product should not be sold until it satisfies the agency's stringent 
drug-safety and efficacy rules. Pharmanex sued FDA over this decision. It 
argued that its red-yeast product should qualify as a supplement because it has 
been used as a spice and food coloring in China for millennia and is legally 
found in countless Chinese-grocery and restaurant offerings throughout the 
United States.

 In June, a U.S. district court temporarily agreed with Pharmanex, so Cholestin 
remains on the market and is available in 35,000 U.S. stores. The court expects 
to issue a final ruling on Cholestin's supplement status in January.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 20, November 14, 1998, p. 311. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


