Science News Online (11/14/98): The Ice that Burns

 November 14, 1998 

 The Ice that Burns

 Can methane hydrates fuel the 21st century?

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 In October of next year, the Japan National Oil Corp. will send a ship to a 
spot about 60 kilometers off a cape called Omae zaki, not far from Mount Fuji. 
Its crew will lower a drill through 950 meters of water and then start cutting 
a circular hole the width of a dinner plate into the seafloor. At first, the 
bit will slice through fine silt as soft as birthday cake. Then, at a depth not 
yet known, the diamond-tipped drill will breach a hard icelike layer and, in 
the process, reach into the postpetroleum future.

 The frozen substance is called methane hydrate, a name that has been 
increasingly echoing off the walls of Congress, university research offices, 
and oil company conference rooms around the world. Found under the ocean floor 
and polar permafrost, methane hydrates are a crystalline combination of natural 
gas and water, locked together into a substance that looks remarkably like ice 
but burns if ignited. Until recently, the natural gas industry considered it 
only a nuisance, something that occasionally plugs up pipelines. Now, some 
scientists view methane hydrates as the resource that may power the 21st 
century, and governments are scrambling to explore its promise.

"Methane hydrates are a potentially enormous natural gas resource," declared a 
U.S. presidential commission last year in its report on future energy research. 
"It may be that [natural] gas can be produced economically from the methane 
hydrates on the continental shelf, and this may prove to be a very large new 
source globally, particularly for some developing countries such as India as 
well as for the United States," concludes the report.

 With some geologists predicting that oil supplies will tighten in the next 15 
years (SN: 10/31/98, p. 278), the prospect of vast new fossil fuel deposits has 
fired the imagination of energy experts. According to some estimates, the 
energy locked within methane hydrates amounts to more than twice the global 
reserves of all conventional gas, oil, and coal deposits combined (SN: 11/9/96, 
p. 298). The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that the methane hydrates 
hidden beneath U.S. waters alone hold some 200 trillion cubic feet of natural 
gas, enough to supply all the nation's energy needs for more than 2,000 years 
at current rates of use.

 Lured by such a vast resource, Congress is currently considering a bill that 
would establish a national methane hydrates research program. At the same time, 
the U.S. Department of Energy is proposing a plan aimed at making it possible 
to extract methane commercially from hydrates in less than 20 years. Canada, 
India, Korea, and Norway have all joined Japan by initiating their own hydrates 
research programs.

 Such hopes may be little more than drill-pipe dreams, though. At this point, 
no company or government has demonstrated how to pull natural gas out of 
methane hydrates deposits without pouring a tremendous amount of money down the 
borehole.

"The bottom line is there is a lot of gas hydrate. There's probably more gas 
hydrate than all other resources. But because we have no sense of how much gas 
hydrate is actually recoverable, we have to be careful," says Timothy S. 
Collett, a geologist who studies methane hydrates at the USGS in Denver. "It 
may be totally irrelevant to any resource issue," he says.

     

 Japan has taken the lead on methane hydrates exploration because its geologic 
heritage has left it with few options. "We don't have many energy resources 
near Japan, so we mainly import oil and gas from foreign countries," explains 
Arata Nakamura, assistant project director at the Japan National Oil Corp. 
(JNOC), a quasi-governmental company headquartered in Tokyo. "JNOC is very 
interested in conducting research to develop methane hydrates," he says.

 Just how deep that interest runs is a matter of some secrecy. Like other oil 
and gas companies, JNOC considers many exploration issues proprietary. In 1994, 
Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry established a 5-year 
methane hydrates research plan, culminating in the offshore-drilling project 
slated for next year. Nakamura declined to specify exactly how much the plan 
will cost but said it will total more than $60 million.

 In a preview of next year's program, JNOC funded a drilling operation in 
February and March of this year at an inland site in the Mackenzie Delta of 
northwest Canada. Working with the Geological Survey of Canada, a Japanese team 
bored a well 1,150 m deep into the Arctic permafrost, where methane hydrates 
are common.

 Using a hollow drill, they pulled up cores of sandy sediment that formed the 
ocean bottom many millennia ago. This once-soft sand was as solid as concrete. 
In places, methane hydrates filled almost all the space between the sand 
grains, cementing the sediment into frozen layers located between 900 m and 
1,100 m below the surface.

 The main purpose in drilling the well, called Mallik 2L-38, was to measure how 
much hydrates hide in the sediments, says Scott Dallimore of the Geological 
Survey of Canada in Ottawa, who coordinated the scientific research at Mallik. 
"Methane hydrates occur in very high concentrations in the Mallik well, much 
higher [concentrations] than have been observed anywhere else," he says.

 In sand, explains Dallimore, the grains occupy only about 65 percent of the 
total space, leaving a network of pores that take up the rest of the volume, 
much like the gaps between the nuts in a jar of cashews. At Mallik, methane 
hydrates fill 55 percent of the pore space surrounding the sand grains. So, 
roughly 20 percent of each coreful of the cemented sand was methane hydrates. 
That percentage exceeds the concentration found even in the richest known 
deposits under the seafloor, says Dallimore.

 The Japanese team chose to drill onshore at Mallik because it is easier to 
work on land than under the ocean. When it comes to searching for domestic 
methane hydrates, however, JNOC must move underwater. Japan has no permafrost 
of its own.

 The lair of most methane hydrates lies far from shore and deep below the 
waves. There, in water depths of at least 600 to 800 m, low temperatures and 
extreme pressures in the sediments combine to squeeze methane and water into a 
crystalline structure. Each molecule of methane gets trapped within a cagelike 
lattice of frozen water molecules, an arrangement that greatly concentrates a 
large amount of methane into a small space. Hydrates also go by the name of 
clathrates, a term derived from the Latin word for lattice.

 The methane in most hydrate deposits originally comes from bacteria living 
beneath the seafloor. As they consume bits of plant and animal remains in the 
sediment, the bacteria excrete methane, a process still going on today. "It's 
the same thing as swamp gas or sewer gas," says Roy D. Hyndman of the 
Geological Survey of Canada in Sidney, British Columbia. When conditions are 
cold and the pressure is high, the bacterial gas gets locked up into hydrates.

 In some deposits, the source of the gas lies much deeper, in sediments warmed 
by Earth's internal heat. Several kilometers below the seafloor, the 
temperature in the sediment rises so high that it cooks the buried organic 
debris. This slow simmer produces petroleum and hydrocarbon gases, which leak 
upward toward the seafloor. As the gases reach cooler sediments, they can form 
hydrates containing a mixture of hydrocarbons.

 Or so the theory goes. Methane hydrates lie so deep beneath Earth's surface 
that geologists are uncertain about even the most basic details concerning the 
deposits. "We have to understand where they occur and why they occur," says 
Collett. The Energy Department, in its plan for a 10-year research program, 
puts the top priority on resource characterization-in other words, determining 
how much is out there and how to locate the richest deposits.

     

 The same methane locked up in hydrates also comes out of the rear ends of cows 
and sheep, but the gas industry is not bursting down barn doors to collect the 
flatus of farm animals. Each animal produces only a little methane, and 
companies would go bankrupt trying to collect sizable quantities of gas. 
Likewise, most methane hydrate deposits are probably uneconomical because the 
gas is not concentrated in large-enough amounts, says Arthur H. Johnson, a 
geologist with Chevron USA Production Co. in New Orleans.

"While the published estimates of methane hydrate abundance are enormous, it is 
likely that most of the hydrate occurs in low concentrations and has no 
commercial potential. Our goal is to be able to find locations where the 
methane hydrates are sufficiently concentrated to warrant commercial 
production," Johnson testified at a hearing of the House Energy and Environment 
Subcommittee in September.

 To spot underwater hydrate deposits, geologists rely principally on a 
technique routinely used by companies searching for petroleum. Blasts set off 
near the ocean surface send out sound waves that reflect off deep geologic 
structures and then return to the ocean surface, where they are recorded.

 This process, called seismic reflection profiling, sometimes picks up a 
distinct band in the sediments that parallels the contour of the seafloor. 
Geologists call these "bottom simulating reflectors." The band marks the bottom 
of a hydrate deposit, where bubbles of methane gas in the sediment have become 
trapped below the impermeable frozen layer.

 A related technique spots hydrates by estimating the speed of the sound waves 
as they penetrate the seafloor. In places where hydrates have stiffened up the 
otherwise soft sediment, sound travels much faster, says Hyndman. He and his 
colleagues at the Geological Survey of Canada recently used these techniques to 
pinpoint the potential locations of hydrate deposits off the coast of India.

 People in both India and Japan pay three to four times as much for natural gas 
as do consumers in the United States. The steep price provides an incentive for 
these countries to pursue methane hydrates, whereas countries with domestic 
sources of hydrocarbons currently find hydrates far too expensive to seek.

 In next year's drilling, Japan plans primarily to extract cores of methane 
hydrate, which will help in assessing the richness of the deposit, according to 
Nakamura. The company says it does not intend to "produce" the hydrate, a term 
engineers use to mean pulling commercial quantities out of the ground.

     

 Nonetheless, U.S. geologists believe that Japan is taking steps toward that 
goal. At a meeting last year in England, a JNOC official said that after next 
year's drilling, the company hopes to take the commercially significantstep of 
classifying some of the hydrate resource as energy reserves, says Michael D. 
Max, a geologist with the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C. "What 
that means is [the resource] changes from a possibility to a certainty. That 
means they would be able to put some recovery numbers on it, and they can start 
looking at the commerciality and the costs," says Max.

 Right now, the costs of producing methane hydrates remain a big question mark 
because nobody has tried to extract this resource, with the possible exception 
of the operators of a controversial well in Siberia. Solid hydrates won't come 
out of the ground as easily as oil and so-called conventional gas, which can 
flow through rock pores and then up through the drill pipe.

 One way to pry hydrates loose would be to release some pressure on the 
deposit, which would cause the methane and water to split apart, or dissociate. 
The advantage of this technique is that it would be relatively cheap, says 
Collett. To relieve pressure, a drill crew could tap the methane gas that often 
accumulates underneath and pushes up on the deposit. Unfortunately, this 
process might work too slowly, he says. As hydrates dissociate, they cool down, 
which stabilizes them and prevents more hydrate from melting.

 To speed up the process, crews could drill far below the methane hydrates and 
pump hot water upward into the deposit, thereby melting the hydrates. Or, they 
could inject antifreeze from the surface to spur dissociation. "But when you 
look at the total balance sheet of the issue," says Collett, "the minute you 
start looking at enhanced techniques, you're putting energy and money into the 
project, and gas is not a real expensive commodity. So, you end up with the 
problem that you're putting more money in than you're going to get out in the 
form of gas."

 Even though hydrates remain uneconomical at present, U.S. policy makers see 
other reasons for researching these deposits. Oil-drilling operations in the 
Gulf of Mexico are now moving into water more than 1,000 m deep and are 
starting to drill through methane hydrate layers more frequently, raising 
safety concerns. A drill spinning through the hydrate can cause it to 
dissociate, and each liter of melted hydrate releases 160 liters of gas, says 
Robert S. Kripowicz, acting assistant secretary for fossil energy at the U.S. 
Department of Energy.

 The freed gas can explode out of the hole, causing the drilling crews to lose 
control of the well, a costly problem to solve.

"Offshore operators are increasingly reporting problems of drilling through 
hydrates," Kripowicz told the House energy subcommittee.

 Engineers are exploring whether unstable hydrate layers could give way beneath 
oil platforms or even play a role in triggering tsunamis (SN: 10/3/98, p. 221). 
Climate researchers have also grown concerned about hydrates because global 
warming could melt some shallow methane deposits, releasing millions of tons of 
this potent greenhouse gas into the air.

 With so little known about methane hydrates, energy experts say that it is 
hard to predict whether society will ever tap into these deposits as a fuel 
source. Still, the Japanese initiative has spurred other oil companies to take 
an active interest. At a meeting last month in Chiba City, Japan, a group from 
Shell International Exploration and Production, B.V., discussed its analysis of 
exploiting methane hydrates. "Our consensus is there are no show stoppers. 
There is nothing that we cannot handle technically. If we encountered a good 
accumulation of natural gas hydrates, we could develop it with the existing 
technology," says Wim J. A. Swinkels, a member of Shell's gas hydrate team. The 
only issue standing in the way right now, he says, is economics.

 Yet, the days of plentiful oil and gas are numbered, and countries will 
require new energy sources to keep the wheels of progress spinning. "We're 
enjoying a wonderful economy right now, largely because of the very low cost of 
energy," said Rep. Vernon J. Ehlers (R-Mich.) at the recent hearing on methane 
hydrates. "I'm very worried about what's going to happen when the cheap oil is 
gone, and we're not paying enough attention to it."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 20, November 14, 1998, p. 312. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


