Science News Online (1/10/98): Astronomers Aglow About Infrared Maps by R. Cowen

 January 10, 1998 

 Astronomers Aglow About Infrared Maps

by R. Cowen

 There's more to the universe than meets the eye. New sky maps that paint a 
broad-brush portrait of the cosmos in the far infrared provide graphic proof of 
that astronomical adage. The pictures reveal that at these invisible 
wavelengths, the universe is a far livelier place than many scientists had 
imagined. 

 The maps portray a uniform glow that arises from dust warmed by all the stars 
that have existed since the universe began. They indicate that the sky may be 
2.5 times brighter in the far infrared than in visible light. To put it another 
way, dust in the cosmos absorbs about two-thirds of the visible light emitted 
by galaxies.

 After analyzing data gathered by NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) 
satellite, two groups of researchers unveiled their infrared pictures Jan. 9 at 
a Washington, D.C., meeting of the American Astronomical Society.

 Although the craft's detectors could not discern the individual sources of the 
infrared background, researchers suspect that a substantial portion comes from 
dust cloaking the earliest, most primitive galaxies in the universe.

 Dust readily absorbs ultraviolet and visible light emitted by stars and 
reradiates it in the near infrared and mid infrared. Because the expansion of 
the universe shifts all light to longer, or redder, wavelengths, a distant 
observer would detect this radiation in the far infrared. 

 Mapping the infrared background wasn't easy, notes Michael G. Hauser of the 
Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. He and his colleagues analyzed 
the radiation recorded between December 1989 and October 1990 by the craft's 
diffuse infrared background experiment (DIRBE).

 The instrument surveyed the sky at 10-infrared bands, ranging from 1 to 240 
micrometers (mm). Before deducing the extragalactic glow, Hauser's team had to 
estimate and subtract two local infrared signals -- radiation from 
interplanetary dust in the solar system and from dust and stars within the 
Milky Way galaxy.

 Indeed, the contribution from interplanetary dust is so strong at the shorter 
infrared wavelengths that the researchers could detect the background clearly 
only at 140 mm and 240 mm.

 Another team, which includes Marc Davis of the University of California, 
Berkeley, stumbled upon the infrared background while using DIRBE to measure 
the amount of dust in the Milky Way. This team's maps show a similar 
far-infrared background, Hauser says.

 A third group, building on its earlier analysis of data from a COBE detector 
that surveys the sky at longer infrared wavelengths, also finds evidence of a 
substantial, though smaller, infrared background. Bruno Guiderdoni of the 
Institute of Astrophysics in Paris and his colleagues reported this finding in 
the Nov. 20, 1997 Nature.

 COBE made headlines in the early 1990s, when it measured the microwave 
background -- radiation left over from the Big Bang (SN: 5/2/92, p. 292). In 
contrast, the infrared background comes from galaxies, which formed several 
hundred thousand years later. 

 Recent studies with the Infrared Space Observatory bolster the belief that the 
infrared background indeed comes from dust associated with distant objects 
making stars at a feverish rate, says Joseph I. Silk of the University of 
California, Berkeley. "Most likely we're looking at the youthful counterparts 
of nearby [galaxies] in their very bright formation phase," he says. During 
that epoch, bits and pieces of galaxies may have coalesced, trigging intense 
star formation.

 Testing this notion will require a new generation of telescopes, ones that can 
resolve individual galaxies in the smooth infrared background. A slew of 
instruments, including the Space Infrared Telescope Facility and the Far 
InfraRed and Submillimeter Telescope, scheduled for launch early in the next 
decade, may provide answers.

 Over the next 6 months, astronomers plan to use the Hubble Space Telescope's 
near-infrared camera to survey the Hubble Deep Field, the patch of sky most 
intensively studied in visible light. If many more galaxies show up in the near 
infrared than in visible light, it would indicate that dust plays a major role 
in hiding distant galaxies, says Mark E. Dickinson of Johns Hopkins University 
in Baltimore. 

 
