Science News Online (10/3/98): Amazon forests caught in fiery feedback

 October 3, 1998 

 Amazon forests caught in fiery feedback

 By S. Milius

 One little fire inching through a tropical forest may not kill much. Yet it 
triggers a vicious cycle-fires preparing the way for bigger fires-that could 
ultimately turn Amazon jungles into savannas, according to new research.

 During a typical 16-day dry spell, only some 5 percent of an intact rain 
forest dries out enough to catch fire, says Mark A. Cochrane of the Woods Hole 
(Mass.) Research Center. But even a small fire can sufficiently tatter the 
shade canopy -and leave behind enough extra debris for fuel-to render some 50 
percent of that forest vulnerable to a second, more destructive blaze during a 
subsequent dry spell. As fires recur, virtually all the forest becomes 
susceptible, report Cochrane and Mark D. Schulze of Pennsylvania State 
University in State College.

 Brazil's Tailandia region in Para has already slipped into this fiery feedback 
loop, observe Cochrane and Schulze in the October Conservation Biology.

 A decade ago, Tailandia was the new Amazonian frontier. Settlers moved in, and 
accidental fires became common. Now, forests there that have previously caught 
fire reburn about every 3 years, too quickly to allow regeneration. 
Historically, the time between forest fires was at least 400 years.

"Fire is burning everything and everyone," Cochrane says. On a data-gathering 
trip last December, he found that fire had destroyed even the Brazilian forest 
service's sustainable management plot.

 The first fire that attacks an intact Amazon forest looks "unimpressive," 
admits Cochrane. Most of the time, the flames spread as a thin ribbon barely 
ankle-high, creeping perhaps 100 meters a day. These fires take the night off, 
winking out around 5 p.m. and reigniting from smoldering sparks when the next 
day heats up around 10 a.m. They kill thin-skinned young trees but typically 
leave 90 percent of the forest's biomass alive.

 A year after such a fire has worked through a forest, however, the tree canopy 
provides only 60 percent shade instead of its former 85 to 95 percent, the 
researchers report. Trees no longer create as much moist cover as they used to, 
and the next fire starts more easily, this time burning some 40 percent of the 
biomass. Unlike the first fire, the second one kills big trees as often as 
little ones.

 Longtime tropical fire watcher Christopher Uhl, also from Penn State, comments 
in the same journal issue that "fire adds a whole new dimension to tropical 
disturbance ecology." Long gone are the days when researchers observed that 
Amazon jungles didn't burn. Uhl once sheltered part of the forest floor from 
rain for more than a month but couldn't get a blaze going. Now Uhl sees fire as 
a huge force for change in rain forests. "Even for those species that survive, 
these grand fires might be among the largest biological selection events in 
modern history."

 The feedback effect does not surprise Norman L. Christensen, dean of the 
Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke University in Durham, N.C. "The 
pattern is similar to what we see in some of the coastal forests in the Pacific 
Northwest," where ecosystems have not evolved to cope with frequent blazes.

 In other temperate forests, however, small fires have the opposite effect and 
reduce the chance of future blazes, notes James K. Agee of the University of 
Washington in Seattle. Little fires lap up dead leaves and branches, preventing 
fuel from building up. Adaptations like thicker bark protect trees. Forest 
managers now set these so-called prescribed burns as preemptive housekeeping 
blazes.

"My take-home message is that we wouldn't want to take those temperate [forest] 
ideas and try to apply them too strongly to the tropics," Agee says. "Ecology 
is really a science of place."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 14, October 3, 1998, p. 214. Copyright C 1998 
by Science Service.


