Science News Online (11/14/98): Lock-on-a-chip may close hackers out

 November 14, 1998 

 Lock-on-a-chip may close hackers out

 By P. Weiss

 Engineers have crammed an electromechanical combination lock onto a computer 
chip that they say can shut out cybercrooks. The device erects a barrier to 
computer intrusions that is far more difficult to penetrate than security 
software, the only option available today, say the lock's inventors.

 Because security software does not physically isolate a system but monitors 
electronic codes, determined hackers on the Internet or a modem connection can 
keep trying passwords and other keys until they breach the defenses.

 The new lock, however, accepts only one number among a million possibilities 
as its correct combination. If a remote troublemaker attempts a break-in with 
the wrong code just once, the device disconnects the computer from its network. 
When the lock closes, only someone physically present at the computer can 
reopen it.

 The new lock, which employs concepts developed for protecting nuclear weapons, 
"puts a physical barrier between an asset and a threat," says the devices 
designer, Frank J. Peter of Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M. 
"And it absolutely, positively can't be circumvented in software."

 Peter and his colleagues have packed intricate machinery into the silicon 
device the size of a shirt button. Electrically driven shafts studded with 
microscopic teeth turn tiny gears to set the combination. If triggered by a 
bogus code, the mechanism throws a switch that interrupts the flow of electric 
current or light through the device, temporarily isolating the computer.

 Such a drastic response may prove impractical except for restricted-use 
computer systems where a small number of users all know the code and someone is 
continuously on duty to reset machines, says Peter Mell of the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology in Gaithersburg, Md. Moreover, attackers 
can send trouble-causing electronic mail and other data without having to gain 
access to a computer by logging on. Hackers could also maliciously trigger the 
lock to deny use of computers to their owners, he notes.

 During the next 2 years, the inventors may consider such questions in 
preparation for commercializing the technology. Perhaps they will choose to 
allow more than one false start, for instance, since computer users who rely on 
remote log-ins may occasionally type the wrong password. They also hope to find 
a company to mass-produce the locks inexpensively via methods used by 
integrated-circuit makers.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 20, November 14, 1998, p. 309. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.

: Sandia National Laboratories provides additional information about the lock 
at these websites:  and .

 
