Science News Online (11/7/98): Democratizing Science

 November 7, 1998 

 Democratizing Science

 Science shops are tackling research for and with communities

 By JANET RALOFF

 In the early 1970s, the Center for Urban Affairs at Northwestern University 
was contacted by the Christian Action Ministry. This coalition of 13 Chicago 
churches, which ran medical clinics in its low-income neighborhood, wanted to 
prevent disease and injuries. Instead, it seemed stuck doing little more than 
dispensing treatment.

 So, the university center recruited Scott Bernstein and 19 other students on 
its Evanston, Ill., campus to scout for root causes of the neighborhood's 
medical problems. They began by sifting through a year's worth of medical 
records-some 22,000 files-from the west-side community's two hospitals.

 The students eventually identified the top 10 reasons for hospital visits, a 
list that allowed the community to focus on projects that held the prospect of 
quick payoffs for relatively small investments.

 Such as the number-two health problem: traffic accidents.

 The ministry's neighborhood, home to 80,000 people, averaged almost 55,000 
traffic accidents per year. The Northwestern students pored over police records 
to identify the hot spots and then monitored those intersections.

"We witnessed a system out of control," Bernstein says. "Nobody was keeping up 
the stop signs, traffic lights were mis-timed or not working, curbs were 
crumbling, and potholes were everywhere." Armed with site-specific data, 
community leaders met with the city's traffic-safety commission not only to 
address specific problems but also to change how the city channels traffic 
through the neighborhood. Local traffic-accident rates fell.

 More importantly, Bernstein argues, the community learned it could take charge 
of local problems.

 A quarter-century later, Bernstein has become famous in Chicago for attacking 
many of the same types of problems on a metropolitan scale through his Center 
for Neighborhood Technology. He's still mapping problems and analyzing their 
underlying causes-though now with a paid staff of 20 and an annual budget of 
about $2 million. Working with government and industry power brokers, the 
center is also helping devise low-cost incentives for reinvestments in inner 
cities beyond Chicago.

 It's but one of dozens of small centers that have sprung up around the country 
using community-based research to address local problems. The Netherlands, home 
to several dozen such research centers, is widely credited with pioneering this 
type of institution and its generic moniker: the science shop. Its model has 
spawned centers in France, Northern Ireland, and Austria, but most of the 
centers in the United States developed independently.

 Until recently, most of these groups have toiled in relative obscurity, notes 
Richard E. Sclove, president of the Loka Institute in Amherst, Mass. His 
organization hopes to change that by knitting them all into a worldwide network 
and "increasing their public profile so that people who could benefit from them 
can also find them."

     

 The first Dutch science shop opened in 1974 at the University of Utrecht. 
Others quickly followed, evolving into politically popular centers through 
which federally funded institutions of higher learning could fulfill a 
social-service mission.

 Collectively, the Dutch centers now perform about 2,000 research projects 
annually for community groups, unions, schools, and individuals. Some have 
developed into the equivalent of consulting companies, undertaking contract 
work, even for industrial customers. While public projects are conducted free 
of charge, commercial commissions must be financed by the client.

 The larger shops, often staffed by 4 to 10 people, serve as centralized 
doorways to a university's research community. They work with neighborhood 
groups to hone public inquiries into something students can address, then find 
faculty members who will supervise the student investigators. The more numerous 
smaller shops tend to be thematically focused and more likely to oversee 
directly any research project that they accept.

 The University of Groningen has nine such decentralized science shops. In even 
its biggest, the Chemistry Shop, a typical project lasts only about 4 weeks and 
usually amounts to little more than an intensive state-of-the-art literature 
search, explains its director, Henk A.J. Mulder. Yet, these projects can prove 
practical and substantive, he says.

 Among the "green chemistry" projects undertaken by Dutch chemistry shops are 
research that identified vegetable oil^-based substitutes for harmful organic 
solvents and a literature search that uncovered methods to produce 
polycarbonate window plastics without chlorinated chemicals.

 Danish universities have embraced many aspects of the Dutch model for their 
federally funded science shops-such as relying on students to perform research. 
At the Technical University of Denmark, outside Copenhagen, research needs are 
publicized in an annual catalog mailed to all students and faculty members, 
notes Michael S. Jorgensen, who runs the university's science shop. Though 
student participation is voluntary, he says, perhaps 25 of about 35 projects 
described in the catalog are completed each year. In addition to receiving 
university credit for their work, "students receive real-life experience in 
problem solving," he observes.

     

 U.S. science shops, in contrast, have developed individually, usually at arm's 
length from any university-and without any explicit government encouragement. 
Moreover, notes Sclove, until 3 years ago, most were "virtually clueless to 
each other's existence."

 It was at about that time that he described the Dutch centers in an article in 
the March 31, 1995 Chronicle of Higher Education and challenged  educators to 
create a U.S. community of science shops. He then received letters from several 
dozen people who noted that they were affiliated with something that might be 
considered a science shop. In pursuing each lead, he created the first catalog 
of U.S. community-based research centers, some 50 institutions.

 Last July, Loka published a report contrasting these centers with their Dutch 
counterparts. Most of the U.S. science shops are young and affiliated only 
loosely with a university, but they have little else in common. Some are made 
up of scientists who respond to research requests from the local community; 
others have scientists who collaborate with communities around the country to 
conduct research; and a few are populated exclusively by people who have been 
drawn into research within their own communities.

 The Alaska Boreal Forest Council in Fairbanks is an example of the last of 
these. It began 5 years ago as an ad hoc group of families living in the Tanana 
River Watershed, an area about the size of Pennsylvania. As the state and 
federal governments negotiated deals that would allow commercial timber 
companies to log the area, residents raised questions about whether the 
programs would employ methods to sustain the forests.

"We aren't against logging," explains Jan Dawe, the council's executive 
director. "We just want to get more jobs per board foot cut" and ensure that 
the logging is done in a way that won't unleash another "boom-and-bust cycle" 
that plunders the environment.

 So, over the past few years, this group of some 120 families has recruited 
volunteers to interview experts. Their goal has been to understand the big 
picture, learn what questions to ask the logging companies and leasing agents, 
and knowhow to evaluate any answers they give. Though the council "initially 
focused on identifying information gaps," Dawe says, "more recently, we've been 
trying to help fill those gaps" by doing surveys and ecological field research.

     

 The Childhood Cancer Research Institute (CCRI) that Dianne Quigley runs also 
has a very narrow focus: empowering communities near U.S. military facilities, 
especially Native American tribes downwind of the Nevada Test Site, to 
investigate risks they might have incurred from exposure to radiation.

 Though affiliated with Clark University in Worcester, Mass., Quigley's 
10-year-old science shop-with a staff of three half-time employees-performs 
most of its work at distant sites, such as Ely, Nev.

 When area tribes noticed what seemed to be an unusually high incidence of 
cancers and thyroid disease, they contacted the shop to help them probe a 
possible link to fallout from decades of aboveground, nuclear-weapons tests. 
Using federal grants, CCRI set up the Citizen Advisory Committee in Ely, 
staffed by Native Americans.

 The committee has begun training some members of the local Shoshone and Paiute 
tribes to teach others about radiation-such as explaining that boiling did not 
detoxify foods that were contaminated by fallout in the 1940s and 1950s, as was 
widely believed. The committee is also interviewing tribal members about former 
cultural practices that might have resulted in an exposure to fallout. CCRI and 
the committee are also planning to investigate jointly whether perceived 
excesses of disease reflect actual excesses.

 Which they may not-as residents of one community learned with the help of the 
JSI Center for Environmental Health Studies. This 9-year-old Boston science 
shop was created by epidemiologists who met while serving as expert witnesses 
for plaintiffs in litigation alleging that polluted water in Woburn, Mass., 
triggered a cluster of leukemia deaths. The case has been described in the book 
A Civil Action (1995, Jonathan Harr, Vintage Books) and will be the subject of 
an upcoming movie.

 When residents of another Massachusetts town became alarmed that "they were 
going to too many funerals" and that most of the deceased had lived downstream 
of a landfill where industrial wastes had been buried, neighborhood volunteers 
began systematically plowing through their town's death records. After jotting 
down addresses for all town residents who had succumbed to cancer since 1969, 
"they came to me to find out how they could analyze the data to see if cancer 
rates around the landfill were higher than the town's average," recalls Richard 
W. Clapp, who heads the science shop's staff of six.

 Meeting with community residents, who called themselves the "Death Squad," 
Clapp encountered a retired engineer who offered to enter the data into a 
spread-sheet program on his home computer. Clapp helped him figure out how to 
compute the odds of dying from leukemia relative to where a person had lived.

"And that answered their question," Clapp says. "It turned out that there was 
no excess of leukemia deaths around the town landfill."

 Because the Death Squad volunteered so much of its labor, the science shop's 
financial burden was relatively small. Many projects, however, prove quite 
costly. Without grants or benefactors to cover them, such projects are usually 
rejected by science shops.

 Though many European science shops get at least minimal federal funding, often 
channeled through a host university, their U.S. counterparts are largely 
independent of the federal research and development enterprise.

 Research needs of communities "tend to be very problem oriented," observes 
Loka board member Daryl Chubin of the National Science Foundation (NSF) in 
Arlington, Va. Moreover, he points out that while community concerns tend to be 
small and multidisciplinary, federal research agencies prefer to focus on "big 
problems that come neatly packaged by discipline."

 Sclove sees another reason for science shops' low visibility to funders. "Only 
the producers of science and technology get representation in R&D policy 
decisions," he says. "It is a bizarre aberration of the democratic process." 
Putting more money into community-based research could help redress the 
inequity, Sclove believes.

 In fact, "we have been dithering around trying to figure out what the 
post^-Cold War [federal] research agenda should be," observes Anne C. Petersen, 
senior vice president for programs at the W.K. Kellogg Foundation in Battle 
Creek, Mich. "Many have been arguing that there's a great need to focus on 
societal issues. I can't think of a better way to do that than to invest in 
community-based research," she says.

 Indeed, she'd like to see for community research the creation of "something 
analogous to the agricultural extension service."

 Chubin thinks U.S. universities should also consider making support for 
science shops an explicit part of their mission. Because every university is 
part of its local community, he says, "One might ask, how it is serving that 
community?" At a minimum, he argues, it should consider making its staff 
available to the public.

 An advantage of a strong university tie for science shops is the credibility 
it can confer, says Gabriele Bammer of the Australian National University in 
Canberra. It's something she learned the hard way as a founder of Australia's 
first science shop-a $20,000 venture that lasted just 27 months.

"Starting a science shop is not that hard," she maintains, "because there's 
often seed money available." The challenge is securing its future. The center 
her team started in Canberra tried to remain independent of a university. In 
retrospect, she says, "I think if we were tied to the university, we would have 
looked more respectable to funding agencies." Certainly, she says, "If we were 
foolish enough to try and start something like this again, we'd look for bigger 
grants" and higher-profile projects-ones that could be widely publicized upon 
completion.

 These are lessons Bernstein, of Chicago's Center for Neighborhood Technology, 
learned long ago. He is now working on a three-city project in conjunction with 
the Federal National Mortgage Association (see sidebar).

 Sclove says networking science shops could be the most important lesson of 
all. "Once they begin sharing such hard-won experience, they won't have to make 
the same mistakes."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 19, November 7, 1998, p. 298. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


