Science News Online (11/28/98): Gene Triggers New Hair in Adult Mice

 November 28, 1998 

 Gene Triggers New Hair in Adult Mice

 By J. Travis 

 In research that could one day suggest ways to combat baldness or curb 
excessive hair growth, scientists have created mice whose skin continues to 
sprout new hair follicles long after birth. However, proliferating cells within 
the follicles sometimes give rise to tumors as well.

 In mammals, birth of hair follicles normally occurs only in a growing embryo. 
"During development, you're given a set number of hair follicles for the rest 
of your life," says Elaine Fuchs of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the 
University of Chicago.

 In the mice genetically engineered by Fuchs and her colleagues, however, new 
follicles also start to emerge several weeks after birth and continue to do so 
throughout life. Supplementing the normal coat the mice were born with, the new 
hairs arise from skin cells in between the preexisting follicles or even spring 
forth from the original follicles.

 These unusually furry rodents highlight a previously unrecognized signaling 
pathway that can command adult skin cells to give rise to new hair follicles, 
says Fuchs. A key component of this pathway appears to be a protein called 
beta-catenin. Fuchs' group has been interested in beta-catenin because it 
interacts with Lef-1, a protein already implicated in the development of hair 
follicles. When beta-catenin attaches to Lef-1, the pair can travel to the 
nucleus of a cell and activate genes specific to hair cells.

 In adult animals, any free beta-catenin in a cell is destroyed quickly. Fuchs 
and her colleagues, however, created mice whose skin cells had a gene encoding 
a form of beta-catenin that resists degradation. In some skin cells, but not 
all, this added beta-catenin ignited the development of new follicles. The 
scientists suspect that some still mysterious signal, perhaps released by 
existing follicles or other nearby cells, determines why only certain cells 
react to the extra beta-catenin.

 The new hair growth in the mice was not fully normal, Fuchs' team reports in 
the Nov. 25 Cell. Hair follicles frequently weren't angled appropriately, so 
hairs emerging from them didn't break the skin but extended beneath it. There 
were so many of these misaligned follicles, notes Fuchs, that "the skin 
actually got thicker."

 Two types of hair-follicle tumors also plagued the mice. Fuchs suggests that 
the tumors arise because the added beta-catenin gene is constantly stimulating 
cells to grow. She notes that similar cancers create bulges under the skin of 
some people and, though invariably benign, can be disfiguring.

 While the new research offers the hope that physicians will learn to control 
the beta-catenin pathway with drugs or topical agents, and consequently learn 
to inhibit abnormal hair growth or cure baldness, investigators caution that 
such goals remain far off. "There's tremendous potential here, but there's an 
enormous amount of additional experiments that need to be done," says Fuchs.

 Researchers, for example, need to test whether temporarily activating the 
beta-catenin pathway can generate new follicles without prompting tumors. 
Scientists note that the added beta-catenin gene functions during the mouse's 
embryogenesis and may cause permanent changes in skin cells that make them 
amenable to follicle formation in adulthood.

"Ideally, you would like to turn on beta-catenin just in an adult and see if 
you have the same effect: production of hair follicles," says George Cotsarelis 
of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 22, November 28, 1998, p. 340. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


