Science News Online (11/21/98): Chunk of Death-Dealing Asteroid Found

 November 21, 1998 

 Chunk of Death-Dealing Asteroid Found

 By R. Monastersky

 Sifting through seafloor muck from the bottom of the Pacific, a geological 
detective has recovered what appears to be a piece of the murder weapon that 
silenced two-thirds of Earth's species 65 million years ago and brought to a 
close the reign of the dinosaurs.

 The tiny extraterrestrial rock-only twice the thickness of a dime-holds the 
potential to solve a mystery that has nagged scientists for nearly 2 decades: 
What kind of object smacked the planet and unleashed the mayhem? "There is this 
significant question whether it was an asteroid or a comet," says the 
discoverer, Frank T. Kyte of the University of California, Los Angeles. "The 
[new] data would support an asteroid."

 Kyte found the geological gem in a cylindrical core of sediments pulled up 
from the middle of the North Pacific. Amid the monotonous chocolate-brown clay, 
Kyte spied a small speck of pale clay containing an angular rock, 2.5 
millimeters across. From previous chemical analysis of the core, Kyte knew that 
the rock sat in sediment contemporaneous with the mass extinction, which marks 
the boundary between the Cretaceous (K) and Tertiary (T) periods.

 Geologists have spent nearly 20 years pursuing the killer from the K-T 
boundary. In the early 1990s, researchers identified on the Yucatan peninsula a 
giant, buried crater that had formed at the time of the extinctions. But the 
planet-wrenching energy unleashed by the impact had seared away all signs in 
the crater that could pinpoint the responsible body.

 Kyte reports that the newfound rock has characteristics similar to a class of 
meteorites known as carbonaceous chondrites, fine-grained carbon-rich rocks 
peppered with little balls of silica-rich minerals, such as olivine. The 
silicate minerals in these meteorites often contain grains of nickel-iron metal.

 Within the Pacific meteorite, Kyte found clay with a texture similar to 
olivine and with iron oxides inside. He interprets these materials as relicts 
of the original meteorite, transformed over the millennia.

 Because Kyte's meteorite dates to the same time as the Yucatan crater, the 
chances are high they are related, he says. "This is really the first thing we 
can say is a piece of a meteorite from the K-T boundary," says Kyte, who 
described his discovery in the Nov. 19 Nature.

"He has made a pretty good circumstantial argument that this was a piece of the 
meteorite that was the culprit for this havoc," says Harry Y. McSween Jr., a 
meteorite scientist at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville. The discovery 
should prompt others to look for corroborating evidence from different sites, 
he says.

 From the meteorite's composition, Kyte links it to several classes of 
carbonaceous chondrites, which are thought to come from asteroids. 
Occasionally, the orbits of asteroids become unstable and they veer across 
Earth's path.

 Asteroids hit the planet at about half the speed of comets, and calculations 
suggest that some fraction of an incoming asteroid would survive the cataclysm, 
says H. Jay Melosh of the University of Arizona in Tucson. In the Yucatan 
crash, he says, the shattered backside of the asteroid could have been lofted 
back into space and then sprayed the Pacific with tiny meteorites. Geologists 
have postulated that the impact filled Earth's atmosphere with poisonous gases, 
knocked the climate out of whack, sparked global conflagrations, blocked out 
the sun, and triggered other unpleasant side effects.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 21, November 21, 1998, p. 324. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


