Science News Online (11/21/98): Microbe linked to Alzheimer’s disease

 November 21, 1998 

 Microbe linked to Alzheimer's disease

 By J. Travis

 Chlamydia pneumoniae is getting a bad reputation. Scientists first identified 
the bacterium a decade ago as the cause of severe, even fatal, respiratory 
failure in people. More recently, some investigators connected C. pneumoniae 
with atherosclerosis (SN: 6/14/97, p. 374). Now, a research group contends that 
this relatively common bacterium can invade the brain and perhaps trigger 
Alzheimer's disease.

 Although the origin of most cases of Alzheimer's disease remains mysterious, 
scientists long ago ruled out infectious agents as suspects. Still, many 
researchers have amassed data suggesting that inflammation resulting from 
abnormal immune responses in the brain may lead to the cell death 
characteristic of the illness (SN: 12/5/92, p. 394). Moreover, 
anti-inflammatory drugs seem to slow the disease's progression (SN: 2/19/94, p. 
116).

 Brian J. Balin of the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine and Alan P. 
Hudson of Wayne State University School of Medicine in Detroit wondered if C. 
pneumoniae sparks the brain's aberrant immune response in Alzheimer's disease.

 The researchers found traces of the bacterium in the brains of 17 out of 19 
people who had died with Alzheimer's disease. In contrast, only 1 autopsied 
brain out of 18 from people without the illness had signs of the microbe, Balin 
and his colleagues reported at last week's Society for Neuroscience meeting in 
Los Angeles. They also described the research in the August Medical 
Microbiology and Immunology.

 Other scientists studying Alzheimer's disease are intrigued by the new work 
but remain skeptical. "A bacterial infection in the brain could explain the 
widespread evidence of inflammation that one sees in Alzheimer's brains," says 
Joseph Rogers of the Sun Health Research Institute in Sun City, Ariz. "We need 
to find out if this [finding] is a statistical fluke or true in many patients."

"Clearly, someone else is going to have to verify this information. On the 
surface, it's difficult to believe," adds Paul Brown of the National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke in Bethesda, Md., who many years ago 
unsuccessfully tried to transmit Alzheimer's disease to monkeys by injecting 
tissue from diseased human brains.

 The evidence of C. pneumoniae's presence in the brain took several forms. Two 
tests detected DNA unique to the microbe. Antibodies that bind only to the 
bacterium stained regions of the brain affected in Alzheimer's disease. 
Electron microscopy yielded pictures of C. pneumoniae in brain cells. Finally, 
the researchers grew the microbe from some of the brain tissue samples.

 Unlike most bacteria, C. pneumoniae lives inside cells. While it hasn't been 
found in the brain before, scientists could have mistaken the microbe for 
cellular structures known as lysosomes, argues Balin. Moreover, it infects 
brain cells called glia rather than the nerve cells that die in Alzheimer's 
disease.

 When glia are infected, they may produce immune molecules that ultimately harm 
neighboring nerve cells. "We think it's the inflammation that's really doing 
the damage," says Balin.

 He and Rogers agree that it's unclear how a bacterial infection produces the 
abnormal protein deposits typical of Alzheimer's disease. One difficulty in 
evaluating the importance of C. pneumoniae's presence in the brain, adds 
Rogers, is that pneumonia is the most common cause of death for people 
enfeebled by late-stage Alzheimer's. "They may just be more susceptible to 
Chlamydia pneumoniae," he says.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 21, November 21, 1998, p. 325. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


