Science News Online (11/7/98): New Drug Keeps HIV Out of Cells

 November 7, 1998 

 New Drug Keeps HIV Out of Cells

 By S. Simpson

 Drugs currently approved to fight HIV wait for the virus to start trouble 
inside the cell before springing into action. Like a bouncer stopping obnoxious 
patrons at the door, a promising new drug paralyzes the virus before it ever 
invades.

 Sixteen HIV-positive adults without any AIDS symptoms received intravenous 
doses of the experimental drug, known as T-20, twice daily for 2 weeks. HIV 
concentrations in the four patients given the highest doses dropped by 99 
percent, an effect as potent as that of the drug combinations given to HIV 
patients today.

"The antiviral effect of the T-20 drug is really substantial," says Anthony S. 
Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in 
Bethesda, Md.

"I don't think anybody, even the big supporters of T-20, expected the 
impressive response we saw in the highest-dose group," says J. Michael Kilby of 
the University of Alabama at Birmingham, lead author of a report in the 
November Nature Medicine. "But the enthusiasm for this project isn't merely 
about this drug, it's about [proving] a whole new approach to therapy."

 To do its damage, HIV bumps up against immune cells, binds to them, and 
invades. Standard medications attack enzymes the virus uses to copy itself once 
inside the host cell, but the new approach stops the virus from ever fusing to 
the cell. "The virus can't do anything if it can't get inside our cells," Kilby 
says.

 Seeking to block that fusion, researchers from Alabama, Duke University, and 
the North Carolina biotechnology company Trimeris set out a decade ago to 
figure out the role of so-called glycoproteins that stud the outside of the 
virus like lollipops. When the sticky end of the lollipop bumps into an 
unsuspecting immune cell, the lollipop stem, a protein called gp41, releases 
the sticky end and reaches out to snag the cell, then pulls it close enough for 
the virus and cell to fuse.

 To stop gp41's deadly act, the team designed the peptide T-20, a chain of 36 
amino acids. The molecule attaches to gp41 and prevents it from drawing virus 
and cell together.

 Some researchers have wondered whether blocking cell entry by this mechanism 
could really stop a virus from spreading. "Although the principle of blocking 
entry is not new, this was the first truly successful attempt," Fauci says.

 Some patients in the T-20 trial experienced low-grade fevers or complained of 
transient headaches, but no one withdrew from the study because of side 
effects. The drug appears safe, Kilby says, but unlike existing HIV drugs, T-20 
does not work in pill form. Stomach acid would damage its delicate chain of 
amino acids before it could reach the bloodstream.

 Douglas D. Richman of the University of California, San Diego points out the 
impracticality of a therapeutic drug that can't be taken as a pill. "Working 
people who need drugs all their lives are going to want that," he says.

 That difficulty "doesn't bother me that much," says Fauci. "If you prove the 
concept that you get a substantial antiviral effect, then you start working on 
better mechanisms of delivery."

 Richman notes that it might be possible to develop a smaller, less complex 
molecule, just as potent as T-20, that would not be destroyed in the stomach.

 Kilby's team is already testing the power of administering T-20 just under a 
patient's skin. "A simple shot, like an insulin shot that you could learn to 
give yourself at home, is getting a little closer to something that would be 
practical," Kilby says. Simple injections of T-20 might some day work as a 
"rescue regimen" for people who develop resistance to other drugs, he adds.

 Kilby expects results in the next few months, but even if they're promising, 
researchers still need to test the drug's long-term success and its effects 
when combined with other drugs. It could take years before T-20 is approved for 
widespread use.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 19, November 7, 1998, p. 292. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


