Science News Online (1/17/98): Genes of Silence: Scientists track down a slew 
of mutated genes that cause deafness by John Travis

 January 17, 1998 

 Genes of Silence Scientists track down a slew of mutated genes that cause 
deafness

 By JOHN TRAVIS

 On the north shore of the island of Bali sits Bengkala, a 700-year-old village 
that has earned a measure of fame for its remarkably large number of deaf 
people -- currently 48 of the nearly 2,200 inhabitants. These deaf residents 
have had a profound influence on Bengkala's culture.

"This is a very unusual community. The village has created a unique sign 
language, and most people in the village have some facility with it," says John 
T. Hinnant of Michigan State University in East Lansing, an anthropologist who 
has recently spent time documenting the village's culture on videotape.

 Signed names have replaced spoken names. Villagers refer to Hinnant by making 
the sign for a videocamera or, he ruefully admits, the sign for a big nose.

 Bengkala isn't fertile scientific ground just for anthropologists. Hinnant 
learned of the village from geneticists who are working to isolate the mutated 
gene responsible for the widespread hearing loss. So far, they've localized the 
gene to a small region of chromosome 17.

"We're quite close to having it," says Thomas B. Friedman of the National 
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders in Bethesda, Md.

 Once found, the Bengkala gene will join the numerous other genes that 
investigators have recently tied to hearing loss. Last year was "quite dizzy 
with deafness genes," remarks Karen P. Steel of the Medical Research Council's 
Institute of Hearing Research in Nottingham, England.

 These new genes are providing some of the first molecular insights into the 
workings of the auditory system and into the reasons why about 1 child in 1,000 
is born deaf. Mutations in some of the genes produce hearing loss alone. In 
other cases, the gene mutations cause a range of other problems as well, such 
as blindness. 

 While the identification of these deafness genes may not help people born with 
profound, almost always permanent hearing loss, it may benefit the many whose 
deafness strikes later in life. "If you know at a biological level what's going 
wrong in the ear, you at least have a chance of intervening, preventing the 
hearing loss from getting any worse, or maybe even reversing it," says Steel.

 Discerning the origins of deafness, genetic or otherwise, is no easy task. 
Indeed, physicians often cannot diagnose the flaw that eliminates a person's 
perception of sound. 

 A person's ability to hear depends on the spiral-shaped cochlea, a pea-size 
organ in the inner ear. In each cochlea, a mere 16,000 hair cells, each bearing 
a cap of bristles called stereocilia, detect noises. Sound-induced movement of 
the stereocilia stimulates the hair cells to generate electric impulses that 
convey auditory information to the brain. Physicians suspect that most cases of 
deafness stem from problems with the hair cells -- but that's tough to confirm, 
since the cochlea is hidden within a bony labyrinth.

 Resolving the genetics of deafness is no less challenging. Genetic flaws 
account for about half the incidence of congenital deafness, but researchers 
estimate that mutations in more than a hundred genes may trigger such hearing 
loss. This genetic diversity shows up in the striking fact that the majority of 
children born to two deaf parents can hear.

 Scientists have been able to find many genes responsible for the syndromic 
forms of deafness, in which hearing loss is accompanied by other symptoms. In 
1992, for example, investigators found the mutated gene behind Waardenburg's 
syndrome, a condition characterized by deafness, widely spaced eyes that are 
sometimes mismatched in color, and a white forelock (SN: 5/2/92, p. 296). Last 
year, several research groups examining people with deafness, frequent loss of 
consciousness, and a dangerous heart arrhythmicity attributed the syndrome to 
mutations in various genes that encode components of a protein complex that 
allows potassium ions to enter cells.

 In contrast, investigators have struggled to find genes behind nonsyndromic 
deafness, which is the far more common type, accounting for the majority of 
congenital hearing loss. 

 The hunt has been complicated by a phenomenon to which scientists have given 
the unromantic name of assortative mating. "Deaf individuals tend to 
intermarry, at least in developed countries," explains Christine Petit of the 
Pasteur Institute in Paris. 

 Since the two members of a deaf couple generally owe their hearing loss to 
different genes, assortative mating creates a nightmare for geneticists trying 
to track a single deafness gene through a family's history, a useful step in 
finding its chromosomal location. 

 For a long time, investigators considered mapping of nonsyndromic deafness 
genes an impossible task, notes Richard Smith of the University of Iowa in Iowa 
City, who maintains a World Wide Web site that tracks the field's progress (the 
hereditary hearing loss home page at ).

 The first major break in the hunt for nonsyndromic deafness genes came when 
Pedro E. Leon of the University of Costa Rica in San Jose learned of a large, 
local family with many deaf members. The affected members of the family can 
hear at birth, but around age 10 they start to go deaf. By age 30, all hearing 
is lost.

 Leon traced this trait back through eight generations of the family and 
obtained blood samples from nearly 150 living members. He then teamed up with a 
research group headed by Mary-Claire King of the University of Washington in 
Seattle. In 1992, after tracking genetic markers known to be inherited along 
with the deafness, the investigators announced that they had mapped the gene 
responsible to a part of chromosome 5. 

 With that first success in hand, says Smith, many other scientists began to 
search around the world for large, inbred populations in which hearing loss is 
common. Meanwhile, Leon and his colleagues continued their quest until, in the 
Nov. 14, 1997 Science, they identified the mutated gene behind the Costa Rican 
family's deafness.

 By examining a library of genes active in the cochlea of a developing fetus, 
Leon's team has shown that the normal version of this gene is turned on in the 
inner ear. Yet the brain, heart, lungs, kidney, and many other tissues also 
seem to use the gene. That finding poses a difficult question about those with 
mutations in the gene. 

"Why are these people deaf and otherwise normal, when this gene's product is 
used by a vast array of cell types?" asks the University of Washington's Eric 
D. Lynch, who led the search for the gene.

 The deafness gene resembles a fruit fly gene called diaphanous, which has 
offered some clues to the human gene's possible role in hearing. Studies of 
diaphanous and a similar mouse gene indicate that their proteins help a 
molecule called profilin assemble filaments of another protein, actin. 

 Such filaments provide a dynamic skeleton for cells. They may be especially 
important to the cochlea's hair cells because the stereocilia owe their 
stiffness to bundles of actin filaments that are continuously broken apart and 
rebuilt.

"The hair cells are possibly so reliant on the actin cytoskeleton to perform 
their hearing function that we see a [consequence of the gene's mutation] there 
and not elsewhere," says Lynch.

 To study further the cause of the Costa Rican family's deafness, the 
researchers plan to genetically engineer mice to suffer a similar form of 
hearing loss. "We're trying to mimic the mutation as closely as possible," says 
Lynch.

 The scientists are also investigating whether some cases of hearing loss stem 
from mutations in a second human gene that they have found resembles 
diaphanous. "We think it makes a good candidate, considering its sibling's role 
in deafness," says Lynch.

 The Costa Rican gene wasn't actually the first nonsyndromic deafness gene 
isolated. That honor went several months earlier to the gene encoding a protein 
called connexin 26. Ironically, this gene came to light during the search for 
the cause of an apparently syndromic form of hearing loss.

 Investigators were studying a family that had both deafness and a skin 
disorder. The researchers focused on a group of channel-forming proteins, or 
connexins, that play an important role in the skin. Connexins allow small 
molecules to pass between cells. 

 As suspected, some deaf family members had mutations in the gene for a 
connexin. The scientists realized, however, that the family's symptoms had been 
mistakenly linked. "Not everyone who had skin disorders was deaf and vice 
versa," notes Robert F. Mueller of St. James' University Hospital in Leeds, 
England.

 In the May 1, 1997 Nature, Mueller and his colleagues reported that mutations 
in the gene for connexin 26 produce deafness, but not the family's 
dermatological problems. 

 The investigators also used antibodies that bind to connexin 26 to show that 
the protein is present in various regions of the inner ear, but they're still 
unsure what role it plays in hearing. Some scientists speculate that flawed 
connexins may disrupt the ability of hair cells to take in or expel potassium 
ions. Both activities are crucial to the cell's generation of electric impulses.

 The gene for connexin 26 illustrates one emerging theme of deafness genetics. 
In several cases, different mutations in a single gene can cause either 
recessive or dominant forms of inherited hearing loss. In the recessive forms, 
a deaf child has inherited a mutant copy of the gene from both parents, and 
deafness is usually present at birth. If the gene has a dominant mutation, only 
one flawed gene is needed to produce deafness, and the hearing loss often 
occurs gradually and later in life.

 Another lesson hearing researchers have learned is that syndromic and 
nonsyndromic deafness can represent two sides of the same coin. They have found 
that certain mutations in a gene produce both hearing loss and other symptoms, 
while other mutations seem to cause just deafness.

"For clinical geneticists, who have spent their lives asking, 'Is this 
syndromic or nonsyndromic?' it's mind-boggling to find out it's just an 
artifact of where the mutation is," says Mueller.

 Take Pendred's syndrome, perhaps the most common syndromic cause of hereditary 
hearing loss. Usually born deaf, though the hearing loss sometimes occurs 
during childhood, people with Pendred's syndrome also develop goiter, an 
enlarged thyroid gland, around puberty. 

 In 1996, two research groups that had studied large, inbred families 
exhibiting Pendred's syndrome reported that they had mapped the responsible 
gene to chromosome 7. One group, led by Benjamin Glaser of Hadassah University 
Hospital in Jerusalem and Val C. Sheffield of the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute at the University of Iowa in Iowa City, then contacted Eric D. Green 
of the National Human Genome Research Institute in Bethesda, Md.

"My lab's passion is chromosome 7," says Green, who has developed a detailed 
map of genetic markers on the chromosome.

 After narrowing the chromosomal region under suspicion, Green and his 
colleagues began sifting through genes there, testing whether deaf family 
members had mutations in any of them. As reported in the December 1997 Nature 
Genetics, the investigators finally struck gold with a gene that appears to 
encode a protein, which they call pendrin, that ferries sulfate molecules 
across cellular membranes.

 Cells attach sulfates to proteins and many other molecules for myriad reasons, 
and scientists have recently discovered that mutations in other sulfate 
transporter genes can cause dwarfism or constant diarrhea, notes Green.

 As expected, the gene encoding pendrin turned out to be active in the adult 
thyroid gland. Preliminary experiments suggest that it is also active in the 
developing fetal cochlea, which may explain the deafness associated with 
Pendred's syndrome. 

"We think there's a direct role this protein plays in the development of the 
inner ear," says Green. "The cochlea is like a spiral staircase, and [in people 
with Pendred's] it just doesn't have the right number of turns in it." 

 Blurring the definition of Pendred's syndrome, however, the investigators have 
also found that certain mutations in the pendrin gene can cause deafness 
without thyroid problems. "Not all individuals develop goiters," says Green.

 This finding, he adds, may mean that mutations in the pendrin gene account for 
many more cases of deafness than researchers had previously suspected.

 A similar conclusion now seems likely for a gene tied a few years ago to 
Usher's syndrome. In this condition, people born deaf slowly lose their sight. 
The gene encodes a protein called myosin VIIa, and in several reports this 
year, investigators have described mutations in the gene among deaf people with 
no obvious visual problems.

 The gene first came to light through studies of mice. Over the years, 
scientists have identified many deaf mouse strains. As names like shaker and 
waltzer indicate, these strains were often first identified by their 
head-tossing, odd circling behavior, or other abnormal movements that seem to 
reflect balance difficulties stemming from inner ear problems.

 Several years ago, Steel and her colleagues discovered that a mouse strain 
called shaker-1 owes its hearing loss to mutations in the gene for myosin VIIa. 
This protein and many similar ones can bind to actin filaments and, through the 
effort of a built-in motor, move along them, often ferrying some form of 
molecular cargo. 

 Steel and her colleagues then realized that the human version of the gene for 
myosin VIIa resides in a part of chromosome 11 already implicated in one form 
of Usher's syndrome. Further research by Petit and other investigators 
established that mutations in this gene indeed cause the syndrome's visual and 
auditory problems.

 Several cell types in the eye produce myosin VIIa, and according to studies 
conducted by Tama Hasson of Yale University School of Medicine, the protein is 
abundant in stereocilia and other specific regions of hair cells. "We know 
where the protein is, so now the question is, what does the protein do," says 
Hasson.

 While the search for the protein's natural roles continues, Steel and her 
colleagues report in the November 1997 Neuron that myosin VIIa appears to play 
a role in the accumulation of a certain antibiotic inside hair cells. 
Consequently, the presence of myosin VIIa in the inner ear may explain why 
antibiotic-induced deafness is one of the major nongenetic causes of hearing 
loss.

 As investigators continue to catalog new deafness genes, they need to firm up 
their estimates of how many cases of hearing loss can be attributed to each 
gene. At the moment, most of the excitement centers around connexin 26. The 
most dramatic evidence concerning its gene comes from a study by Petit and her 
colleagues in the November 1997 Human Molecular Genetics. Among 65 families 
with histories of hearing loss, most of them from Tunisia, France, New Zealand, 
and the United Kingdom, the researchers found that about half had mutations in 
the gene for connexin 26. 

"It looks like connexin 26 accounts for a lot [of deafness] in certain areas of 
the world, but it's not clear how much it accounts for hereditary deafness in 
the United States," says Friedman.

 As the genetic data accumulate, physicians may begin to screen for mutations 
that might cause late-onset hearing loss or counsel people about potential 
outcomes of future pregnancies. 

 The latter issue is particularly important, since only half of congenital 
hearing loss stems from inherited mutations. "The main question of a family 
with a deaf child is whether they will have another one," notes Petit.

 Outside the clinic, scientists will continue to examine how the proteins 
encoded by these deafness genes make hearing possible. They will investigate 
primarily the mouse inner ear, especially in mice bred to have mutant copies of 
the various deafness genes.

 Mice will also serve as the initial testing ground for any treatments that 
might emerge from the discovery of deafness genes. Last year, for example, Anil 
K. Lalwani of the University of California, San Francisco reported at a meeting 
that he and his colleagues had for the first time successfully introduced a 
foreign gene into the mouse cochlea. With the growing number of identified 
deafness genes, physicians should soon know which ones will be useful in gene 
therapy for preventing or reversing hearing loss.


