Science News Online (12/19-26/98): The Greatest Story Ever Told

 December 19 & 26, 1998 

 The Greatest Story Ever Told

 Is cosmology solved?

 By RON COWEN

 Scientists don't often make great debaters. Rather than dealing with absolutes 
in black and white, they tend to invoke qualifiers and caveats in shades of 
gray. But cosmologist Michael S. Turner, whose hand-drawn viewgraphs are so 
colorful that they have adorned the walls of an art gallery, isn't the typical 
scientist, and 1998 hasn't been the typical year for the study of the universe.

 In an October forum-billed as "The Nature of the Universe Debate: Cosmology 
Solved?"-Turner, who is at the University of Chicago and the Fermi National 
Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., put forth an assertion as bold as his 
drawings: For the first time in history, cosmologists have developed a 
consistent framework that integrates the origin, evolution, and current 
appearance of the universe.

 Turner's opponent in the debate, Jim Peebles of Princeton University, took a 
more conservative view of recent progress in deciphering the cosmos. He 
prescribed caution in concluding that the key pieces of the cosmic puzzle have 
all been revealed.

 The past year could mark a turning point for cosmology, Turner told a packed 
auditorium at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History 
in Washington, D.C.

 Clearly, 1998 began with a jolt: Two rival teams studying the titanic 
explosion of distant, elderly stars overturned the prevailing belief that the 
cosmos has been slowing down its rate of expansion ever since the Big Bang. In 
fact, they reported, the universe is actually flying apart faster than ever 
before (SN: 3/21/98, p. 185; 10/31/98, p. 277).

 Although entirely unexpected, that recent finding and others appear to unify 
elements of a cosmic portrait that have emerged over the past decade, Turner 
says. Stitching together such disparate concepts as energy associated with 
empty space, invisible matter in the universe, and the curvature of the cosmos, 
the new reports may turn out to mark a watershed for cosmology. Their impact 
could be every bit as important as the discovery more than 3 decades ago of the 
whisper of radiation left over from the Big Bang.

      

 In 1964, two physicists at Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J., stumbled upon 
key evidence for the Big Bang. Scanning the sky with a radio receiver, they 
discovered a faint, uniform crackling. The pervasive nature of the signal and 
its intensity over a range of frequencies indicated that the radiation could 
not have come from the universe today. Instead, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson 
concluded, it represents the radiation produced by the cosmos when it was young 
and extremely hot.

 This radiation, known as the cosmic microwave background, is one of the 
cornerstones of the Big Bang theory. Along with measurements of the abundance 
of light elements forged just after the birth of the universe, the microwave 
background provides evidence that the universe began with the explosive 
expansion of a dense, hot soup of subatomic particles and radiation.

 A fog of electrons pervaded the infant universe. For thousands of years after 
the Big Bang, radiation did not stream freely into space but was repeatedly 
absorbed and scattered by these charged particles.

 About 300,000 years after the Big Bang, the universe became cool enough for 
the electrons to combine with nuclei. This lifted the fog, enabling radiation 
to travel unimpeded. Shifted to longer wavelengths by the expansion of the 
universe, this relic radiation is today detected as microwaves and far-infrared 
light. It provides a snapshot of the universe when it was 300,000 years old.

 The Big Bang model has been phenomenally successful in explaining the events 
that took place beginning one-hundredth of a second after the birth of the 
universe. But by 1980, scientists trying to elucidate even earlier cosmic 
events were pushing the limits of the theory. The Big Bang model offers no 
explanation for the explosion itself, notes Turner. The dynamite that produced 
the Big Bang remains elusive.

 The model has other shortcomings. It does not reveal the nature of the matter 
that fills the universe. Nor does it explain why the young cosmos was so smooth 
and uniform and how tiny fluctuations in the density of the early universe 
could give rise to the lumpy collection of galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and 
superclusters seen today.

 A theory known as inflation, developed and refined during the 1980s, provides 
a partial answer to these riddles. In this theory, the cosmos undergoes an 
extremely short but prodigious growth spurt. In just 10-32 second, the universe 
expanded more than it has in the 13 billion years or so that has elapsed since 
(SN: 6/7/97, p. 354).

 This growth spurt captured chance subatomic fluctuations in energy and 
inflated them to macroscopic proportions. The action transformed the 
fluctuations into regions of slightly higher and lower density. Over time, 
gravity molded these variations into the spidery network of galaxies and voids 
seen in the universe today.

 In inflationary cosmology, quantum fluctuations provide the energy for the 
expansion. According to quantum theory, the vacuum of space is far from empty. 
It seethes with particles and antiparticles constantly being created and 
destroyed. Energy from this vacuum can be tapped and is more than sufficient to 
trigger the era of explosive expansion dubbed the Big Bang.

 This scenario gained support from a 1992 discovery: The microwave background 
does not have a uniform temperature but is full of hot spots and cold spots. 
The variations, a few ten-thousandths of a kelvin, were detected by the Cosmic 
Background Explorer (COBE) satellite. They are thought to correspond to slight 
variations in the distribution of matter at the moment when light and matter 
parted company, and radiation streamed freely into space. This finding was 
hailed as proof that microscopic lumps in the infant cosmos, no bigger than 
about 10-23 centimeters across, were the seeds for the galaxies and other 
large-scale structures we see today.

 Inflation also explains the overall uniformity of the universe. Conventional 
Big Bang cosmology cannot account for how regions of the universe separated by 
distances so large that they have never even exchanged light signals can look 
so similar to each other. According to inflation theory, the universe began 
with regions so tiny that they were homogeneous. These regions then expanded 
into volumes vastly bigger than astronomers can ever observe.

 Inflation makes the cosmos not only uniform but also flat. Any curvature to 
space-time is stretched out by the expansion, like a cosmic version of a 
balloon stretched to enormous proportions.

 Over the past 4 years, nearly 20 ground-based and balloon-borne telescopes 
began measuring variations in the temperature of the cosmic microwave 
background over small spatial scales. The pattern of variations is known to be 
sensitive to the shape of the cosmos (SN: 2/21/98, p. 123). The measurements 
are not yet conclusive, but they suggest that the geometry of the universe is 
indeed as flat as the inflation theory would predict.

 For the universe to be flat, astronomers calculate that it must contain a 
critical density of material. A variety of observations, however, including 
measurements taken over the past year, has revealed that the universe comes up 
short: It doesn't have nearly enough matter to be flat.

 Of the four types of lightweight nuclei forged in the Big Bang, deuterium is 
the most sensitive indicator of the density of ordinary matter, which is made 
of protons, neutrons, and electrons. The greater the density of deuterium, the 
lower the density of ordinary matter (SN: 5/18/96, p. 309).

 Because stars burn deuterium, the amount present today is not a good indicator 
of the primordial abundance, Turner notes. By measuring deuterium in very 
distant, essentially starless, hydrogen clouds, which hail from a time when the 
universe was very young, David R. Tytler of the University of California, San 
Diego and Scott Burles of the University of Chicago this year pinned down the 
amount of deuterium made in the Big Bang. Their measurements indicate that the 
density of ordinary matter contributes only 5 percent of the density needed for 
the universe to be flat.

 Astronomers set their sights on clusters of galaxies to estimate the total 
density of matter in the cosmos, including exotic kinds of matter that would 
reveal their presence only through their gravitational influence. To weigh 
these behemoth clusters, the scientists use several methods. They measure the 
temperature of the X rays the clusters emit, and they determine the random 
motion of galaxies within a cluster.

 With these methods, researchers recently found that the total density of 
matter is about 40 percent of the critical density.

 This result has two profound implications, Turner notes. First, it suggests 
that most of the matter in the universe is not the familiar stuff that rocks 
and people are made of. Rather, it's some unseen, exotic material.

 This dark matter could be remnants from the earliest, fiery moments of the 
universe, when high temperatures would have set the stage for the creation of a 
vast zoo of elementary particles. Slow-moving particles, generically known as 
cold dark matter, are the best candidates for this exotic material, Turner 
says. These particles would allow for the pattern of structures seen in the 
universe today, which indicates that it evolved from the bottom up, forming 
galaxies, then clusters of galaxies, and so on. Other theories had suggested 
that the large structures formed first, then fragmented.

 The other consequence of the new measurements of matter density is even more 
startling. If the universe is flat, then there must be something else-a special 
form of matter or energy (the two are equivalent according to Einstein) that 
makes up the missing 60 percent of the critical density. Turner dubs this 
component "funny energy."

 This special energy resists the gravitational pull of galaxies, so it 
distributes itself uniformly throughout the cosmos.

 Funny energy "leads to a striking prediction," notes Turner. "The expansion of 
the universe should be speeding up, rather than slowing down."

 How so? According to Einstein's theory of general relativity, gravity derives 
both from energy and matter and from pressure. The funny energy manifests 
itself as a negative pressure. If the universe contains a large enough 
component of funny energy, the net effect of gravity is to exert a repulsive, 
rather than an attractive, force. The expansion of the universe then 
accelerates rather than slows down.

 In 1998, this bizarre state of affairs received tentative confirmation. Two 
teams of scientists, including researchers at the University of California, 
Berkeley and Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory, examined a 
distinct type of exploding star, or supernova. Previous studies have suggested 
that this type, known as a supernova Ia, has the same intrinsic luminosity in 
both nearby and distant galaxies.

 Because the light from a faraway galaxy takes several billion years to reach 
Earth, telescopes see such a galaxy as it appeared when the universe was 
younger. If cosmic expansion had recently slowed, then there should be less 
distance between Earth and a faraway galaxy-and a shorter travel time for 
light-than if the expansion had maintained its speed. A supernova in a distant 
galaxy would look slightly brighter in the case of the slowed expansion.

 The researchers this year found exactly the opposite. Distant supernovas 
looked dimmer than expected, indicating that the universe has increased its 
rate of expansion.

 Measurements of the geometry of the cosmos and the gravity within it finally 
add up, says Turner. "For the very first time, we have a complete and plausible 
accounting of matter and energy in the universe."

 The avalanche of data now and expected over the next few years will go a long 
way toward explaining the basic features of the universe with a theory rooted 
in fundamental physics, Turner concludes. "What I want to argue is that in 
1998, we had the first key evidence for a theory that takes us well beyond the 
hot Big Bang cosmology."

     

 Turner's debate opponent, Peebles, argues that nothing is settled until the 
proverbial fat lady sings-and as far as Peebles is concerned, she hasn't sung 
yet. Cautioning his colleagues not to go overboard in their enthusiasm, Peebles 
recalled the words of a cosmologist of an earlier era, Willem de Sitter, who 
admonished in 1931 that "it should not be forgotten that all this talk about 
the universe involves a tremendous extrapolation, which is a very dangerous 
operation."

"Observational advances since then have greatly reduced the danger," says 
Peebles, "but I think [they] should leave us with a sense of wonder at the 
successes in probing the large-scale nature of the physical universe and 
caution in deciding just how well we understand the situation."

"The basic tenets of inflation plus cold dark matter have not yet been 
confirmed definitively," Turner admits. He contends, however, that a survey 
under way to map the location of 1 million nearby galaxies and the planned 
launch of two NASA missions to record the cosmic microwave background in 
unprecedented detail "could make the case soon."

 Peebles raises another criticism, which Turner acknowledges: The existence of 
an accelerating universe implies that we live during a very special time in the 
history of the cosmos. This circumstance harks back to the different behavior 
of the two components-matter and energy-that contribute to the critical 
density. The amount of mass per unit volume declines as the universe expands, 
but the energy density, at least in its simplest form, remains the same. 
Indeed, it is sometimes referred to as the cosmological constant.

 Observations suggest that right now, the densities of matter and funny energy 
are roughly equal. The energy density is just beginning to take over from 
matter density as the factor controlling cosmic expansion. At an earlier time, 
when the mass density was higher, the global effect of gravity would have been 
attractive, and we would not have observed the universe to be accelerating.

 The big question, quips Turner, "is the Nancy Kerrigan question: 'Why me, Why 
now?'" There's only one period when matter and energy densities are comparable, 
he notes, "and that's today, and we happen to be around."

 Although he finds that seeming coincidence "bothersome," Turner doesn't see it 
undermining the model of an accelerating universe. He says, "Often in science 
as you answer one question, a new question is raised."

 At the end of the debate between Turner and Peebles, moderator Margaret J. 
Geller of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., 
took a straw poll. She asked the listeners if they thought that a century from 
now, the basic concepts exciting astronomers this year would be cornerstones of 
understanding. Most of the audience thought the concepts would be substantially 
different.

 Even if today's models endure, "solving cosmology does not mean the end of the 
study of the universe, nor even the beginning of a less exciting period of 
inquiry," Turner says in a monograph that accompanied his talk.

"A list of today's puzzles is long enough and challenging enough to occupy 
astrophysicists for decades: What are the objects that make gamma-ray bursts, 
and how do they work? How do galaxies form stars and light up the sky? How are 
stars born? . . . Is there life elsewhere in the cosmos? . . .

"With the flood of data coming, the list will only grow longer and more 
interesting," Turner concludes. "I am confident that there will be plenty of 
challenges for next century's astrophysicists."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 25 & 26, December 19 & 26, 1998, p. 392. 
Copyright O 1998 by Science Service.


