Science News Online (11/7/98): Arctic fossils record evolutionary burst

 November 7, 1998 

 Arctic fossils record evolutionary burst

 By  R. Monastersky

 Working near the northern limit of land, on Canada's remote Victoria Island, 
scientists have unearthed a mother lode of microscopic fossils, chronicling an 
evolutionary explosion among complex cells more than 800 million years ago.

"This is a case of exceptional fossil preservation. We're seeing an awful lot 
more [species] than people have seen in similarly aged deposits," says Nicholas 
J. Butterfield of the University of Cambridge in England, who studied the 
Arctic rocks along with Robert H. Rainbird of the Geological Survey of Canada 
in Ontario.

 Some of the fossils from Victoria Island are bacteria, but many represent 
larger, eukaryotic cells-the branch on the tree of life that harbors all 
animals, plants, fungi, and a vast microcosm of single-celled protists 
including amoebas and paramecia. Like most fossils of early eukaryotes, the 
Victoria Island forms are so simple that they cannot be assigned to any modern 
group. Paleontologists call these acritarchs, a catch-all category of 
unicellular eukaryotic fossils.

 Though the researchers cannot unequivocally identify what the original 
organisms were, the diversity of the acritarchs is startling, says Butterfield, 
who discussed the discovery in the November Geology and in Toronto last week at 
a meeting of the Geological Society of America. The researchers found 30 
acritarch species, 13 of which had never been seen before.

 Butterfield and Rainbird propose that some of the new acritarchs closely 
resemble modern eukaryotes called dinoflagellates, which account for much of 
the photosynthesis in the oceans and thus provide food for larger creatures.

 Some modern dinoflagellates survive winter by producing tough-walled cysts 
that drop to the ocean floor in the cold months and then crack open when the 
cells are ready to resume growing. Geologists have identified fossils of these 
cysts only as far back as the Silurian period, roughly 420 million years ago.

 Butterfield and Rainbird suggest that this record stretches at least twice 
that long. Some of the Victoria Island acritarchs, they say, have jagged, 
polygonal edges, a pattern characteristic of dinoflagellate cysts that have 
broken open. Despite the similarity, Butterfield and Rainbird say they cannot 
firmly identify the acritarchs because the fossils lack key features seen on 
many, but not all, dinoflagellates.

 The Victoria Island discovery supports chemical studies of rocks that have 
found molecular indications of dinoflagellates at least as far back as 850 
million years ago, says Roger Summons of the Australian Geological Survey 
Organisation in Canberra. He and other paleontologists have suspected for some 
time that a fraction of the known acritarch species represent predecessors of 
modern dinoflagellates.

 Regardless of the acritarchs' affinities, however, the number and complexity 
of species found on Victoria Island indicate that eukaryotes were passing 
through a critical evolutionary period at that time, says Butterfield.

"All of this means something. There's a huge amount of diversity in the 
environment at this time," says Butterfield. It suggests that eukaryotes were 
rapidly evolving in the face of some new ecological pressure, and one candidate 
is the appearance of the earliest animals, which could have been grazing on the 
plentiful organisms, he suggests. Traces of animals don't appear in the fossil 
record until less than 600 million years ago, but scientists are currently 
debating whether animals split off from other eukaryotes far earlier in time. 

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 19, November 7, 1998, p. 294. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


