Science News Online (12/19-26/98): A Billion Years of Beauty

 December 19 & 26, 1998 

 A Billion Years of Beauty

 Exhibit of fossils strains the definition of art

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 -- See the beautiful images that accompany the following article, and test 
your creative talents!

 Visitors shuffling through Yale University's Peabody Museum of Natural History 
may find themselves scratching their heads when they reach the so-called hall 
of mammals. Missing are the sabertooth cat, giant sloth, dire wolf, and many 
other long-time residents of this room.

 Instead, viewers encounter a series of 6-foot-tall stony slabs, mounted 
vertically like paintings and illuminated from above by spotlights. Each of the 
intricately patterned panels carries a fanciful title but little else in the 
way of explanation-a style more in keeping with an art gallery than a 
scientific exhibit.

 One piece bears the name "Shrimp Burrow Jungle" and looks like a Jackson 
Pollock drip painting stripped of its colors. Another jagged slab, called 
"Nature as Fingerpainter," is covered with curvy wrinkles that bring to mind 
thumbprints or the fleshy folds of an infant's skin.

 These giant blocks are part of the exhibit "Fossil Art," which has been 
touring North American natural history museums for the past year. Created by 
German paleontologist Adolf Seilacher, the show explores how the blossoming of 
animal life transformed the landscape of the ocean bottom. At the same time, 
Seilacher's displays delve into the murky chasm separating art from science, 
forcing viewers to consider how the two endeavors overlap. In the process, it 
raises the thorny question, Can fossils be considered a form of art?

"The whole exhibit tries to bridge the cultural divide between arts and 
sciences because this is an ingrained division that is not necessary and 
natural," says Seilacher, a professor at both Yale University and Tubingen 
University in Germany.

 Despite the name of the show, the panels at the Peabody are not actual 
fossils. Rather, they are epoxy replicas of stone surfaces that Seilacher and 
his Tubingen crew visited in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, 
Japan, Libya, Namibia, Pakistan, Scotland, Spain, and the United States.

 Seilacher embarked on his artistic quest in 1992, after winning the 
prestigious Crafoord Prize from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for his 
contributions to paleontology. To make a dramatic statement that could compete 
with the dinosaurs in most museums, Seilacher came up with the plan to display 
large sections of bedding planes-sheets of former seafloor sediments sculpted 
many millennia ago by water and animals.

 Because the team could not remove the giant blocks of rock, museum preparator 
Hans Luginsland used latex and silicone to make high-quality casts of them. 
After the casts dried, the team rolled them up like carpets. Back in Germany, 
the molds were used to recreate the original stone surfaces.

 The bedding planes reveal a different facet of paleontology than most museum 
fossil displays do. Typical exhibits-dinosaur skulls, mammoth tusks, 
trilobites-present the anatomy of extinct creatures. Most of the surfaces in 
"Fossil Art" preserve the impressions made by bygone beings instead of 
presenting the animals themselves.

"With just two or three exceptions . . . all of Seilacher's examples represent 
the activities and behaviors of organisms-burrows, traces, tracks, and 
trails-rather than their overt anatomies. Thus, we learn that organic effort 
can be as beautiful as organic form," says Harvard paleontologist Stephen J. 
Gould in a foreword to the exhibit catalogue. He calls Seilacher "the 
acknowledged master" in the field of deciphering such traces, a discipline 
called ichnology.

     

"Fossil Art" starts off with examples of nature's trickery, with fossil-like 
patterns that formed long before animals ever started sculpting the seafloor. 
Reaching back over a billion years ago, the exhibit's first pieces display 
rippled shapes carved not by organisms but by ocean currents, waves, and the 
slow compaction of seafloor sediments. Fooled by such intricate forms, 
paleontologists have sometimes categorized them as fossils and given them Latin 
names.

 Seilacher has debunked several such pseudofossils, but he now sits on the 
opposite side of the debate regarding one specimen. Last year, he and his 
colleagues reported finding worm burrows in a 1.1-billion-year-old rock from 
India (SN: 11/1/97, p. 287), the actual specimen of which is on display in the 
exhibit. These marks would push back the record of animal life by a 
half-billion years, but some other paleontologists think that Seilacher has 
himself been fooled in this instance (SN: 10/17/98, p. 255).

 From the Indian specimen, the exhibit moves to its main feature-the pivotal 
period when life grew more complex and began covering the seafloor with 
biological graffiti. This evolutionary revolution spanned the end of the 
Precambrian era and beginning of the Cambrian period, from some 600 million to 
520 million years ago.

 Before this time, Earth's oceans had teemed with bacteria and other microbes 
that first appeared at least 3.5 billion years ago. These minute forms had the 
run of the planet until the late Precambrian, when a smorgasbord of enigmatic 
beings appeared, some the size of dinner tables. Called the Ediacaran biota, 
these hard-to-categorize organisms apparently led a peaceful lifestyle, 
passively soaking up energy from the sun and from chemicals in the ocean. 
Mobile animals also lived at this time, but they dwelled in the shadow of the 
more massive and abundant Ediacarans (SN: 11/22/97, p. 326).

 At the start of the Cambrian, life took a turn toward the swift and savage. 
Driven by an escalating arms race between predators and prey, species started 
acquiring elaborate shells and hard skeletons. Other creatures, escaping from 
the fury, began mining food from beneath the seafloor. They churned up the 
sedimentary layers and opened up entirely new habitats. In a shrug of geologic 
time, most of the modern animal phyla appeared and began leaving elaborate 
trails in the sea bottom.

 Seilacher describes all this in detail in the catalogue to the exhibit, but he 
has intentionally left such information off the fossil displays. He forces 
people to confront them first as pure designs, as pieces of abstract art.

     

 The success of that gambit depends, not surprisingly, on the eye of the 
beholder. Sally Hill, an exhibit designer at the Eli Whitney Museum in Hamden, 
Conn., says that the fossil replicas fit her own personal definition of art. 
"The object is art because you enjoy looking at it as art, in my mind," she 
says. "To me, the scale of them and the texture of them makes you want to touch 
them, to feel them, to eat them. They're really beautiful."

 As yet, however, Seilacher has not managed to interest an art museum or 
gallery in taking the "Fossil Art" show, which will travel next to the Nova 
Scotia Museum of Natural History in Halifax.

 Some within the art community have trouble with Seilacher's attempts to 
characterize the fossils as art. "That I find just naivete. That I can't 
accept," says Richard S. Field of the Yale University Art Gallery, who spoke at 
a panel discussion on the exhibit last month. "You can't take a cast of a 
fossil bed and say that it's art. It has nothing to do with human intention. . 
. . You can't credit the mollusk and the trilobite with having intention," he 
says.

 Photographer Richard Benson, dean of Yale University's School of Art, took a 
different view during the discussion. "As a practicing artist, I'm interested 
in art that human beings make, and human beings making the thing is part of the 
defining aspect of art," says Benson. "You could make the case that [Seilacher] 
is the artist," he says, because the scientist fashioned the casts.

 Seilacher balks at that role, though. "I have no interest in being called an 
artist or to be an artist." To him, nature has played the role of the artist by 
producing something captivating that can move people and invite meditation.

 Through the power of this experience, Seilacher hopes to dispel the popularly 
held conception that science and emotion are antithetical. "The sense of visual 
fascination is at the base of many scientific discoveries and descriptions. We 
should not shy away and say that science is something else, that science is not 
appealing to the emotion. I think emotion is a large part of it. But of course, 
the emotion has to be controlled by reasoning and arguments and so on."

 Field agrees with Seilacher that science and art have far more in common than 
many people realize. "Dolf wants to bring the two cultures together, and this 
is a great exhibition for showing that art and science are not that far apart," 
he says. "One could argue that the arts are a form of inquiry just as the 
sciences are. In fact, there isn't such a great difference."

 -- See the beautiful images that accompany this article, and test your 
creative talents!

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 25 & 26, December 19 & 26, 1998, p. 398. 
Copyright O 1998 by Science Service.


