Science News Online (12/19/98): New Gene Therapy Fights Frailty

 December 19 & 26, 1998 

 New Gene Therapy Fights Frailty

 By J. Raloff 

 By age 40, every man and woman begins losing muscle. Over the next 3 to 5 
decades, this process-known as sarcopenia, or "vanishing flesh"-inexorably 
transforms even the most hale individuals into frail elders. While exercise can 
slow the weakening that accompanies this loss, there has been no way to halt 
the muscle wasting.

 New research now suggests that this unrelenting process may be stoppable.

 Working with mice, which experience a similar loss of up to 30 percent of 
their skeletal muscle during aging, scientists applied a novel gene therapy. 
They inserted DNA for a hormonelike substance into a virus gutted of the 
capacity to cause disease. The researchers then injected the virus into the 
right, back leg of young, middle-age, and elderly animals. They then observed 
the rodents, which were kept sedentary, for 3 to 9 months. 

 Comparing the treated leg with its left counterpart, they found roughly 15 
percent more mass and strength in the right leg of young adult animals. In 
geriatric mice, the effect was even more pronounced: They showed 19 percent 
more muscle mass and 27 percent more power in the treated leg.

"Though I expected improvement in the old animals, I never dreamed we would 
basically preserve them at young-adult levels," says study leader H. Lee 
Sweeney of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia. 
His team presented its findings Dec. 14 at a meeting in San Francisco of the 
American Society for Cell Biology. A report of the work also appears in the 
Dec. 22 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 Previous studies suggested that sarcopenia might trace to a drop in the body's 
production or ability to use insulinlike growth factor 1 (IGF-1), explains Anna 
M. McCormick of the National Institute on Aging in Bethesda, Md. Normally 
secreted by injured muscle, this hormonelike substance recruits nearby 
satellite cells-local repair crews-to mend routine, small muscle rips (SN: 
8/10/96, p. 90).

 The new findings don't prove that an IGF-1 deficiency causes sarcopenia, says 
Nadia Rosenthal at the Cardiovascular Research Center of Massachusetts General 
Hospital in Charlestown, a member of Sweeney's team. However, she notes, this 
gene therapy "can arrest [muscle] degeneration and atrophy due to aging." And 
while it works in both young and old animals, she says, to get the most 
benefit, "the younger the better."

"This is exciting," says Charlotte A. Peterson of the University of Arkansas in 
Little Rock. "It's the first case of a molecule affecting muscle atrophy due to 
aging," she says. The technique used to provide it "is the closest anyone has 
come to something you might consider using as a therapy [for people]," she adds.

 McCormick agrees that it's "a great proof of principle. But as with any gene 
therapy, we have a long way to go."

 Still, "these dramatic findings signal a fountain-of-youth opportunity," says 
neurologist Leon I. Charash of Cornell University Medical College in New York 
City. He is a medical advisor to the Muscular Dystrophy Association, which 
funded Sweeney's team. The finding holds out the prospect, he says, "of helping 
older people lead healthier and better lives, with less need for medical care."

 Rosenthal is also excited by the technique's potential use in helping aging 
cardiac muscle repair damage from a heart attack. Sweeney notes it may even 
help limit some of the wasting caused by the milder forms of muscular dystrophy.

 However, because the treatment's effects are local, treating a human to 
prevent frailty might require hundreds of injections to augment all the 
skeletal muscles vulnerable to aging. Cardiac therapy would need far fewer 
injections. In either case, Sweeney says, "you'd only have to do it once."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 25 & 26, December 19 & 26, 1998, p. 388. 
Copyright C 1998 by Science Service.

 
