Science News Online (1/31/98): How Inhaled Dust Harms the Lungs by J. Raloff

 January 31, 1998 

 How Inhaled Dust Harms the Lungs 

by J. Raloff

 Seven years ago, an Environmental Protection Agency statistician stunned 
researchers studying the effects of air pollution on health when 
he reported analyses indicating that as many as 60,000 U.S. residents die each 
year from breathing federally allowed concentrations of 
airborne dust (SN: 4/6/91, p. 212). This and subsequent studies figured 
prominently in EPA's decision last year to ratchet down the 
permitted concentration of breathable particles in urban air -- and in human 
airways (SN: 7/5/97, p. 6). 

 At the time, many industrialists argued that they shouldn't have to pay for 
better pollution control because science had yet to suggest a 
plausible biological mechanism by which breathing low concentrations of urban 
dust might sicken or kill people. 

 Now, scientists at the University of Texas Houston Health Science Center 
describe how they uncovered what they think may be one of the basic 
elements of that toxicity. 

 On the alert for foreign debris, a community of white blood cells known as 
alveolar macrophages patrols small airways of the lung. When these 
cells encounter suspicious material, they identify it and send out a chemical 
clarion call to rally the immune system cells best suited to 
disabling and disposing of such matter. 

 The trick is to recruit only as many troops as are needed. If they call in too 
many, the lung can sustain inflammatory damage from friendly 
fire. Alongside the small troop of macrophages that stimulates defense 
measures, a larger squadron of macrophages halts immune activity when 
it threatens the host. 

 Andrij Holian and his coworkers in Houston have found that people with healthy 
lungs normally have 10 times as many suppressor macrophages as 
stimulatory ones. In people with asthma and other chronic lung diseases -- who 
face an increased risk of respiratory disease from inhaling 
urban dust -- that ratio may be only 3 to 1. The reason for the difference is 
not known. 

 In a report to published in the March Environmental Health Perspectives, 
Holian's team describes test-tube studies of human alveolar 
macrophages. The macrophages showed no response to ash collected from the Mount 
St. Helen's eruption. However, when exposed to airborne dust 
from St. Louis and Washington, D.C., most of the suppressor macrophages 
underwent apoptosis, or cellular suicide, while the stimulatory ones 
survived unaffected. Ash from burned residual oil, a viscous boiler fuel, 
proved even more potent at triggering suppressor cell suicides. 

 If this test-tube system models what's actually happening in the human lung, 
Holian told Science News, the different responses of the two 
classes of lung macrophages could result in an overly aggressive immune 
response to normal triggering events. Indeed, he says, it would be the 
first step in a cascade that can end in inflammatory lung injury. "We may one 
day be able to target this upstream event and prevent that 
injury." 

"This is, I think, an important contribution to the overall story," says Daniel 
L. Costa of EPA's pulmonary toxicology branch in Research 
Triangle Park, N.C. 

 Studies by EPA suggest that certain metals -- especially iron, vanadium, 
nickel, and copper -- in smoke from combustion of fossil fuels 
trigger particularly aggressive inflammatory responses by lung cells. Costa 
says these metals play a "preeminent" role in the toxicity of 
airborne particulates. When EPA researchers removed the metals, they also 
removed the toxicity, he says. Moreover, he notes, these metals tend 
to reside on the smallest water-soluble particles in urban air -- the fraction 
targeted for more aggressive controls under the new rules. 

 John Vandenberg, assistant director of EPA's National Health and Environmental 
Effects Research Laboratory in Research Triangle Park, says 
Holian's results are "a nice complement to our studies." 



