Science News Online (12/5/98): Fill 'Er Up . . . With Veggie Oil

 December 5, 1998 

 Fill 'Er Up . . . With Veggie Oil

 Vegetable oils are moving from the kitchen table to the car engine

 By CORINNA WU

 Asked to name a striking image from the 1970s, some might think of President 
Nixon making his resignation speech, a news photo from the Vietnam War, or even 
a young John Travolta striking a pose.

 Others might recall the long lines of cars at gas stations during the oil 
embargo. From October 1973 to March 1974, Arab nations banned oil exports to 
the United States in retaliation for U.S. support of Israel during the 
Arab-Israeli War. Gasoline became a rare and precious commodity.

 Those lean days made it all too clear how heavily the United States had come 
to depend on imported petroleum and how easily its supply could be cut off. The 
energy crisis of the 1970s, followed by high oil prices in the early 1980s, 
sparked widespread interest in alternative energy sources.

 Today, gasoline is again plentiful and cheap, and the long lines at gas 
stations are a fading memory. Research into alternatives, however, continues. 
Some geologists predict that petroleum production will peak within 2 decades, 
then diminish, triggering a sharp rise in oil prices (SN: 10/31/98, p. 278).

 Hoping to develop technologies that could lessen U.S. dependence on imported 
oil, some scientists are looking to a homegrown solution, literally. They are 
developing diesel fuels and lubricants based on vegetable oils-the same 
vegetable oils that people drizzle on salads and use to cook french fries.

 Oils from soybeans, corn, canola, and sunflowers all have the potential to 
move from the kitchen to the garage, researchers say.

 In some applications, fuels and lubricants made from vegetable oils actually 
perform better and pollute less than their petroleum counterparts. Their big 
drawback, however, is that they're two to three times more expensive. For that 
reason, researchers are adapting vegetable oil for those fuel markets where its 
advantages might justify its cost.

     

 The idea of using vegetable-based products as fuel is not new. German engineer 
Rudolf Diesel reportedly employed peanut oil to power one of his engines at the 
Paris Exposition of 1900. In the late 1970s, petroleum makers stretched limited 
fuel supplies by mixing gasoline with ethanol from fermented corn. This formed 
a cleaner-burning concoction known as gasohol (SN: 10/29/77, p. 280) that is 
still available. Gasohol burns more completely than petroleum, producing less 
carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons.

 To some researchers, vegetable oils seem like a natural choice for an 
alternative fuel since the United States grows an abundance of agricultural 
crops. In Europe, strict environmental regulations have made vegetable 
oil-based products an even more attractive choice, since they present less of a 
problem if accidentally spilled. Seventy to 80 percent of a vegetable oil 
biodegrades to small organic molecules, carbon dioxide, and water in 
standardized tests compared with only 20 to 40 percent of a conventional 
lubricant, says Andre L. Boehman of the Pennsylvania State University in State 
College.

 In a junkyard, a car leaking canola oil won't contaminate the soil as badly as 
one leaking conventional gasoline or oil. A boat that inadvertently dumps 
soybean-based diesel fuel into a lake won't foul the water as much as one 
releasing regular fuel.

 Farmers also look to the oil research as a way to increase the market for 
their crops, says Lowell Norland, director of community and business services 
for the Ag-Based Industrial Lubricants Research Program at the University of 
Northern Iowa in Waverly. Toward this goal, scientists in the oil research 
group at the Department of Agriculture's National Center for Agricultural 
Utilization Research (NCAUR) in Peoria, Ill., are studying the properties of 
biodiesel, a type of fuel derived from vegetable oil. It may someday serve as 
an alternative to the diesel fuel used in many trucks and boats.

 Ordinary diesel fuel is a mixture of hydrocarbon molecules of differing 
lengths and structures. These molecules contain no oxygen atoms. Some 
hydrocarbons consist of long, straight carbon chains; others branch like a tree 
or form rings. They may have double-bonded carbons that cause the chains to 
bend. The characteristics of the hydrocarbons affect how they burn.

 Vegetable oils, on the other hand, are mixtures of fatty acids-molecules that 
contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. The fatty acids may be saturated, 
monounsaturated, or polyunsaturated, meaning they contain zero, one, or 
multiple double bonds between carbons, respectively. The greater the number of 
double bonds, the more easily the compound reacts with oxygen from the air and 
goes bad, as kitchen fats and oils do after months on the shelf.

 Saturated fats, such as those in lard, have another disadvantage as a fuel or 
lubricant. They turn solid at low temperatures, while mono- and polyunsaturated 
oils remain liquid. Researchers have their eye on polyunsaturated soybean oil, 
in particular, because many of its properties, such as viscosity and 
combustibility, are similar to those of petroleum-based oils.

 To produce biodiesel, chemists treat a vegetable oil in a process called 
transesterification. This turns the oil into methyl ester compounds, which burn 
more cleanly than diesel fuel and leave fewer engine deposits than untreated 
vegetable oil.

 When burned in an engine, biodiesel emits smaller amounts of pollutants, 
including particulates, volatile organic compounds, carbon dioxide, and 
polyaromatic hydrocarbons, than regular diesel fuel does, says Gerhard Knothe, 
a scientist at NCAUR. Notable exceptions are the nitrogen oxides, major 
contributors to smog, which biodiesel generates more of than does petroleum 
diesel.

 On the other hand, biodiesel contains no sulfur, unlike regular diesel, so 
acid-rain-producing sulfur oxides aren't a problem (SN: 8/27/94, p. 134).

"You can smell the difference," Knothe observes. "The fumes from biodiesel are 
less obnoxious."

     

 An advantage of biodiesel over other alternatives to petroleum is that it 
works in existing diesel engines. Other clean-burning fuels such as natural gas 
have combustion properties so different from those of diesel fuel that they 
can't be used in conventional engines.

 Natural gas must also be stored differently. "The fuel [itself] may be 
cheaper, but the engine and infrastructure changes are so expensive, they 
outweigh that advantage," says Knothe.

 In terms of performance, however, biodiesel isn't yet up to par. Because of 
its unsaturated fatty compounds, vegetable oil reacts with oxygen more easily 
than diesel does, and so its properties can change. Biodiesel can also leave 
more gummy deposits in engines than regular diesel does.

 And just like cooking oil placed in the freezer, biodiesel thickens and forms 
solid crystals-mostly of saturated fats-at low temperatures, plugging fuel 
lines. At 0@C, components of biodiesel begin to crystallize. Lower the 
temperature a few degrees more, and the fuel no longer flows. "Here in the 
Midwest, we'd be in trouble," says Knothe.

 The fix is rather simple: The scientists can winterize the fuel by cooling it 
until the crystals form, then filtering them out. The resulting biodiesel can 
start an engine at -15@C, a temperature comparable to petroleum-based diesel.

 Some of the fats filtered out, such as methyl palmitate and methyl stearate, 
tend to have the best combustion properties, however. "It's a tradeoff," says 
Knothe. "You improve one property, but you have to be careful about the other."

 Biodiesel can be combined with conventional diesel fuels, says Knothe. Several 
companies manufacture a blend known as B20 because it contains 20 percent 
biodiesel and 80 percent regular diesel fuel.

 Biodiesel improves the slipperiness, or lubricity, of diesel fuel. When sulfur 
is removed during refining of conventional diesel, the lubricity goes down. "If 
you add [biodiesel] in, you get the lubricity back," says Knothe. As an 
additive to a fuel tank, biodiesel could potentially reduce wear on moving 
engine parts.

 In a similar way, vegetable oil added to an engine's oil pan can do the duty 
of motor oil while polluting less. Boehman, Joseph M. Perez, and their 
colleagues at Penn State are studying an engine lubricant made from sunflowers 
genetically modified to produce oil with a high concentration of 
monounsaturated oleic acid. To test a formula made by Renewable Lubricants in 
Hartville, Ohio, they compared it with a 10W-30 petroleum-based oil.

 In the lab, Boehman explains, he puts lubricant in a small diesel engine, 
which he runs at a variety of temperatures and engine speeds. He passes the 
exhaust through a filter and collects particles of soot and other pollutants.

 The researchers see a reduction in particle emissions with the sunflower oil, 
although they want to confirm those results with additional tests, says 
Boehman. He presented some of the group's recent findings in August at a Boston 
meeting of the American Chemical Society.

 In regular engine operations, "most of the emissions come from the lubricant," 
he says. Oil vapors that don't get burned condense on the solid particles of 
soot that fly out through the exhaust pipe. Vegetable oil doesn't evaporate as 
easily as petroleum-based oil, so less finds its way out of the engine.

 Because oleic acid has only one double bond, it doesn't react with oxygen as 
readily as polyunsaturated oils do. Adding antioxidants to sunflower oil 
improves its stability, to resemble that of 10W-30 motor oil.

 As foods, monounsaturated oils such as olive and canola oil may have health 
benefits (SN: 11/21/98, p. 328). Therefore, many agricultural seed companies 
are genetically modifying plants to increase their proportion of 
monounsaturated oils, says Norland. "What seed companies are developing for 
human consumption is also very good for industrial lubricants."

      

 If vegetable oil-based fuels and lubricants are to compete with conventional 
ones, their price will have to drop considerably.

"Biodiesel will not be able to replace all conventional diesel," says Knothe. 
"If you took all the vegetable oil in the world and made biodiesel out of it, 
you'd only replace a few percent of the whole conventional diesel market. 
That's the reason why the National Biodiesel Board [a trade organization] is 
targeting niche markets." These markets would include urban bus fleets, mining 
equipment, and marine vessels. Mine and marine environments face particular 
threats from fuel spills.

 One factor that would reduce the price is an increase in supply spurred by 
changing patterns of consumption, Norland suggests. Soybean products, for 
example, are gaining recognition for their heart-healthy qualities (SN: 
5/30/98, p. 348). "As soybean flour is used more and more, oil becomes a 
by-product," he notes.

 Legislative activity may drive the acceptance of vegetable oil-based fuels and 
lubricants, whatever their price. The omnibus spending bill recently passed by 
Congress recognizes B20 as an alternative fuel. The Clean Air Act of 1990 and 
the Energy Policy Act of 1992 also create markets for these products.

 In Germany's Black Forest region, environmental protection laws require farm 
machinery to use only biodegradable fuels and lubricants, thereby instituting 
"almost a requirement to use veggie oil," says Boehman. Several products based 
on canola oil are used in Europe.

 At the University of Northern Iowa, Lou Honary and his colleagues developed a 
vegetable oil replacement for hydraulic fluid used in heavy machinery such as 
forklifts and garbage trucks. An Iowa bill passed this year requires all state 
agencies to purchase as much of this fluid, called BioSOY, as allowed by their 
budgets and manufacturer warranties on equipment.

 Oil companies themselves don't see vegetable-based products as a threat, 
according to Honary. Instead, they have already jumped on the bandwagon. "I 
don't know of any petroleum company that doesn't have a green program running," 
he says. "They are all trying to find some way to promote the use of vegetable 
oils. They'd like to have this alternative for certain applications."

 In the end, researchers hope that vegetable oils will perform well enough to 
convince people to use them. Honary looks to the example of Sandia National 
Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M. The facility tested BioSOY in 20 of its own 
vehicles from 1996 to 1997. This hydraulic fluid worked so well that Sandia 
decided to use it in all of its vehicles.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 23, December 5, 1998, p. 364. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


