Science News Online (1/24/98): Tinnitus location found in the brain by N. Seppa

 January 24, 1998 

 Tinnitus location found in the brain

by N. Seppa

 The chronic sensation of loud ringing in the ears, or tinnitus, plagues 
roughly 12 million people in the United States, including about 10 percent of 
the elderly. An additional 40 million people have a milder form of the disease. 
Loud noise or other injury to the cochlea, a portion of the inner ear, can 
trigger the disorder, which often accompanies hearing loss. The progression of 
tinnitus is poorly understood, and there is no cure.

 Now, scientists have located the area of the brain that seems to register this 
ringing sound -- a first step, they hope, toward treating the condition.

 The finding emerged from a study of unusual tinnitus patients, who hear 
changes in the ringing when they move their jaws. Researchers used positron 
emission tomography (PET) to examine the brains of four such people and 
compared the images produced when the people clenched and relaxed their jaws.

 PET scans showed that jaw clenching changed blood flow, an indicator of neural 
activity, to certain regions of the brain -- mainly an area of the temporal 
lobe associated with hearing. In three of the patients, who had tinnitus only 
in the right ear, blood flow changes showed up on the left side of the brain. 
Blood flow also increased somewhat in the hippocampus, a part of the brain that 
controls emotions. Other, more predictable activation occurred in parts of the 
brain responsible for motor activity, in this case the jaw clenching, the 
researchers report in the Jan. 22 Neurology.

 Six people without tinnitus showed no blood flow change in auditory regions, 
whether they clenched their jaws or not. 

 The researchers then exposed all of the participants to a tone in the right 
ear. This activated responses in auditory portions of the brain on both the 
right and left sides, says study coauthor Alan H. Lockwood, a neurologist at 
the State University of New York and at the Veterans Administration Western New 
York Health Care System, both in Buffalo. The findings suggest that sound, even 
in one ear, is processed on both sides of the brain, whereas the tinnitus arose 
on one side only.

 The result indicates that "this form of tinnitus is not cochlear," because a 
disturbance arising in the ear would register on both sides of the brain, says 
Kenneth A. Gruber, a scientist at the National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communications Disorders in Bethesda, Md. In these people, tinnitus apparently 
originates within the brain, Lockwood agrees.

 Just as some amputees feel pain in a limb they no longer have, people with 
tinnitus experience sounds they don't actually hear. "We think that tinnitus 
may be a sort of sensory analog to phantom limb pain," Lockwood says.

 Although the brain appears to be largely "hard-wired" for sensory input, it 
"is capable of undergoing some fairly substantial reorganization, especially in 
altered sensory perception," says Lockwood, whose current work focuses on this 
brain remodeling, or plasticity. 

 The researchers also consider activation of the hippocampus unusual. In the 
control group, PET scans showed no hippocampal activation. The findings support 
past research hinting that the frustration of tinnitus can induce emotional 
problems, Lockwood says.

 Counseling helps some tinnitus patients, whereas others find relief from 
devices that mask the ringing with more soothing sounds. Few drugs ease 
tinnitus. Lidocaine, an anesthetic, works only when given intravenously and 
then only for a short time. Knowing the location of tinnitus processing in the 
brain may enable researchers to test the effects of new medications, Gruber 
says.


