Science News Online (12/19/98): Potent laser twirls electron figure eights

 December 19 & 26, 1998  

 Potent laser twirls electron figure eights

 By P. Weiss 

 During the past decade, experimenters have developed laser beams of 
unprecedented power. Like other forms of light, these beams are composed of 
perpendicular electric and magnetic fields. The laser beams' enormously strong 
electric fields tear electrons from atoms and accelerate the freed particles 
almost instantly to nearly the speed of light. Made more intense each year, 
compact lasers have promised to unlock new areas of physics and usher in 
practical advances such as X-ray lasers and tabletop particle accelerators (SN: 
9/5/98, p. 157).

 In a partial fulfillment of that promise, researchers at the University of 
Michigan in Ann Arbor report a laser experiment confirming a 30-year-old 
prediction based on Einstein's theory of relativity.

 The Michigan findings indicate that high-power, short-pulse lasers have 
reached sufficient intensities for "opening up a whole new regime" of physics, 
says Nicolaas Bloembergen of Harvard University, who shared the 1981 Nobel 
Prize in Physics for pioneering studies using lasers to probe atoms.

 As described in the Dec. 17 Nature, Michigan researchers Szu-yuan Chen, 
Anatoly Maksimchuk, and Donald Umstadter fired 4-trillion-watt laser bursts 
lasting less than a half-trillionth second. The bursts tore their target, 
helium gas, into a plasma of electrons and ions.

 Theorists predicted in the 1960s that a laser's magnetic field, which has no 
effect on low-speed electrons, would exert a force on the fast-moving electrons 
accelerated by the laser electric field. Because the magnetic field pushes 
perpendicularly to the electric field, the oscillating fields would force the 
particles into minuscule figure eights.

 Electrons on that swooping trajectory would re-emit light at the frequency of 
the laser itself but also, more importantly, at harmonics of the laser's 
frequency. The Michigan team reports that they detected those telltale 
harmonics.

 Moreover, a digital camera showed that the emissions emerged in a cloverleaf 
pattern, as predicted. "The figure eight [motion] is inferred from this 
pattern," Umstadter says.

 As multiples of the laser-light frequency, the harmonics represent higher 
energies. Even more energetic harmonics in the X-ray range may be possible. The 
Michigan researchers are planning new experiments to reach those frequencies.

 Toshiki Tajima of Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory agrees that 
the recent experiment buoys hopes for "a new way to generate bright X rays in a 
very compact and, perhaps, very cheap way." Umstadter says the new results also 
have implications for laser-driven nuclear fusion and laboratory tests of 
astrophysical phenomena.

 Eric J. Prebys of Princeton University says that the new work confirms earlier 
experiments that also demonstrated that electrons can be propelled to 
near-light speeds by laser electric fields. Umstadter, however, claims that his 
group is the first to see unequivocally the instantaneous magnetic effect.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 25 & 26, December 19 & 26, 1998, p. 390. 
Copyright C 1998 by Science Service.


