Science News Online (1/24/98): Alcoholism Shows Its Youthful Side by B. Bower

 January 24, 1998 

 Alcoholism Shows Its Youthful Side

by B. Bower

 A surprisingly large number of people who exhibit serious alcohol problems, 
including alcoholism, began imbibing during childhood or on the cusp of 
adolescence, a national survey finds.

 Young people who take up alcohol drinking before age 15 are four times as 
likely to become alcohol-dependent -- a diagnosis that corresponds to 
alcoholism -- as those who begin drinking at age 21, according to psychiatric 
epidemiologists Bridget F. Grant and Deborah A. Dawson, both of the National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) in Bethesda, Md. Small tastes 
or sips did not count as drinking.

 The rate of alcohol abuse -- a less severe but nonetheless disruptive 
condition -- more than doubles in youngsters who start drinking before age 15, 
compared to those who first use booze as 21-year-olds, Grant and Dawson report 
in the January Journal of Substance Abuse.

"It was not previously known that alcohol dependence was influenced in such a 
dramatic way by early alcohol drinking," commented psychiatrist and NIAAA 
director Enoch Gordis at a press conference held in Washington, D.C., last week 
to announce the findings. Adolescent alcohol use has been linked to several 
troubling characteristics, however, including an increased risk of becoming 
depressed or violent.

 It is not known whether the prevention of early alcohol drinking will, by 
itself, steer individuals away from alcoholism. "We don't know what causes this 
extraordinary association between early drinking and later alcohol dependence," 
Gordis says.

 Grant and Dawson examined interview responses of 27,616 current or former 
alcohol drinkers obtained by U.S. Census Bureau field-workers in 1992. The 
interviews focused mainly on symptoms of alcohol abuse and dependence.

 The prevalence of alcohol dependence declined as the age of initial drinking 
rose, the researchers note. About 40 percent of those who began drinking before 
age 15 became alcohol-dependent at some later time, compared to 25 percent of 
those who began drinking at age 17 and 10 percent of those who first tried 
alcohol at ages 21 or 22.

 Curiously, the prevalence of alcohol dependence rose for those who began 
drinking at ages 23 and 24 -- to around 15 percent and 14 percent, 
respectively. It then declined sharply for those whose alcohol initiation 
occurred after age 25.

 Alcohol use that starts around 23 or 24, which is extremely late for U.S. 
residents, may signal the presence of emotional problems that contribute to a 
desire to drink excessively, the scientists suggest. A related study found 
better psychological health in teens who occasionally experimented with illicit 
drugs than in those who used drugs either frequently or not at all (SN: 5/1/93, 
p. 282).

 Alcohol abuse also declined sharply among those who first imbibed at later 
ages, falling from 14 percent for those who started at age 14 to 2.5 percent 
for those who started at age 25 or older.

 This pattern held for men and women, blacks and whites, and participants with 
and without alcoholic family members.

"I'm not surprised at these findings," says psychologist Rudy E. Vuchinich of 
Auburn (Ala.) University. Kids who begin drinking after age 15 may have had a 
chance to establish constructive habits and activities that discourage 
excessive alcohol use, he theorizes.

 Further research is needed to determine whether early alcohol use induces 
brain changes that foster problems with alcohol later, Gordis adds. 


