Science News Online (2/14/98): Hermaphrodites duel for manhood by S. Milius

 February 14, 1998 

 Hermaphrodites duel for manhood

by S. Milius

 Talk about a battle of the sexes. Researchers have found hermaphroditic 
flatworms that rear up, expose their stubby penises, and literally duel.

 Researchers knew that these flatworms inject sperm into random areas of flesh, 
but "penis fencing is new," Newman says. No one had described the dueling until 
she and Michiels spent some 20 hours continuously watching pairs of captured 
worms mating in old ice cream containers. The details for one moderately 
aggressive species appear in the Feb. 12 Nature.

"It's better to stab than to be stabbed," says Newman. The stabber fathers 
offspring without the energy drain of healing torn flesh or producing eggs.

"The interesting thing," says Michiels, "is that hermaphroditic partners run 
into conflicts because they usually have identical but incompatible interests." 
People may not realize how simple many human sexual conflicts are in the grand 
scheme of nature. "Once a male and a female decide to mate, there is no 
discussion about who will give and who will receive sperm," Michiels says.

 The dueling worms illustrate one extreme of hermaphroditic difficulties -- 
both partners vying for the male role -- but other flatworms have the opposite 
problem. "Individuals have to 'beg' to receive sperm," Michiels says. In these 
species, hermaphrodites project what looks like a penis but reaches out to a 
partner's male organs and withdraws sperm.

 Hermaphrodites, which share the same sexual interests and strategy, may be 
more likely to evolve physically damaging sex, Michiels speculates. For the 
marine flatworms, particularly aggressive duelers may produce more offspring 
than so-so stabbers. "It results in a kind of escalation," he says.

 In two-sex species, the females have a strong interest in not getting their 
flesh ripped to pieces during mating and so may avoid injurious males. Natural 
selection will favor males that are "well-behaved," Michiels says.

 Jabbing sperm directly into flesh may have developed to circumvent female 
devices to control fertilization or wrest some unintended benefit from it, 
Michiels speculates. A number of species with set routes for sperm have special 
female adaptations so that "most of the sperm go straight into the gut."

 Michael Siva-Jothy of the University of Sheffield in the United Kingdom says 
that among species studied so far, "I think the dueling and the overtness of 
the dueling are quite unusual." He adds that he would not be surprised if the 
worm report inspired closer observations of other hermaphrodites, whose 
romances may turn out to be just as weird.

 Another specialist in mating conflicts, William G. Eberhard of the University 
of Costa Rica in San Jose and the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in 
Panama City, Panama, urges researchers to follow the sperm. He'd like to know 
whether the stabbed worm digests or otherwise manipulates the sperm it 
receives. He warns against a common bias: "Females are generally taken as 
relatively passive."

 Eberhard also points out the difficulty of untangling the interests of the 
sexual combatants. Is a dodging partner just filtering out lousy duelers? Then, 
he says, the traditional battle of the sexes becomes "selective surrender."

 References:  

 Michiels, N.K., and L.J. Newman. 1998. Sex and violence in hermaphrodites. 
Nature 391(Feb. 12):647.

 Further Readings: 

 Eberhard, W.G. 1996. Female control: Sexual selection by cryptic female 
choice. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

______. 1985. Sexual selection and animal genitalia. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.

 Sources:  

 Nicolaas K. Michiels Max-Planck-Institut fur Verhaltensphysiologie Seewiesen, 
Postfach 1564 D-82305 Starnberg Germany

 Leslie J. Newman Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History 
MRC 163 Washington, DC 20560

copyright 1998
