Science News Online (1/3/98): Space 1998 From the moon to Mars and beyond

 January 3, 1998 

 Space 1998

 From the moon to Mars and beyond

 In space, small is in. The majority of missions scheduled for launch this year 
are downright diminutive, and most carry only a handful of instruments. Even 
the $1.4 billion Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, the last of NASA's great 
observatories, is a scaled-back version of its former self. 

 Three of the missions this year rely on the services of a small launch vehicle 
called the Pegasus XL, and the space agency is hoping that problems with the 
vehicle are a thing of the past (SN: 1/18/97, p. 42). Early last year, NASA put 
a moratorium on Pegasus flights after several mishaps. The last four launches 
with Pegasus have been successful, however. 

 The following is a tentative schedule of spacecraft launches. Given the 
vicissitudes of equipment and weather, it is subject to change.

 This week, NASA heads back to the moon. The tiny Lunar Prospector, small 
enough to fit in the backseat of a car, may determine within its first month of 
operation whether the permanently shadowed craters at the moon's poles contain 
water ice. Radar measurements made with a previous lunar-orbiting craft, 
Clementine, found hints of frozen water, but the finding remains controversial. 

 Like Clementine, Prospector can't look for water directly. However, its 
neutron detector can infer the abundance of hydrogen. Cosmic rays striking 
atoms on the moon's surface create a steady stream of neutrons, which are 
efficiently scattered into space by hydrogen. If Prospector finds an 
unexpectedly large amount of hydrogen, it's likely that the excess is tied up 
in water.

 Prospector is expected to orbit the moon at an altitude of 100 kilometers for 
1 year. If enough fuel remains, the craft will ultimately swoop down to an 
orbit just 10 km above the lunar surface. Prospector's gamma-ray spectrometer 
will determine the abundance of radioactive trace elements and more common 
elements, such as iron and silicon.

 A magnetometer will measure the strength of magnetic fields at orbiting 
altitude, while an electron reflectometer measures fields at the surface. These 
readings will help pinpoint the size of the moon's core and its electrical 
conductivity, providing a test of the most popular theory of the moon's 
formation. According to the theory, a body at least as big as Mars slammed into 
Earth early in its history, and some of the debris from that collision 
coalesced to form the moon. In this picture, the abundance of magnetic 
materials in the moon, including iron, should not differ significantly from the 
amounts in Earth's mantle.

 To determine the geologic activity of the moon, an alpha particle spectrometer 
will measure the rate at which radioactive gases are released from the surface. 
By measuring where and when gases are vented, scientists hope to determine the 
frequency of moonquakes and other disturbances. These gases -- believed to 
consist mostly of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide -- could become 
key resources if a lunar base is established. 

 By monitoring shifts in the frequency of radio signals emitted by the craft, 
ground controllers can track changes in Prospector's velocity as it orbits the 
moon. The information will allow scientists to construct a detailed gravity 
map, revealing concentrations of mass beneath the surface.

 The public can view data from Prospector at the same time that mission 
scientists receive it by visiting the NASA Web site at .

 TRACE (Transition Region and Coronal Explorer) will explore the link between 
small-scale magnetic fields rooted in the surface of the sun and the structure 
of hot gases in the sun's upper layers. The craft will accomplish this task by 
taking simultaneous high-resolution images of three regions: the sun's visible 
surface; the extended layer of gas above it, known as the transition region; 
and the outer atmosphere, or corona.

 Carried aloft by a Pegasus XL, TRACE will enter into an orbit that will keep 
it on the sunlit side of Earth and enable it to stare continuously at the sun 
for 8 months of its 1-year mission. Its ultraviolet detectors will image 
magnetic field structures on the solar surface as small as 750 km across and 
record changes in those structures on a scale of seconds.

 In concert with the SOHO craft, launched 2 years ago, TRACE will track the 
magnetic fields from the base of the convection zone, deep within the sun, all 
the way up to the corona. It will also record the disturbances triggered by 
these fields, such as the blobs of ionized gas ejected from the corona. 

 NASA plans to launch the first craft in its new millennium program, a fleet of 
low-cost, rapidly designed space explorers. Deep Space 1, the program's first 
deep-space craft, will visit a near-Earth asteroid, fly past the moon, and 
encounter a comet -- all while testing several new technologies. Deep Space 1 
will be the first craft of any kind to rely on an onboard, autonomous 
navigation system, which will enable it to modify its orbit and encounter 
celestial bodies with minimal assistance from ground controllers. Instead of 
being weighed down with fuel, the craft will, in part, employ solar power to 
propel itself.

 In January 1999, the craft will fly within 10 km of the near-Earth asteroid 
McAuliffe, the closest a satellite has ever come to a solar system body. The 
asteroid is named for Christa McAuliffe, the schoolteacher who died in the 1986 
explosion of the space shuttle Challenger. During the flyby, the craft will 
take images and spectra, measuring such properties as mineral composition, 
size, shape, and brightness. It will also search for changes in the solar wind, 
the stream of charged particles blown from the sun, in the vicinity of the 
asteroid.

 Swinging past Mars for a gravity assist in April 2000, Deep Space 1 will study 
the composition of the Red Planet's surface and atmosphere. With luck, it may 
also view the two Martian moons, Phobos and Deimos. Two months later, the craft 
is scheduled to fly past Comet West-KohoutekIkemura, taking close-up portraits 
and studying the shroud of gas and dust that surrounds the comet's icy nucleus.

 Launched from the cargo bay of the space shuttle, Satelite de Aplicaciones 
Cientificas-A will test several new devices for the Argentine and U.S. space 
programs. These include a global positioning system that will measure the 
orientation of the craft without input from the ground, a solid-state camera 
for digital space photography, silicon solar cells, a magnetometer, and an 
instrument designed to track the migration of endangered whale populations in 
the Southern Hemisphere. 

 A student-designed mission to survey Earth's upper atmosphere is scheduled to 
be flown on a Pegasus XL. Known as TERRIERS (Topographic Experiment using 
Radiative Recombinative Ionospheric EUV and Radio Sources), the project 
includes both a small research craft and ground-based instruments that together 
will generate a three-dimensional image of the ionosphere. Boston University 
students helped develop the satellite's instruments, which will take daily 
measurements of extreme-ultraviolet emissions from the ionosphere. One of a 
series of student research projects sponsored by the University Space Research 
Association in Columbia, Md., the mission is expected to last 1 year. 

 Japan plans to launch its first interplanetary spacecraft, Planet B, scheduled 
to arrive at Mars in October 1999. The craft will study the upper atmosphere of 
the Red Planet, measure magnetic fields, and examine the interaction of the 
solar wind with the atmosphere. The lightweight, 186-kilogram vehicle carries 
15 instruments and is expected to last 1 Martian year -- nearly 2 Earth years.

 Ablaze with light, starburst galaxies give birth to one-third of all stars 
produced in the universe today. The telescope WIRE (Wide-Field Infrared 
Explorer), set for launch on a Pegasus XL, will conduct a 4-month study of 
these highly active galaxies. By measuring how their density and luminosity 
change over time, the detector may provide clues about the evolution and origin 
of galaxies, as well as quasars, which have been linked to starburst galaxies. 
Because intense star birth may be a signpost of the formation of galaxies, WIRE 
will also search for fledgling galaxies, known as protogalaxies.

 Most of the energy emitted by starburst galaxies is absorbed by dust and then 
radiated in the infrared. WIRE will record this radiation at two infrared bands 
-- one centered at 12 micrometers (Mm), the other at 25. Featuring a 
28-centimeter mirror and no moving parts, the tiny telescope will be cooled by 
frozen hydrogen to reduce its own infrared radiation, which could overwhelm 
faint emissions from distant starburst galaxies.

 Expected to survey about 100,000 galaxies scattered across several hundred 
square degrees of the sky, the telescope can detect starburst galaxies as far 
away as 5 billion light-years. It may also record extremely luminous galaxies 
that are much more distant, dating from a time when the universe was only about 
10 percent of its current age. 

 Eyeing the nearby universe in the far ultraviolet, a telescope called FUSE 
(Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer) will examine the composition of 
interstellar gas as well as survey a variety of other astrophysical 
environments, including the outer atmospheres of cool stars and planets, the 
centers of active galaxies, and quasars. Recording the emission and absorption 
of ultraviolet light with wavelengths from 90 to 120 nanometers, FUSE will fill 
the gap between the Hubble Space Telescope, which detects only the near 
ultraviolet, and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer.

 During its 3-year mission, FUSE will measure in the nearby universe the 
abundance of deuterium, an isotope of hydrogen created in the Big Bang. In 
addition, FUSE is the first satellite with enough sensitivity to determine the 
structure of the interstellar medium in nearby galaxies, such as the Large and 
Small Magellanic Clouds. The telescope will also study nova and supernova 
explosions, testing theories of how these explosions synthesize heavy elements 
and examining how supernova shock waves heat surrounding gas.

 A shuttle flight will test the space-worthiness of a cryogenic cooler that 
astronauts plan to install on the Hubble Space Telescope in 1999. The cooler, 
which operates mechanically rather than relying on frozen nitrogen or some 
other ice, would extend the lifetime of Hubble's infrared camera, NICMOS. Soon 
after the camera was installed in 1997, the dewar that houses it and maintains 
its frigid operating temperature developed a leak (SN: 5/3/97, p. 272). Without 
repair or replacement, NICMOS is expected to last for only 1.6 years rather 
than the 4 to 41/2 years planned. The shuttle test will determine the new 
cooler's ability to maintain temperatures within a narrow range under 
zero-gravity conditions. 

 Dubbed the Hubble Space Telescope of the X-ray universe, the Advanced X-Ray 
Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) takes a one-way ride on the shuttle. AXAF was 
originally intended to last for 15 years, including periodic repair missions by 
astronauts. Budgetary constraints reduced the scope of the project to only 5 
years, with no servicing missions planned.

 While orbiting Earth, AXAF will produce ultrasharp images and high-resolution 
spectroscopy at low X-ray energies, ranging from 100 to 10,000 electron-volts. 
Among its goals is investigating the existence of black holes a few times the 
mass of the sun, determining how much of the total mass in the universe is in 
the form of hot gas, searching for dark matter in galaxies, making a 
determination of the age of the cosmos independent of the distances of 
galaxies, and testing theories of stellar evolution and supernova explosions. 

 The second wave of an armada of U.S. craft bound for Mars begins its journey 
this month. Mars 98 Orbiter is scheduled to reach the planet in September 1999 
and start its main mission 2 months later. From a nearly circular polar orbit 
400 km above the planet, the orbiter will monitor the climate for an entire 
Martian year. The craft's pressure-modulated infrared radiometer, the duplicate 
of a device lost on Mars Observer (SN: 9/4/93, p. 149), will measure the 
distributions and time variations of temperature, pressure, dust, water vapor, 
and condensates in the atmosphere. Another tool, the Mars color-imaging system, 
will monitor the interaction of the atmosphere with the surface. Data from both 
instruments may indicate the most likely places for subsurface reservoirs of 
water. The orbiter may also serve as a relay station for future Mars landers.

 Further Readings: 

 Further information is available about the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics 
Facility at ; about the Tomographic Experiment using Radiative Recombinative 
Ionospheric EUV and Radio Sources (TERRIERS), at ; about Mars 98 Orbiter, at ; 
about Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer, at ; and about Lunar Prospector, 
at .

copyright 1998
