Science News Online (1/31/98): Spy satellite plumbs secrets of Antarctica by R. 
Monastersky

 January 31, 1998 

 Spy satellite plumbs secrets of Antarctica 

by R. Monastersky In the frostiest campaign of the Cold War, the Central 
Intelligence Agency pointed covert satellite cameras toward 
Antarctica to map the frozen continent. Thirty-five years later, scientists are 
using declassified photographs from that mission to gain 
unparalleled insight into the behavior of Antarctica's icy cover.

 A comparison of the CIA photographs with more recent data reveals that a giant 
river of Antarctic ice has slowed 50 percent in 3 decades, a 
much bigger change than scientists had expected. The discovery, reported in the 
Jan. 30 Science, complicates attempts to predict whether 
melting Antarctic ice will contribute to rising sea levels in the next century, 
say scientists. 

"It makes our life harder," says study author Robert Bindschadler, a 
glaciologist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. 

 The Antarctic analysis is the first scientific study to mine information from 
the formerly secret pictures, says Bindschadler. In 1995, 
President Clinton signed an order declassifying all intelligence satellite 
photography taken before 1972. 

 The CIA's Corona satellites carried large spools of film into space. After 
photographs were taken, the satellites jettisoned the exposed 
film, which was then snared in midfall by military planes. During 1963, the CIA 
photographed giant rivers of ice, called ice streams, which 
drain into the Ross Ice Shelf. 

 Up to 80 kilometers across and hundreds of kilometers long, ice streams flow 
10 to 100 times faster than the ice along their banks. 
Scientists consider the streams critical to the stability of the ice sheet 
covering West Antarctica. If the streams were to speed up, they 
would drain ice from the interior of the continent and deposit it on the 
floating ice shelves, thus raising global sea levels (SN: 2/13/93, p. 
104). 

 Bindschadler and Patricia Vornberger of General Science Corp. in Laurel, Md., 
compared satellite images to measure how far key features had 
moved over the decades. They calculate that Ice Stream B -- one of the five 
leading into the Ross Ice Shelf -- was traveling at about 970 
meters per year in 1963. Researchers on the ice in 1984 and 1985 observed that 
the ice was then moving at only 471 m per year, less than half 
as fast. Over this same period, the ice stream widened by 4 km, much more than 
researchers had anticipated. 

 The combination of changes surprised Antarctic specialists -- theory predicts 
that ice streams should behave in the opposite way. The 
relatively slow-moving banks of the ice stream are thought to restrict its 
flow. As the stream widens, the banks move away from the center of 
the stream and the ice there should flow faster, says Charles F. Raymond of the 
University of Washington in Seattle. "It's clear that it's not 
that simple," he says. 



