Science News Online (2/14/98): Depression Gets Doleful Diagnosis by B. Bower

 February 14, 1998 

 Depression Gets Doleful Diagnosis

by B. Bower 

 Major depression is a bedrock psychiatric disorder that afflicts an estimated 
one in six U.S. adults at some time in their lives.

 Now, a new study of depression presents mental health workers with a 
diagnostic downer. The popular definition of major depression as a discrete 
mental ailment is misleading, the study finds, because symptoms of the disorder 
can vary greatly in severity and duration from one person to another.

"Our diagnostic conventions for major depression may be arbitrary," says 
psychiatrist Kenneth S. Kendler of the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond. 
"That means it's dangerous to take a Chinese menu approach to depression, 
simply selecting symptoms needed for a diagnosis without probing into a 
person's life history."

 Debate has long raged over whether various mental disorders stem from specific 
diseaselike processes or occur at the extreme end of a symptom continuum that 
runs from very mild to severe. This controversy has played into a dispute over 
how accurately family physicians can diagnose depression (SN: 3/11/95, p. 148).

 Kendler and Virginia colleague Charles O. Gardner Jr. analyzed interview 
responses of around 1,000 sets of female twins, both identical and fraternal. 
Each woman granted three interviews over 5 years.

 Today, major depression is diagnosed if an individual exhibits at least five 
of nine symptoms of depression (extreme sadness, loss of interest in all 
activities, and insomnia, to name a few), the symptoms last for at least 2 
weeks, and they substantially impair work or home duties. The researchers 
focused on the ability of these three key components of a diagnosis to help 
clinicians identify patients most likely to suffer from major depression in the 
future.

 They found that the risk of episodes of major depression did not depend on 
having previously displayed this trio of diagnostic signposts. Later rates of 
major depression were proportional to the number, duration, and severity of the 
initial symptoms -- the rates did not begin rising rapidly upon reaching the 
thresholds used in diagnosis.

 A noticeably elevated risk appeared even in women who initially reported 
having experienced only three or four depressive symptoms, periods of 
depression lasting only a week, or symptoms that caused minimal impairment, 
Kendler and Gardner report in the February American Journal of Psychiatry.

 These findings indicate that depressive symptoms lie along a spectrum that far 
exceeds the diagnostic boundaries of major depression, Kendler holds.

 In an accompanying commentary, psychiatrist Gary J. Tucker of the University 
of Washington in Seattle criticizes what he sees as an overreliance on the 
diagnostic symptoms listed in the official manual of psychiatric disorders.

 Psychiatrists tend not to establish the empathic understanding needed to 
elicit from a patient the events and meanings in his or her life that can guide 
a diagnosis and treatment plan, Tucker argues. This problem has expanded, both 
in training programs and in clinics, with pressures from managed care companies 
to limit the amount of time devoted to patient examinations, he says.

 Clinicians need better tools to help them make diagnoses, concurs psychologist 
Ellen Frank of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. She is helping 
to develop structured interviews to identify a broad spectrum of symptoms 
related to major depression and several other mental disorders.

 The official diagnostic manual acknowledges that, for mental disorders, there 
are no sharp boundaries between health and illness, comments psychiatrist 
Robert L. Spitzer of Columbia University. Spitzer led the move to introduce 
symptom-based psychiatric diagnoses in 1980.

"All medical specialties overemphasize diagnoses and sometimes lose sight of 
the patient," Spitzer asserts. "This isn't the fault of [psychiatric 
diagnoses]. If there's a problem, it's with inadequate training of 
psychiatrists in how to get a patient's life story."


