Science News Online (2/21/98): Added Noise Keeps Waves Going by I. Peterson

 February 21, 1998 

 Added Noise Keeps Waves Going 

by I. Peterson 

 Usually a nuisance, noise sometimes aids the transmission of a signal. 
Researchers have now demonstrated in the laboratory that random 
fluctuations in the concentration of a chemical across a surface can enhance 
the propagation of waves of another chemical's activity in a thin 
gel. "Noise actually helps," says chemist Kenneth Showalter of West Virginia 
University in Morgantown.

 Showalter and his coworkers Sandor Kadar and Jichang Wang report their results 
in the Feb. 19 Nature. 

 The observation of enhanced wave propagation in a chemical medium represents a 
new avenue in the study of a phenomenon called stochastic 
resonance (SN: 2/23/91, p. 127), in which the addition of noise can boost a 
weak signal to detectable levels."This is the first experimental 
demonstration of stochastic resonance that occurs in a system spread over a 
surface [and changing with time]," says Frank Moss of the Center 
for Neurodynamics at the University of Missouri-St. Louis. The findings also 
provide a model of how internal noise may sustain long-range 
chemical waves in networks of brain cells (SN: 11/23/96, p. 330).

 Showalter and his coworkers studied a photosensitive version of a chemical 
system known as the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, in which rising 
and falling chemical concentrations appear as visible waves traveling through a 
thin layer of silica gel. Shining light on the gel produces a 
chemical that quenches wave propagation.

 The researchers initially adjusted the light intensity to suppress wave 
activity. They then replaced that uniform illumination with a grid in 
which intensity varied from cell to cell and from time to time in each cell, 
yet maintained an average intensity across the grid that 
inhibited activity.

 By increasing the amplitude of the random fluctuations, "you get qualitative 
changes in the wave behavior," Showalter says. "As the [optical] 
noise increases, the wave propagates farther and farther [along] the medium 
until there is sustained wave propagation." Eventually, however, 
the noise overwhelms the system and the waves break up.

 The waves represent a kind of order that emerges out of the background of 
flickering light and reaches a maximum at a particular level of 
noise, Moss remarks.

 Moss and his collaborators have detected a similar phenomenon in networks of 
glial cells, which fill the spaces between neurons in the brain. 
The researchers studied the passage of waves of calcium ions from cell to cell 
in cultured glia under the influence of local fluctuations in 
the concentration of a neurotransmitter. Where the concentration of the 
neurotransmitter reaches a threshold, calcium waves begin to form, 
Moss says. Moss, Peter Jung of Ohio University in Athens, Ann Cornell-Bell of 
Viatech Imaging in Ivoryton, Conn., and Kathleen S. Madden of 
the Foundation for International Nonlinear Dynamics in Bethesda, Md., describe 
their results in the February Journal of Neurophysiology.

"There seems to be a definite link between our chemical system and this network 
of brain cells," Showalter says. "Calcium waves could 
represent some sort of long-range, noise-mediated signaling in brain tissue." 

 
copyright 1998

