Science News Online (2/14/98): The Mush Zone, A slurpy layer lurks deep inside 
the planet by Richard Monastersky

 February 14, 1998 

 The Mush Zone A slurpy layer lurks deep inside the planet

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 If you were to take a supersonic elevator down toward the center of the globe, 
it wouldn't take long to feel the heat. Just after the start of the journey, at 
the meager depth of 200 kilometers, the temperature rises to 1,000@C. This is 
the base of Earth's lithosphere, its outermost skin.

 Leaving the lithosphere, the elevator enters the mantle -- the great rocky 
domain that makes up 84 percent of the planet's volume. If the heat doesn't do 
you in, the boredom certainly will. The shaft descends through thousands of 
kilometers of mostly featureless, solid rock. It's like enduring a 
cross-country bus ride that rolls past the same flat scenery for days on end.

 It might be tempting to doze at this point, but don't give in to the impulse. 
Even a brief siesta could cause you to miss the highlight of the trip -- a 
recently discovered zone that is turning out to be one of the most important 
parts of the inner planet.

 As the elevator reaches the base of the mantle, it enters a realm of partially 
molten rock molded into slushy mountain ranges 10 times higher than the 
Himalayas. This messy layer is rapidly churning, transporting blistering heat 
out of Earth's iron core and sending it rising toward the crust.

 Although the mush zone lies 2,850 km down -- almost halfway to the center of 
the planet -- emerging evidence suggests that it may have direct relevance to 
life on the surface. The zone appears to determine where massive volcanic 
eruptions occur and perhaps where ocean basins form. In short, it could play an 
important role in shaping the very face of the planet.

"People used to think that the lower mantle was a relatively simple place and 
that you could probably learn more about plate tectonics by just paying 
attention to the top part of the mantle," says Donald V. Helmberger, a 
seismologist at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. "But the 
picture we're seeing is that the lower mantle is much more fascinating than 
people thought, and it's probably playing a bigger role in what's happening 
above it."

 Like everyone else, when Helmberger first caught a glimpse of the mush zone, 
he didn't realize what he was seeing. In 1987, Edward J. Garnero, a graduate 
student working with Helmberger, noticed something unusual about seismic 
recordings from a 1969 earthquake. The quake started at a depth of more than 
500 km in the upper mantle under Fiji. As in all earthquakes, the seismic waves 
spread out in every direction. Some shot directly toward the surface. Others 
rocketed down through the core and continued on through the mantle toward the 
opposite side of the planet, where stations in North America recorded the 
far-flung vibrations. 

 Most of the waves traveling through the core followed relatively direct paths, 
but a small fraction got temporarily sidetracked. At the core-mantle boundary, 
they took a funny bounce -- called a critical reflection -- that sent them 
rippling along the base of the mantle for a short stretch. Eventually, they 
passed through the core and then to the other side of the globe.

 While studying seismograms recorded in North America, Garnero grew interested 
in these odd, little-studied waves with the funny bounce. He noticed that they 
had straggled into various North American stations well after a more direct 
type of core-crossing wave. The time interval between these two sets ran 
several seconds longer than seemed reasonable, given what seismologists knew 
about the inner Earth.

 Garnero took his finding to Helmberger, who confirmed that the gap was 
unusual. Apparently, something was not quite right with the standard model of 
Earth's interior. Some part of the planet was either speeding up the first set 
of waves or delaying the second set, the two researchers concluded. Then, as 
happens often in science, both of them got back to more immediate projects. 
Garnero stored the observation in a file and forgot about it.

 Five years later, however, the problem waves resurfaced. Stephen P. Grand, a 
visiting seismologist from the University of Texas at Austin, happened upon 
another example of them while sifting through the microfiche files in the 
subbasement of the Caltech seismology building. Grand has a photographic memory 
for seismograms and a reputation for painstaking work. Instead of relying on 
neat, abridged catalogues compiled by other people, he likes to wade through 
original seismic recordings, poring over the wiggly, messy tracings.

 It was this encyclopedic knowledge of seismograms that tipped Grand off. While 
studying records from some deep South American earthquakes, he found an odd set 
of vibrations arriving at stations far later than they should have. These 
delayed waves turned out to be another example of what Garnero and Helmberger 
had puzzled over. Grand convinced Garnero to follow up on the tardy vibrations 
to see what was causing the traffic jam inside the planet.

"[Grand] really was the catalyst," says Garnero. "Without him, it probably 
still would be in my desk along with several other files of things that I 
thought were interesting but didn't get around to."

 Garnero first tried working within the confines of the system. He knew that 
the mantle contains some regions considered fast or slow -- where seismic waves 
speed up or slow down by a few percent. Geophysicists attribute the changes 
mostly to slight differences in mantle temperature, with slow regions 
corresponding to warmer rocks (SN: 7/19/97, p. 46). 

 To explain the retarded waves, Garnero calculated what would happen if the 
vibrations lost 5 percent of their speed while passing through a thick layer at 
the base of the mantle. The suggestion seemed extreme. In seismology, a 5 
percent drop in speed represents a drastic change -- the biggest ever observed 
in the 2,100-kilometer-thick lower mantle.

 The 5 percent scenario worked well in explaining the first few earthquakes, 
but it started to break down as Garnero looked into more quakes. Finally, 
Helmberger suggested a way around the problem. If 5 percent did not fit, try an 
inconceivable number like 10 percent, Helmberger offered. "He was really 
instrumental in pushing me to open up my preconceived notions of what the Earth 
is," says Garnero, now at the University of California, Berkeley.

 Williams and Garnero teamed up to investigate what was causing the slowdown 
inside the ULVZ. An experimental physicist by training, Williams specializes in 
studying the planet's interior by squeezing and heating materials in a 
diamond-tipped vise. From these experiments, he knew that it would be very 
difficult to reduce seismic wave speeds in solid mantle minerals by 10 percent. 
The only realistic explanation, however improbable, was that the ULVZ rocks 
were partially molten, he and Garnero reported in the Sept. 13, 1996 Science.

 Geophysicists had always assumed that the mantle was solid, but Williams and 
Garnero proposed that, in places, the bottom of the mantle was semiliquid -- a 
material resembling fluid-filled Swiss cheese or perhaps a melting snow cone. 
This conclusion, if correct, could have profound implications for understanding 
Earth, the scientists maintained. "Melting in the deep mantle would basically 
change all the rules for how the deep mantle behaves," says Williams.

 Williams predicted that seismologists would find further evidence of partial 
melting by studying shear (S) waves -- seismic waves that vibrate minerals from 
side to side as they pass through the planet. The original ULVZ discovery had 
involved research on compressional waves, which cause vibrations backward and 
forward along the direction of motion. S waves are far more sensitive to small 
amounts of fluid in the rock, so if the ULVZ were partially molten, it would 
slow S waves by 30 percent or more, predicted Williams.

 Recently, Justin Revenaugh at UC-Santa Cruz has obtained indirect evidence of 
the drastically slowed S wave speeds in the ULVZ. In a different study, John E. 
Vidale at the University of California, Los Angeles has found corroborating 
evidence of partially molten rock in the ULVZ under Fiji.

 To put the ULVZ studies into perspective, Williams compares them to studying 
the human body. "It would be almost like discovering a new organ or a new part 
that we didn't know was there before -- like discovering the pancreas. This may 
be a gland for the planet. It's something that is small, but it's likely very 
important."

 The gland analogy may be an especially apt one. In the human body, glands 
release far-reaching hormones; the ULVZ appears to release something -- heat -- 
that travels far and has profound effects throughout the planet.

 If the ULVZ is partially molten, it may provide a window through which heat 
can escape from the core, says Williams. In places without a ULVZ, where the 
lowermost mantle is solid, heat travels relatively slowly up from the core into 
the mantle. Partially molten rock, however, can transport heat perhaps a 
hundred times faster out of the core, he says. The flood of energy leaving the 
core should cause the solid mantle rock above the ULVZ to start rising, 
creating a plume of superheated rock creeping toward the surface.

 Revenaugh, Williams, and Garnero described evidence supporting this idea in 
December 1997 at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco. 
They compared the mapped location of the ULVZ with the known position of mantle 
hot spots. As the name suggests, hot spots are anomalously warm regions at the 
top of the mantle; they melt the base of the lithosphere and create volcanoes 
such as Hawaii and Iceland. As a lithospheric plate passes over a hot spot, 
like a conveyor belt passing over a lit candle, the heat raises a chain of 
volcanoes.

 The researchers report finding strong evidence linking the ULVZ to the 
position of hot spots. So far, geophysicists have searched almost half the 
bottom of the mantle; their mapped locations of the ULVZ underlie a total of 12 
percent of the globe. Although relatively limited, the documented ULVZ shows up 
beneath a third of all hot spots, including the most prodigious ones, says 
Williams. There is only a 1 percent chance that this pattern would occur 
randomly, the researchers estimate.

 Some other scientists, however, remain cool to the hot spot-ULVZ connection at 
this point. "So far, it is more tantalizing than compelling," comments Vidale. 
He says that researchers will need to survey the rest of the globe to see just 
how pervasive the ULVZ is.

 If the link between hot spots and the ULVZ holds, it offers insight into 
aspects of Earth's evolution. When plumes rise from the mantle and start 
burning through the lithosphere, they may have the power to fracture 
continents. Indeed, some geophysicists suggest that a plume severed Africa from 
South America 130 million years ago, creating the South Atlantic Ocean. It may 
be, says Williams, that the distribution of the ULVZ has helped determine the 
position of the ocean basins and continents on the modern globe.

"What we're seeing at the surface may effectively be a manifestation of 
something that's occurring 2,850 km below our feet," he says.

 Geophysicists like to refer to the continents as the scum of the planet. These 
rocky rafts represent an amalgam of the buoyant materials that bobbed to the 
surface throughout Earth's evolution. Following that nomenclature, then, the 
ULVZ may be the dregs of the mantle -- in other words, the densest rocks in the 
planet.

 Since the discovery of a partially molten layer at the base of the mantle, 
researchers have wondered just what kind of materials make up the ULVZ. At this 
point, they have little evidence to go on, says Williams. It could be that when 
portions of the deep mantle start to melt, the fluids are actually denser than 
the surrounding rock and sink to the bottom. Or the ULVZ may contain iron-rich 
minerals, created when mantle minerals react with the molten iron of the outer 
core. In recent years, high-pressure experiments have taught scientists that 
these reactions are possible.

 If the lowermost mantle contains pockets of iron-rich rock, these electrically 
conductive patches should have noticeable effects on Earth's geomagnetic field. 
The field draws its power from the swirling currents of molten iron in the 
outer core, but the lowermost mantle may exert some control over the behavior 
of the field, says seismologist Thorne Lay of UC-Santa Cruz.

 One sign of this comes from patterns of geomagnetic reversals, when Earth's 
north and south magnetic poles swap positions. During these chaotic episodes -- 
which happen once or a few times every million years -- the positions of the 
poles migrate over Earth's surface in two distinct corridors running through 
the Americas and the western Pacific. These corridors tend to avoid places 
where scientists have detected the ULVZ, which suggests that the deep mantle 
may play a role in how reversals happen, says Lay.

 With so many new discoveries of the deep mantle appearing in research journals 
during the last few years, scientists are struggling to put all the 
observations into a coherent picture. For some, the current state of affairs 
brings on a sense of deja vu -- back to the days just before the birth of plate 
tectonics, when research on the lithosphere was blossoming. The giddiness is 
almost palpable at scientific meetings, where scientists flock to crowded halls 
to watch new images of the deep planet flash up on screen.

"The field is poised," says Lay, "for a bunch of different observations to come 
together into some enhanced understanding of how the deep mantle works."

 References:  

 Helmberger, D.V., L. Wen, and X. Ding. 1997. Extremes in CMB structure beneath 
Europe and Africa. Meeting of the American Geophysical Union. San Francisco.

 Lay, T. 1997. Structure of the boundary layer at the base of the mantle. 
Meeting of the American Geophysical Union. San Francisco.

 Revenaugh, J., Q. Williams, and E. Garnero. 1997. A correlation between 
ultra-low basal velocities in the mantle and hot spots. Meeting of the American 
Geophysical Union. San Francisco.

 Vidale, J.E., and M.A. Hedlin. 1997. Intense scattering at the core-mantle 
boundary north of Tonga: Evidence for partial melt. Meeting of the American 
Geophysical Union. San Francisco.

 Williams, Q., and E.J. Garnero. 1996. Seismic evidence for partial melt at the 
base of Earth's mantle. Science 273(Sept. 13):1528.

 Further Readings: 

 Monastersky, R. 1997. Global graveyard. Science News 152(July 19):46.

 Sources: 

 Edward J. Garnero University of California, Santa Cruz Earth Sciences1156 High 
Street Santa Cruz, CA 95064

 Donald V. Helmberger California Institute of Technology Seismological 
Laboratory Mail Stop Code 252-211200 East California Boulevard Pasadena, CA 
91125

 Thorne Lay University of California, Santa Cruz Earth Sciences1156 High Street 
Santa Cruz, CA 95064

 Quentin Williams University of California, Santa Cruz Earth Sciences1156 High 
Street Santa Cruz, CA 95064

copyright 1998
