Science News Online (1/3/98): The Cosmos' Fate: World Without End by R. Cowen

 January 3, 1998 

 The Cosmos' Fate: World Without End

by R. Cowen

 Will the universe expand forever, or will it eventually contract into a Big 
Crunch? Observing the fireworks from distant, exploding stars, two independent 
research groups have found evidence suggesting that the cosmos will balloon 
indefinitely.

 The density of matter may simply be too low for gravity to halt the expansion 
that began with the birth of the universe -- the Big Bang -- some 15 billion 
years ago. Although other studies over the past several years have hinted at 
the same conclusion, the technique employed in the two new reports is a 
particularly promising method of determining the fate of the cosmos, 
researchers say.

 If further observations support the notion of perpetual expansion, 
cosmologists may have to rethink their options. The widely accepted theory 
known as inflation explains why the structure of the universe looks the same in 
all directions, but it also predicts that the cosmos has exactly the right 
density to bring expansion to an eventual halt (SN: 6/7/97, p. 354). 
Reconciling this theory with endless expansion may require cosmologists to 
resurrect the so-called cosmological constant -- an antigravity term in the 
equations of general relativity.

 The new results are based on measurements of the brightness and recession 
velocity of a special class of supernovas, or exploded stars. Known as type 1a, 
these supernovas are the brightest in the cosmos and can be seen from great 
distances. Moreover, they all have about the same intrinsic brightness.

 The most distant 1a supernova observed with the Hubble Space Telescope 
provides a glimpse of the cosmos when it was half its current age. The rate at 
which the universe was expanding in the past determines how far away a 
supernova with a given recession velocity lies. By comparing observations of 
faraway supernovas to those of nearby ones, astronomers can infer the rate at 
which cosmic expansion may be slowing down.

 Saul Perlmutter of the Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory and his 
colleagues find little or no sign of deceleration, they report in the Jan. 1 
Nature.

 Their analysis of five nearby supernovas and a newly discovered distant one 
suggests that the universe will expand indefinitely. A preliminary analysis of 
about 35 additional supernovas, both nearby and distant, to be presented next 
week at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Washington, D.C., 
supports that finding, Perlmutter says. 

 Observations of three other distant supernovas, to be described by Peter M. 
Garnavich and Robert P. Kirshner of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for 
Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., and their colleagues in an upcoming 
Astrophysical Journal Letters, yield a similar conclusion. 

"We cannot make much of a conclusion from a single farthest supernova . . . but 
when we average it with several others, we find, to a 95 percent level of 
confidence, that the density of matter is insufficient to halt the expansion of 
the universe," Garnavich says. In a year or two, adds Kirshner, when both teams 
will have completed studies of several dozen supernovas, the fun will begin. 

"This is a hard subject, and the data do not [yet] constrain the imagination 
very much," says Kirshner. "What's new here is that we're beginning to show 
that we have the potential to [distinguish among models of the cosmos] and that 
it isn't just going to be a matter of what you like, what you think is 
beautiful. It's going to be a matter of looking into the real answer book of 
nature and finding out what it says." 

"It's very exciting -- not from the results, but from the promise of what's in 
the future," says Michael S. Turner of the University of Chicago and the Fermi 
National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill.  


