Science News Online (1/3/98): New foam tames an asbestos by J. Raloff

 January 3, 1998 

 New foam tames an asbestos 

by J. Raloff 

 Ever since the carcinogenicity of asbestos came to light, regulators have been 
pushing building owners to rid their structures of the mineral or to seal it in 
place so that it cannot escape. Yet removing or treating asbestos, a material 
widely used from at least the 1940s through the 1960s for fireproofing and 
thermal insulation, can release mineral fibers into the air, creating a 
carcinogenic dust. 

 Now, chemists from W.R. Grace & Co. of Boca Raton, Fla., and the Energy 
Department's Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) in Upton, N.Y., have 
developed a chemical foam that lets building owners treat asbestos-containing 
fireproofing material without removing it. As the foam seeps into the 
fireproofing, it initiates chemical reactions that "digest" any asbestos, say 
Grace and BNL scientists. Within 24 hours, more than 99 percent of the fibers 
present undergo a transformation that makes them less toxic by altering their 
chemistry and their shape, notes BNL chemist Leon Petrakis.

 Almost all of the asbestos used for fireproofing is chrysotile. Its fibers 
have a hollow, "jelly-roll structure" of chemically bound sheets of magnesium 
oxide and silicon oxide, explains foam project manager David F. Myers, a 
chemical engineer in Grace's Cambridge, Mass., office. 

"Because of the differences in the atomic radii of silicon and magnesium, when 
the sheets fall one atop the other they grow into a hollow tube," Petrakis 
says. 

 The foam contains both an acid, which attacks the magnesium oxide, and a tiny 
amount of fluoride ions. Together, they "synergistically unbind the sheets and 
selectively remove some [positively charged materials]," Petrakis explains. 
"What remains is a hard material -- globs of minerals bound together."

 In animal tests, the treated material proved nontoxic. In fire tests, it 
retained its ability to protect metal structures used in buildings.

 Seven patents on the foam are pending, and Grace hopes to begin marketing it 
in the next few months. Meanwhile, Petrakis' team continues to work on adapting 
the technology for other types of asbestos and applications, such as thermal 
insulation.   

 
