Science News Online (2/7/98): Protein switch curls bacterial propellers by C. Wu

 February 7, 1998 

 Protein switch curls bacterial propellers

by C. Wu

 Without its flagella, many a bacterium would truly be up a creek without a 
paddle. 

 A bacterium may have a dozen or so of these corkscrew-shaped tails that act as 
little propellers. A rotary motor protein at the base twirls each flagellum 
counterclockwise. To change course, a bacterium briefly reverses the flagellar 
rotation and then tumbles about until heading off in the new direction. 

 This quick switch alters not only the bacterium's path, but the shape of the 
flagellum as well. Now, an international team of researchers has determined 
what happens to the complex structure of a flagellum when the bacterium throws 
its motors into reverse.

 Keiichi Namba of the International Institute for Advanced Research at the 
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. in Seika, Japan, and his colleagues have 
obtained high-resolution, X-ray fiber diffraction patterns of the 
three-dimensional structure of bacterial flagella. Their images reveal a 
mechanism that enables a flagellum to switch from its ordinary loose-corkscrew 
shape, wound in one direction, to a curlier corkscrew wound in the opposite 
direction.

 The team's report appears in the February Nature Structural Biology.

 The findings represent "a dramatic step forward," says Donald L.D. Caspar of 
Florida State University in Tallahassee. "The bacterial flagellar system has 
been one of the most significant models of switching mechanisms in biological 
structures." 

 A bacterial flagellum is a complex structure made of a bundle of 11 protein 
strands that wrap gently around each other like the fibers in a rope. In the 
dramatic change of shape, the strands of a flagellum slide past each other.

 The corkscrew structure arises from the mix of two different types of strands 
in the bundle. Like mirror-image spiral staircases, one type has an 
intrinsically left-handed twist and the other a right-handed twist. Bacteria 
genetically mutated to produce only one type of strand have straight flagella 
-- which don't make very good propellers, Caspar notes.

 When a normal, corkscrew flagellum reverses rotation, mechanical stress forces 
the interlocking protein strands to move past each other slightly and fasten 
together in different spots. "The slipping switch propagates over the entire 
length of a 10- to 15-micrometer-long flagellar filament within a few tens of 
milliseconds," says Namba. This speedy shape shift occurs without major 
rearrangement of the strands, which remain entwined in the same order.

 This subtle slip-and-click mechanism accounts for another observation 
concerning the lengths of the individual strands. Each strand consists of a 
chain of protein subunits linked end-to-end like the cars of a train. The 
subunits in the loose corkscrew flagella are about 0.08 nanometer farther apart 
than those in the curlier tails. 

 In a conventional scheme of protein refolding, says Caspar, "it's very hard to 
visualize a structural change in a protein molecule that involves such a small 
displacement." The current mechanism can account for the tiny change, he adds, 
because the slippage causes the subunits on neighboring strands to mesh with 
only a slightly different spacing.

 Namba expects that the switch might also be used in other motor proteins. He 
says that hemoglobin, the blood molecule that alters its structure when it 
binds to oxygen, also changes its overall shape without major rearrangements of 
its components.

 Namba and his colleagues have already obtained even higher resolution images 
of flagellar filaments, which should show "the atomic detail of the subunit 
structure and subunit-subunit interactions," he says. "Once the crystal 
structure is solved and the atomic model is built, we will be able to look into 
the details of the slipping switch mechanism." 


