Science News Online (2/7/98): New Budget Provides Lift for Science by J. Travis

 February 7, 1998 

 New Budget Provides Lift for Science

by J. Travis

 On Feb. 2, President Bill Clinton gave Congress a 1999 budget containing 
surprisingly good news for many of the agencies that fund scientific research 
and development (R&D). The 381-page document, representing the first balanced 
budget proposal for the federal government in 3 decades, detailed some $1.7 
trillion in spending programs.

 While mandated efforts to balance the budget have caused science funding to 
slip in recent years, the proposed 1999 budget offers a nearly $2 billion 
increase, to slightly more than $78 billion, in R&D spending by military and 
civilian agencies. 

 When adjusted for inflation, projected to be 2.0 percent, this increase 
represents a 0.6 percent rise over 1998 budget figures.

 As the military portion of R&D funding continues to shrink, civilian agencies 
receive more of the bounty. Nondefense R&D jumps an inflation-adjusted 3.7 
percent, to $37 billion, under the proposed budget. Moreover, in outlining the 
Research Fund for America set out by President Clinton in his State of the 
Union address, the budget calls for civilian R&D funding to grow by 32 percent 
in the next 5 years.

 Presidential science adviser John H. Gibbons notes that the 1999 budget 
emphasizes the research component of R&D -- welcome news to universities whose 
faculty pursue fundamental questions in science. Indeed, funding for basic 
research, both civilian and military, would increase 5.5 percent after 
inflation.

"It's a lot better starting point than we've seen in a while," says Albert H. 
Teich, director of science policy at the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science in Washington, D.C. "Still, you have to bear in mind 
it's not a done deal. There are a lot of hungry mouths to feed."

 The most ambitious new science project in the budget is the Department of 
Energy's $1.3 billion Neutron Spallation Source, which would use a particle 
accelerator to send high-energy protons into liquid mercury, generating 
neutrons to probe materials, biological molecules, and the nature of matter. 
Though construction is not likely to start until 2000, the 1999 budget includes 
an initial $157 million for planning the facility, which would be built at Oak 
Ridge (Tenn.) National Laboratory.

 Overall, the Energy Department did well. Its R&D budget is slated to rise an 
inflation-adjusted 8.6 percent, with some of the new money going to the Climate 
Change Technology Initiative, a 5-year research and technology plan to reduce 
the country's emissions of greenhouse gases. The Environmental Protection 
Agency and several other federal agencies would join that initiative.

 Another agency slated to receive a windfall in the 1999 budget is the 
Department of Health and Human Services, which oversees the National Institutes 
of Health. In 1999, NIH funding would leap an inflation-adjusted 6.5 percent, 
bringing its total to $14.8 billion. Furthermore, the budget outlines a plan to 
increase NIH's funding by 50 percent over 5 years.

 Much of the new NIH money will be earmarked for cancer research and for 
research on AIDS and emerging infectious diseases. NIH Director Harold Varmus 
notes that nearly half the money will be used to increase the number and size 
of research grants available to investigators around the country.

 The National Science Foundation would see an inflation-adjusted 8.8 percent 
increase in funding, according to the 1999 budget proposal. The foundation 
plans to emphasize new research programs in computing, communications, and 
science education.

 Despite the scientific and public relations success of the Mars Pathfinder 
mission, financial hard times at NASA would continue. The agency's funding 
would drop an inflation-adjusted 4.5 percent in fiscal 1999. Still, Daniel S. 
Goldin, head of the space agency, remains upbeat. "The 21st-century NASA does 
better and more with less," he asserts.

 The new NASA budget continues funding for the International Space Station, 
whose first components are scheduled to go into space later this year, and 
provides initial money for a satellite that would visit Jupiter's moon Europa. 
The craft, scheduled for launch in 2003, would bounce radio waves off the 
moon's icy surface, measuring the ice's thickness and determining whether an 
ocean of water -- perhaps harboring life (SN: 11/1/97, p. 284) -- exists under 
the frozen crust.

 While the President's 1999 budget proposal has brightened the faces of many 
science agency officials, the source of most of the additional money for R&D 
remains unclear. Congressional opponents complain that the President's budget 
depends too much on billions of dollars from a still-unachieved legal 
settlement between tobacco companies and the federal government. 

"The administration is clearly trying to force Congress to pass this tobacco 
settlement. If you associate all these good things, like health research, with 
it, that puts pressure on Congress," notes Teich. 


