Science News Online (2/21/98): Gene cloned for stretchiest spider silk by M. 
Jensen

 February 21, 1998 

 Gene cloned for stretchiest spider silk

by M. Jensen

 To snag a speeding insect, the resilient silk at the center of a spider's web 
may stretch to almost three times its original length. Now, researchers have 
cloned the gene for this most elastic of spider silks and unraveled its protein 
structure.

 The extreme elasticity of this natural miracle fiber, called capture silk, 
comes from long spirals in the protein's configuration, propose researchers 
from the University of Wyoming in Laramie. Figuring out what makes silk 
stretchy and what makes it strong will ultimately enable scientists to design 
genes to control the manufacture of silks, says Randolph V. Lewis, a coauthor 
of the report in the Feb. 6 Journal of Molecular Biology. This finding, he 
says, "Gives us the tools to say, 'If you want to make an elastic silk, this is 
what you've gotta have.'"

 The researchers obtained the gene from a gland of the golden orb-weaving 
spider, Nephila clavipes. They found that capture silk protein, a chain of 
thousands of amino acids, contains regions in which a sequence of five amino 
acids is repeated over and over, as many as 63 times.

 The researchers suggest that the segments of the protein with the repeating 
blocks form long, springlike shapes. At the end of each five-amino-acid block, 
the protein kinks back on itself in a 180@ turn, Lewis says. The series of 
turns eventually forms a spiral that "looks exactly like a molecular spring."

 Spiders make as many as seven different types of silk, says coauthor Cheryl Y. 
Hayashi. Insects get entangled in the sticky web, she explains, because the 
stretchiness of capture silk lets the web oscillate back and forth after the 
insect hits it. If the web were stiff, the insect might just bounce off.

 Researchers have cloned several genes for dragline silk, the type that the 
nursery rhyme spider must have spun to lower itself down beside Miss Muffet. 
Spiders use dragline silk to form the guylines and framework for wheel-shaped 
orb webs. It is stronger than capture silk but less flexible (SN: 3/9/96, p. 
152). In fact, Lewis says, dragline silk is only one-fifth as elastic as 
capture silk.

 Dragline silk proteins and capture silk proteins have similar turn-forming 
blocks of amino acids. However, the researchers found that these blocks repeat 
an average of 43 times in the capture silk, compared to only 9 times in the 
dragline silk. That fivefold difference in length corresponds to the difference 
in elasticity between the two proteins, Lewis says.

"When you put the math to it," he notes, "it looks pretty good." 

 The stretchy section of the protein may not spiral in the way Lewis describes, 
cautions John Gosline, a biomechanic at the University of British Columbia in 
Vancouver. An alternative theory suggests that the zigzag turns may simply 
allow the protein to flex and bend, Gosline says. Rather than assuming a 
specific, organized shape, the stretchy parts of the protein may flop around at 
random. 

 Gosline adds that he has no doubt that the Wyoming group has identified the 
correct gene for capture silk protein. 

"I think it's interesting," he says. "We're actually a bit jealous."  

 References:  

 Hayashi, C.Y., and R.V. Lewis. 1998. Evidence from flagelliform silk cDNA for 
the structural basis of elasticity and modular nature of spider silks. Journal 
of Molecular Biology Feb. 6.

 Further Readings: 

 Lipkin, R. 1996. . Science News 149(March 9):152.

 Sources: 

 Cheryl Y. Hayashi University of Wyoming Department of Molecular Biology 
Laramie, WY 82071-3944

 Randolph V. Lewis University of Wyoming Department of Molecular Biology 
Laramie, WY 82071-3944 Web site: 

copyright 1998
