Science News Online (3/28/98): Science Talent Search has new sponsor

 March  28, 1998 

 Science Talent Search has new sponsor

 The competition was fierce, but a winner finally emerged from the pack. The 
Science Talent Search (STS), a 57-year-old contest in which U.S. high school 
seniors annually display their scientific prowess and promise, welcomed a new 
title sponsor last week.

 Holder of the coveted designation is Santa Clara, Calif.-based Intel 
Corporation, the world's largest maker of computer chips.

 Science Service, the nonprofit organization in Washington, D.C., that 
publishes Science News, has administered the STS since its inception -- until 
now in partnership with the Westinghouse Foundation.

"Science Service looks forward to continuing this great tradition of excellence 
and commitment to nurturing young scientific talent in its new partnership with 
Intel," said Ann Korando, director of development and public affairs at Science 
Service.

 Intel sought to establish its new affiliation with the STS in order to carry 
into the next century the accomplishments of a program that it considers a 
"national treasure." Says Gordon E. Moore, chairman emeritus of Intel, "We are 
committed to finding ways to bring the program -- the country's most 
prestigious science competition -- to more students, teachers, and schools."

 Seventy-six companies from around the world contacted Science Service about 
the opportunity to become the new title sponsor of STS. All of the 
organizations that were considered have been invited to collaborate with Intel 
in supporting future STS competitions.

 The STS provides a prestigious forum in which high school students active in 
scientific and mathematical research exhibit their projects, win national 
recognition, and attract the attention of leading universities (SN: 3/14/98, p. 
165). More than 1,500 students entered this year's competition. The 40 
finalists received college scholarships ranging from $1,000 to $40,000.

 Intel also sponsors the International Science and Engineering Fair, which is 
administered by Science Service.

  Further Readings: 

 Milius, S. 1998. Math enthusiast wins Science Talent Search. Science News 
153(March 14):165.


