Science News Online (3/21/98): Grown-Up Monkey Brains Get Growing by B. Bower

 March 21, 1998 

 Grown-Up Monkey Brains Get Growing

by B. Bower

 During adulthood, according to traditional views of primate brain development, 
neurons check out, but they don't check in. In the densely connected mass of 
mature brain tissue, cells die and leave behind no fresh replacements.

 Overturning tradition, researchers have for the first time documented the 
creation of new neurons in the adult primate brain -- in an area linked with 
learning and memory. What's more, a single, highly stressful event can 
interfere with the production of neurons in monkeys for at least 3 weeks, 
reports a research group headed by neuroscientist Elizabeth Gould of Princeton 
University.

"In the classical scientific view of the adult brain, our findings seem 
ridiculous," Gould says. "But the production of new neurons during adulthood 
and its inhibition by stressful experience may be common to many species, 
including humans."

 Previous research conducted separately by Gould's team and a group in La 
Jolla, Calif., documented neural generation throughout adulthood in the 
hippocampus and adjacent regions of the inner brain of rats and tree shrews. 
This so-called hippocampal formation helps to regulate memory formation and the 
learning of information.

 In the new research, described in the March 16 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, Gould and her colleagues injected into the brains of six 
adult male marmoset monkeys a substance that marks neurons in early phases of 
development. Either 2 hours or 3 weeks later, the researchers added another 
chemical marker to slices of the animals' brain tissue to tag fully developed 
neurons previously identified in their formative stages.

 Over 3 weeks, sizable neural production occurred in a part of the hippocampal 
formation called the dentate gyrus, Gould holds.

 The scientists also transferred four adult monkeys individually to the cage of 
another adult monkey for 1 hour, a stressful situation in which aggressive 
displays by the resident animal elicited submissive behavior from the intruder. 
The four stressed monkeys subsequently produced fewer new dentate gyrus neurons 
than the nonstressed monkeys.

 This finding adds to prior indications from several animal species, including 
humans (SN: 6/3/95, p. 340), that stress and trauma trigger the release of 
hormones that can damage the hippocampal formation.

"The discovery that new cells are made in the adult primate dentate gyrus is 
novel and very exciting," says neuroscientist William T. Greenough of the 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

 Further investigations are needed to examine whether the fresh neurons are 
incorporated into the web of preexisting cellular connections, and, if so, how 
they function, Greenough says.

 Gould suspects that dentate gyrus cells generated during adulthood rapidly 
form neuronal connections and become involved in learning and memory.

 She and her coworkers have also reported that neurons are generated in the 
adult rat brain in a section of the outer layer, or cortex, that processes 
smells. This raises the possibility, also open to future research, that parts 
of the primate cortex produce new cells during adulthood, Gould notes. 

 References:  

 Gould, E., et al. 1998. Proliferation of granule cell precursors in the 
dentate gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by stress. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 95(March 16):3168.

 Sources: 

 Elizabeth Gould Princeton University Department of Psychology Green Hall 
Princeton, NJ 08544

 William T. Greenough University of Illinois2325 Beckman Institution405 North 
Mathews Avenue Urbana, IL 61801

copyright 1998
