Science News Online (3/28/98) Digging in the Dirt: Chemical and biological 
sensors could aid the search for hidden land mines

 March 28, 1998 

 Digging in the Dirt Chemical and biological sensors could aid the search for 
hidden land mines

 By CORINNA WU

 Many people regard antipersonnel land mines as the worst form of pollution on 
the planet. An estimated 100 million of these small explosive packages, 
designed specifically to maim or kill when stepped on, lie buried around the 
world, remnants of past military maneuvers or terror campaigns. These devices 
have turned fields, forests, and villages into treacherous, unusable terrain.

 Nations with the severest land mine problems include Afghanistan, Angola, 
Bosnia, and Cambodia, where years of war have littered the landscape with the 
deadly devices. In many parts of these countries, the activities of everyday 
life threaten civilians with possible injury or death. In Cambodia, 1 of every 
250 people has lost a limb or limbs because of an encounter with a mine. These 
deaths and permanent injuries among the population exact a crushing economic 
toll from nations that can ill afford it.

 With so many mines already in the ground, the problem of removing them seems 
almost insurmountable. Even if no more mines were laid, it would take 1,000 
years to clear them all at current removal rates, says Ron Woodfin of Sandia 
National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M. A dramatic increase in the number of 
workers could speed up the demining process, but many people are hoping that 
new technology can quicken the pace.

 Some of the more promising approaches now in development employ chemical and 
biological sensors to detect traces of explosives emitted by mines. Such 
sensors could enable a demining team to survey a large area and identify hot 
spots quickly and safely.

 Perhaps more important, sensors can indicate where there aren't any mines. The 
ability to see that an area is safe would allow demining teams to focus their 
energies on the trouble zones, says Albert M. Bottoms, president of the Mine 
Warfare Association (MINWARA), an educational organization in Monterey, Calif. 
However, "even that is beyond our current technology," he says. Bosnia alone 
has an estimated 18,000 minefields. "To our utter dismay, we don't know how to 
do a survey of even one of them, let alone 18,000," he remarks.

 The various designs of antipersonnel mines form a gruesome gallery of weapons. 
According to the humanitarian organization CARE in Atlanta, there are more than 
600 types. Explosive blast-effect mines tear off a person's lower leg and drive 
dirt and bone fragments into the wound. Fragmentation mines are stuffed with 
ball bearings and metal scraps to pepper their victims with shrapnel. Mines 
nicknamed "bouncing Betties" pop out of the ground and explode at waist height, 
shooting out fragments on all sides.

 The military can often use brute force to rid an area of antipersonnel mines. 
"They're not trying to remove the mines as much as defeat them," says Dick 
Davis, director for defense programs at Oak Ridge (Tenn.) National Laboratory. 
A heavily shielded, remote-controlled vehicle can quickly forge a safe, though 
limited, path for troops by turning up and detonating mines as it rolls along.

 Demining an entire area for humanitarian purposes -- so that children can play 
and families can move about free of fear -- is much trickier. Workers, usually 
trained civilians, slide a rod at an angle into the soil, probing gently for 
any suspicious objects, which include both unexploded artillery and mines. This 
process, required to clear an area as thoroughly as possible, is dangerous and 
frustratingly slow.

 Bottoms sees promise in new technologies that might make mine clearance safer 
and faster. He recalls a videotape he once viewed of "a line of peasants, 
walking across a field, poking the ground with sticks. Technology has to offer 
us something better than that."

 Finding effective detection methods is particularly difficult because most of 
the mines are made of plastic instead of metal, rendering standard metal 
detectors useless for humanitarian demining.

 Other types of imaging systems, such as infrared detectors or 
ground-penetrating radar, can alert deminers to objects buried in the ground, 
but they don't distinguish among mines, unexploded shells, or innocuous metal 
fragments. "In Afghanistan, they find 115 [harmless objects] for every one that 
has explosives in it," says Woodfin. Nevertheless, each hit has to be carefully 
probed, wasting valuable time. The large number of false positives can also 
cause a deminer's attention to flag, with potentially disastrous results. 
"False positives are bad, but false negatives are even worse," says Bottoms.

 In order to make detectors that don't cry wolf so often, several groups of 
researchers are focusing on the essential difference between benign objects and 
deadly mines: the presence of explosives. Since most mines leak a little bit of 
explosive into their surroundings, chemical and biological sensors can sniff 
them out (SN: 4/6/96, p. 223). Deminers can then ignore other buried objects.

 These new sensing techniques are variations on methods developed to detect 
chemicals and hazardous waste in the environment.

 Most of the "cheap and dirty" mines contain the explosive trinitrotoluene, or 
TNT, says Woodfin. Some use plastic explosives such as RDX, a favorite of 
terrorists. 

 At Oak Ridge, scientists are developing sensors that can identify the chemical 
signatures of these compounds. "None are perfected at this point," says Davis, 
"but they will prove beneficial in 2 to 4 years."

 The sensors could be included in long-handled, handheld detectors or mounted 
on a robotic vehicle. Such devices could quickly indicate the presence of mines 
while the deminers maintain a safe distance.

 Some researchers are working to make a standard laboratory apparatus portable 
enough to be taken to a minefield. Those at Oak Ridge have trimmed a 
chemical-sensing machine called an ion trap mass spectrometer to the size of a 
suitcase, says Davis. The current version, including batteries, weighs 60 to 70 
pounds, making it "luggable, not quite portable." Their goal is to get the 
spectrometer to the size of an attache case and run it off a car battery.

 At Sandia, researchers are scaling down another type of mass spectrometer, 
originally developed to check airline passengers for explosives.

 A different type of sensor under development depends on a tiny silicon 
cantilever just 1 micrometer wide that "looks like a small diving board," says 
Thomas G. Thundat, a scientist at Oak Ridge. A coating on the cantilever -- 
platinum, for example -- absorbs molecules of explosives. When the cantilever 
is heated, the miniature explosion occurs at a characteristic temperature, 
indicating the presence of the substance. Once the explosive burns off, the 
sensor can be used again within 1 second, says Thundat.

 Other cantilever-based sensors have also been designed to detect individual 
chemicals by measuring vibrations instead of burn temperatures. Thundat and his 
colleagues have coated the cantilevers with different materials that 
selectively absorb a range of chemicals given off by explosives.

 Absorbed molecules change the mass of the cantilever and, therefore, the 
frequency at which the cantilever vibrates. By focusing a laser on the end of 
the cantilever, researchers can detect the change in frequency. So far, Thundat 
says, they can detect environmental pollutants such as acetone, mercury, and 
toluene -- but not yet its derivative TNT -- using these devices.

 In 1 square centimeter of a silicon chip, researchers can carve out 648 
cantilevers using standard circuit manufacturing techniques. Such an array 
could serve as an artificial nose, sensing a variety of substances without 
using a lot of power.

 Indeed, sensors can take lessons from some real noses. Dogs can smell 
explosives with "breathtaking" efficiency, says Bottoms, but they are expensive 
to train and handle. Sandia scientists are assisting a company called Nomadics 
in Stillwater, Okla., in developing a chemical sniffer. Trying to emulate what 
dogs do when they inhale and exhale near the ground, the sniffer stirs up dirt 
particles, sucks them in, and electrostatically traps them. Traces of 
explosives that stick to the particles can then be identified.

"By far the largest percentage [of explosives] is adsorbed to soil particles," 
says Woodfin. "Only minor fractions are found in vapor." Soil concentrates the 
substances so that they can be analyzed more easily.

 Organisms that can be added to soil also play a part in explosives detection. 
At Oak Ridge, researchers have genetically engineered bacteria to light up in 
the presence of TNT. 

 When certain bacteria ingest organic molecules, they turn on the production of 
regulatory proteins. By inserting a gene for a luminescent or fluorescent 
protein next to the gene for the regulatory protein, the researchers can induce 
the bacteria to produce both proteins whenever they come into contact with 
organic molecules (SN: 6/4/94, p. 358). In this way, glowing bacteria signal 
the presence of the explosive in the environment.

 Robert S. Burlage and his colleagues at Oak Ridge have engineered several 
strains of the bacterium Pseudomonas putida to glow with visible or fluorescent 
light when they scavenge TNT and dinitrotoluene, a related chemical (SN: 
11/9/96, p. 150). Burlage is presenting the results of this project at the 
Third International Symposium on Technology and the Mine Problem to be held at 
the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif., next week.

 Later this year, the group will test the bacteria on a small simulated 
minefield, spraying the plot of land with the bacteria and waiting 3 hours for 
them to produce the glowing proteins. Luminescent bacterial strains should be 
visible to the naked eye, whereas fluorescent ones will require ultraviolet 
light in order to be seen.

 Burlarge expects eventually to apply the technique to real minefields, using a 
crop duster to shower an area with the engineered bacteria. Where the bacteria 
contact explosives, they will give off light that can be mapped from the air or 
viewed on the ground.

 Burlage's team had previously engineered bacteria to report the presence of 
several environmental pollutants: toluene, naphthalene, and mercury. In 1996, 
the Environmental Protection Agency approved the use of these organisms for 
cleaning up polluted areas.

 A Mines lie buried in so many different environments that no single method can 
deal with them all. Researchers are therefore developing a variety of 
technologies. In some places, deminers may need to apply a combination of 
techniques, each based on a different physical principle, in order to reveal a 
minefield's secrets. Discovering how to use advanced data analysis to combine 
these disparate lines of information adds another layer of complexity to the 
challenge.

 Some land mines create a shorter-term hazard than others. So-called smart 
mines self-destruct after a set period of time. The United States makes an 
effort to use only smart mines, says Bottoms. However, a country like China, 
which has a stockpile of 50 million conventional mines, probably won't replace 
them in the near future.

 At the upcoming conference, a representative from the U.S. Army has been 
invited to speak on the Army's efforts to find alternatives to antipersonnel 
land mines, Bottoms says. "Offhand," he adds, "I can't think of what those 
would be."

 
