Science News Online (2/14/98): Stimulating clue hints how lithium works by J. 
Travis

 March 14, 1998 

 Stimulating clue hints how lithium works

by J. Travis

 Some 50 years ago, Australian physician John Cade observed the calming effect 
that lithium had on small animals. After testing the safety of lithium on 
himself, Cade ventured to try it on people suffering from the wild mood swings 
of manic depression.

 Millions of prescriptions later, lithium remains the most popular choice for 
treating manic depression, although scientists do not understand how it quells 
mania or relieves depression. "It's still a mystery," says De-Maw Chuang of the 
National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md.

 Now, there's a new clue to this riddle. Chuang and his colleagues have found 
that lithium protects brain cells from being stimulated to death by glutamate, 
one of the many chemicals that transmit messages in the brain.

 The new data suggest that lithium may calm overexcited areas of the brain or, 
more provocatively, preserve the life of brain cells whose presence guards 
against manic depression.

 This finding "potentially contributes a lot to the field," says Husseini K. 
Manji of Wayne State University in Detroit. "If we could figure out how lithium 
works, we could theoretically come up with better drugs and perhaps understand 
what's going on in manic depression."

 Chuang and his colleagues tested the response of various types of rat brain 
cells to glutamate. Many normal cells and cells soaked in lithium for only a 
day died from a form of suicide that often results when this neurotransmitter 
overstimulates a brain cell.

 Yet rat brain cells soaked in lithium for about a week committed suicide much 
more rarely when exposed to glutamate, Chuang's group reports in the March 3 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The effect was seen in cells 
from several brain regions.

 The delay in protection is particularly striking, notes Manji, since a 
hallmark of lithium therapy is that it can take a week or longer to benefit 
people. Consequently, scientists have been looking for the long-term actions of 
lithium on brain cells.

 Chuang's team also examined the role of the NMDA receptor, the cell surface 
protein that glutamate binds to when it excites a cell. While cells soaked in 
lithium for a week had as many NMDA receptors as untreated cells, the treated 
cells responded differently.

 Normally, activation of the NMDA receptor by glutamate triggers an influx of 
calcium ions, setting off a signaling cascade inside cells. However, cells 
soaked in lithium for a week let in far less calcium when exposed to glutamate.

 In people with manic depression, lithium may correct a dysfunction of the NMDA 
receptor by limiting calcium influx, speculates Chuang.

 Both Chuang and Manji also note that a small body of evidence suggests that 
people with mania or depression may lose brain cells. Lithium may thwart that 
cell death, they say. Indeed, Manji has some evidence that lithium-treated 
cells eventually begin to overproduce a protein that stymies the cell's 
internal suicide program.

 If lithium protects brain cells from death by glutamate overstimulation, it 
may have uses beyond manic depression. This form of cell death occurs in 
strokes and in Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases. Chuang is 
investigating whether lithium protects mice from similar neurodegenerative 
illnesses. 


