Science News Online (3/21/98) Drugged Waters Does it matter that 
pharmaceuticals are turning up in water supplies? By JANET RALOFF

 March 21, 1998 

 Drugged Waters Does it matter that pharmaceuticals are turning up in water 
supplies?

 By JANET RALOFF

 Chemists at an agricultural research laboratory run by the Swiss government 
were screening lake water for pesticide contamination when they ran across a 
puzzling result. Their instruments turned up a compound that resembled 
mecoprop, an herbicide they had been looking for, but it wasn't a perfect match.

 Suspecting that they might have found the pesticide in an early stage of 
degradation, Hans-Rudolf Buser and Markus D. Muller probed further. To their 
surprise, the pollutant turned out to be clofibric acid, a widely used 
cholesterol-lowering drug.

 Immediately, the pair began scouting for the drug elsewhere -- and they found 
it everywhere, from rural mountain lakes to rivers flowing through densely 
populated areas. Concentrations, ranging from 1 to 100 nanograms per liter of 
water, seemed to correlate with how densely a region was inhabited. While 
barely detectable, these concentrations resemble those of other, more 
conventional pollutants found in the environment, Buser notes, such as a 
persistent, toxic ingredient of the pesticide lindane (SN: 3/15/97, p. 157).

 The ubiquity of clofibric acid, which is not even manufactured in Switzerland, 
argued against the possibility that the contamination stems from some 
industrial accident or spill, Buser says. The only reasonable explanation, he 
and Muller conclude in the Jan. 1 Environmental Science & Technology, is that 
it comes from human wastes.

 Though the body tends to break down any medicine it uses, how effectively it 
does so can vary widely -- by individual and by drug. As a result, in some 
cases, 50 to 90 percent of an administered drug may be excreted from the body 
in its original or its biologically active form. In other cases, partially 
degraded drugs are converted back into their active form through chemical 
reactions with the environment.

 Seven years earlier, environmental chemists Thomas Heberer and Hans-Jurgen 
Stan of the Technical University of Berlin had stumbled upon clofibric acid 
while looking for agricultural chemicals in groundwater beneath a German sewage 
treatment farm. Heberer suspects that he and Stan would have missed the drug if 
it hadn't resembled a common pesticide. The drug's structural similarity, he 
says, "proved the key to its detection."

 Like the Swiss team, the Berlin scientists went on to find clofibric acid 
throughout local waters. It laced some groundwater at concentrations of up to 4 
milligrams per liter, or 4 parts per million (ppm), they will report in an 
upcoming issue of the International Journal of Environmental Analytical 
Chemistry. It also turned up in all the Berlin tap water they sampled -- at up 
to 0.2 ppb.

 When it comes to waterborne drugs, however, clofibric acid is just the tip of 
the iceberg. Heberer and Stan are part of a Berlin research team that has found 
drugs for regulating concentrations of lipids in the blood (such as phenazone 
and fenofibrate) and analgesics (including ibuprofen and diclofenac) in 
groundwater beneath a sewage treatment plant. This aquifer serves as a source 
of drinking water. Other researchers have detected chemotherapy drugs, 
antibiotics, and hormones in bodies of water that supply drinking water.

 What do low concentrations of these drugs in water mean? asks ecotoxicologist 
Bent Halling-Sorensen of the Royal Danish School of Pharmacy in Copenhagen. Do 
they pose a health risk to people? Can they harm wildlife or substantially 
alter aquatic ecosystems? Do they foster the buildup of resistance to 
antibiotics?

 For now, there are no answers, he and his colleagues conclude in the January 
(No. 2) Chemosphere. After reviewing more than 100 published reports on drug 
residues in the environment, they found "practically zero" data for gauging the 
potential toxicity of chronic exposures to low doses of these compounds in the 
environment.

 Most countries have regulatory agencies explicitly charged with protecting the 
environment from pesticides and other potentially toxic industrial chemicals. 

 Drugs, however, have come to be regulated by health departments, which possess 
little expertise in protecting natural ecosystems and water supplies. Moreover, 
they tend not to look at pharmaceuticals as potential pollutants -- even though 
up to 90 percent of a delivered drug may leave the body in urine and feces.

 One reason for medicines' low visibility in environmental regulations is their 
low concentrations in water. Until recently, most drugs in public water 
supplies would have been undetectable.

 Regulators have attempted to cope with this problem by asking manufacturers to 
model a new drug's projected concentration in public water supplies, based on 
what was known about company projections for how much of the compound might be 
sold, the quantities of lake and stream water into which the excreted drug 
would be flushed, and laboratory information on the rate at which it would 
break down in the environment. They were also asked to predict its accumulation 
in wildlife.

 In the United States, an environmental assessment containing such estimates 
would be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration as part of the approval 
process for a new drug. If such an assessment suggested that worrisome levels 
of a drug might build up, a manufacturer would have to prepare a more detailed 
investigation. Such an environmental impact statement might even explore 
possible mitigation measures, explains Daniel C. Kearns of FDA in Rockville, Md.

 So seldom did an environmental assessment for a new drug suggest a hazard, 
however, that the FDA decided last July to reduce a manufacturer's 
environmental reporting requirements. The agency concluded that excreted drugs 
"are probably not having a significant environmental effect," Kearns says. "So 
unless modeling data suggest a drug's concentrations would reach 1 ppb, a 
manufacturer no longer must submit an environmental assessment.

"We've never seen a situation where we believe you would have an actual impact 
upon the environment if [drug] concentrations were under that," he told Science 
News.

 Though modeling provided a useful surrogate for water monitoring when 
laboratory analyses were too crude to detect low drug concentrations in the 
environment, chemists today routinely detect parts per trillion (ppt) of many 
waterborne pollutants.

 When asked whether FDA requires any monitoring of water supplies to see 
whether concentrations in the real world match the predictions of drug 
manufacturers' models, Kearns said no.

 If they had, many German chemists now believe, regulators might have received 
a rude awakening -- as Thomas A. Ternes did.

 A chemist with the municipal water research laboratory in Wiesbaden, Ternes 
realized that tons of medicines are prescribed each year in Germany, "but 
nobody knows what happens to those compounds after they are excreted." So a few 
years ago he launched a water-monitoring project to look for drugs in sewage, 
treated water, and rivers.

 He expected to find a few medicinal compounds. Instead, he detected 30 of the 
60 common pharmaceuticals for which he tested. These included lipid-lowering 
drugs, antibiotics, analgesics, antiseptics, and beta-blocker heart drugs. He 
has even found residues of drugs to control epilepsy and ones that serve as 
contrast agents for diagnostic X rays. A report of his findings will appear 
later this year in Water Research.

 Ternes detected parts-per-billion concentrations of these drugs in both raw 
sewage and the water leaving treatment plants. "We also found these compounds 
in nearly all streams and rivers in Germany," he says. Though concentrations in 
streams usually fall in the parts-per-trillion range, he notes that for some 
compounds "you can have maximum concentrations of up to 3 [ppb]."

 The highest concentrations tended to show up in the smallest rivers, where 50 
percent of the water could be sewage treatment effluent. Residues of up to 10 
different drugs have been found in such water at concentrations totaling 6 ppb.

 Ternes notes that finding these drugs "is very hard work." For instance, 
chemists usually identify a compound by comparing it against a standard sample 
of that compound. These standards often are not available for sale, he finds.

 Adding to the problem, Heberer observes, is that almost all excreted drugs 
dissolve easily in water. Because conventional methods of separation take 
advantage of differences in the effectiveness of several solvents, it is 
difficult to segregate the drugs for analysis. That's a problem Shane Snyder at 
Michigan State University in East Lansing has been wrestling with in his study 
of estrogens in sewage effluent.

 While analyzing Las Vegas wastewater flowing into Lake Mead, Snyder found that 
"all of the estrogenicity was coming out of the very water-soluble fraction." 
To isolate the chemicals responsible, he had to repeat the separation procedure 
30 times or more. Though estradiol, the primary natural female sex hormone, 
appears to be the major estrogenic compound in this water, there is evidence 
that a synthetic hormone in birth control pills may also be a contributor. 
Further investigation of that possibility is now under way.

"These findings are not all that surprising," observes James F. Pendergast, 
acting director of the Environmental Protection Agency division that regulates 
what comes out of sewage treatment plants. For quite a while, he notes, water 
quality engineers have recognized that one of the highest-volume contaminants 
emerging in effluent -- especially early in the morning -- is caffeine, a drug 
excreted by all those people who down a cup or two of Java to jolt their bodies 
awake.

 Although he was unfamiliar with the new European studies documenting drugs in 
water, Pendergast says that he has no reason to doubt their findings or the 
possibility that they might herald what could be found in U.S. waters, if 
anyone were to look.

 He's also not surprised that European chemists have stumbled onto the issue 
before U.S. scientists. A number of environmental issues -- from methyl mercury 
buildups in acidified lakes to reproductive risks from hormone-mimicking 
pollutants -- became hot research topics in Europe before U.S. researchers 
jumped on the bandwagon, he says.

 The issue of drugs in water, he concludes, "is certainly an area where we 
could use a lot more science." The critical issue is whether existing 
concentrations pose any hazard to wildlife or to people. To date, he notes, 
"information on hazards at the nanogram level just hasn't been developed."

 A few laboratories stand poised to try. Snyder's assays, for instance, 
indicate that estradiol in water can reach 20 ppt -- a concentration that can 
cause some male fish to produce an egg-making protein normally seen only in 
reproductive females. In upcoming experiments in Lake Mead, he plans to cage 
fish within a plume of effluent from an upstream sewage treatment plant.

 Using a bacterial test that gauges a pollutant's potential to damage DNA, 
Andreas Hartmann of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich has 
been studying effluent from hospitals and municipal wastewater treatment 
plants. In the March Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, he reports finding 
fluoroquinolones, a class of broad-spectrum antibiotics, to be the leading 
source of a hospital wastewater's toxicity to DNA.

"We're finding 0.5 microgram per liter of fluoroquinolone antibiotics in sewage 
treatment plant water," Hartmann told Science News. Tests have tentatively 
identified the drug as ciprofloxacin. Once the antibiotic is more firmly 
identified, he plans to study "whether it -- alone or in combination with other 
antibiotics -- has an influence on the developing resistance to these compounds 
that we're finding in pathogenic organisms in the environment."

"If [he's] finding fluoroquinolone antibiotics at that level in water and 
they're not breaking down, that would be a problem," says Stuart Levy, who 
directs the Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance at Tufts 
University in Boston. Parts-per-trillion concentrations of these drugs can 
affect Escherichia coli and other bacteria, he notes. The 1,000 times higher 
concentrations reported in German wastewater suggest to Levy that "these 
antibiotics may be present at levels of consequence to bacteria -- levels that 
could not only alter the ecology of the environment but also give rise to 
antibiotic resistance."

 Halling-Sorensen is also studying waterborne antibiotics, though his focus is 
their potential toxicity to algae, crustaceans, and other aquatic residents. By 
quantifying the potential ecological effects of individual compounds, he says, 
"we may get information that's useful for decision making.

"For instance, if we have five medicinal compounds that can treat the same 
disease, we might now identify which is most friendly to the ecosystem -- and 
choose to use that one."

 References:  

 Buser, H., M.D. Muller, and N. Theobald. 1998. Occurrence of the 
pharmaceutical drug clofibric acid and the herbicide mecoprop in various Swiss 
lakes and in the North Sea. Environmental Science and Technology 32(Jan. 1):188.

 Halling-Serensen, B., et al. 1998. Occurrence, fate and effects of 
pharmaceutical substances in the environment^-a review. Chemosphere 
36(January):357.

 Hartmann, A. In Press. Identification of fluoroquinolone antibiotics as the 
main source of umuC genotoxicity in native hospital. Environmental Toxicology 
and Chemistry 17:3.

 Hartmann, A., et al. 1997. Determination of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic 
ciprofloxacin in hospital and municipal water. Society of Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry. San Francisco. November.

 Heberer, T. 1997. Determination of clofibric acid and 
N-(phenylsulfonyl)-sarcosine in sewage, river and drinking water. Journal of 
Environmental Analytical Chemistry 3:1.

 Heberer, T. et al. 1997. Detection of drugs and drug metabolites in ground 
water samples of a drinking water treatment plant. Fresenius Environmental 
Bulletin 6:438.

 Snyder, S., et al. 1997. Toxicant identification and evaluation (TIE) of 
endocrine disrupters in aqueous mixtures. Society of Environmental Toxicology 
and Chemistry. San Francisco. November.

 Steger-Hartmann, T., K. Kummerer, and A. Hartmann. 1997. Biological 
degradation of cyclophosphamide and its occurrence in sewage water. 
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 36:174.

 Ternes, T.A. In press. Occurrence of drugs in German sewage treatment plants 
and rivers. Water Research.

 Further Readings: 

1997. National Environmental Policy Act: Revision of policies and procedures. 
Federal Register 62(July 29).

 Burhenne, J., et al. 1997. Chemotherapeutic agents: Primary photoproducts and 
half-lives. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 4:10.

______. 1997. Chemotherapeutic agents: Isolation and structural elucidation of 
polar photometabolites. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 4:61.

 Knepper, T.P., and K. Haberer. Auftreten von phenylsulfonamiden in 
klaranlagen^-,oberflachen^-und trinkwassern(Occurrence of phenylsulfonamides in 
sewage^-, surface^-and tap waters). Vom Wasser 86:263. (Abstract in English).

 Renner, R. 1998. Human estrogens linked to endocrine disruption. Environmental 
News 32(Jan. 1):8.

 Sallustio, B.C., et al. Genotoxicity of acyl metabolites formed from clofibric 
acid and gemfibrozil: A novel role for Phase-II mediated bioactivation in the 
hepatocarcinogenicity of the parent aglycones? Toxicology and Applies 
Pharmacology 147(December):459.

 Schlett, C., und B. Pfeifer. 1996. Bestimmung von steroidhormonen in 
trink^-und oberflachenwassern. (Determination of steroidal hormones in drinking 
and surface water samples.) Vom Wasser 87:237. (Abstract in English).

 Stan, H.J., and T. Heberer. Pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environment. 
Analusis 25:20.

 Stumpf, M., et al. 1996. Nachweis von arneimittelruckstanlagen und flieb 
gewassern. (Determination of pharmaceutics in sewage plants and river water). 
Vom Wasser 86:291.

 Sources: 

 Bent Halling-Serensen Royal Danish School of Pharmacy Institute of Analytical 
and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Section of Environmental Chemistry 
Universitetsparken 2 DK 2100 Copenhagen O Denmark

 Andreas Hartmann Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Department of 
Environmental Sciences Institute for Hygiene and Applied Physiology 
Clausiusstr. 25 CH-8092 Zuerich Switzerland

 Thomas Heberer Technical University of Berlin Institute of Food Chemistry 
Gustav-Meyer-Alleee 25 D-13355 Berlin Germany

 Daniel C. Kearns U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Biologics 
Evaluation and Research (HFM-208)1401 Rockville Pike Rockville, MD 20852

 Stuart Levy Tufts medical School Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug 
Resistance136 Harrison Avenue Boston, MA 02111

 James F. Pendergast Environmental Protection Agency NPDES Permit Division MC 
4203402 M Street, S.W. Washington, DC 20460

 Shane Snyder Michigan State University201 Pesticide Research Center East 
Lansing, MI 48824

 Thomas Steger-Hartmann Experimental Toxicology Scherling AG D-13342 Berlin 
Germany

 Thomas Ternes ESWE-Institute for Water Research and Water Technology 
Soehnleinstr. 158 D-65201 Wiesbaden Germany

copyright 1998
