Science News Online (3/21/98): California's quake deficit fades by R. 
Monastersky

 March  21, 1998 

 California's quake deficit fades

by R. Monastersky

 As Californians recover from El Nino-driven storms, they can take comfort from 
the news that the ground underfoot is less fickle than it once seemed.

 In 1995, a panel of seismologists concluded that Southern California had 
experienced too few earthquakes since 1850 to relieve all the energy that had 
accumulated in the crust. The situation had created a quake deficit that would 
have to be paid back with larger or more frequent earthquakes in the future, 
they said (SN: 1/21/95, p. 37).

 Now, two teams of researchers are disputing the evidence of a quake deficit in 
the region, and their studies are drawing positive reviews from other 
seismologists. "If you add all these things up, it's pretty clear now that this 
deficit can go away. It doesn't have to exist," comments Thomas L. Henyey, 
director of the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), the Los 
AngelesDbased consortium that issued the 1995 report.

 Earthquake-producing stress in Southern California comes from the ongoing 
collision of the North American and Pacific tectonic plates -- two large pieces 
of Earth's outer shell that grind past each other. The SCEC report estimated 
seismic hazard by looking at the rate of past earthquakes, the geology of 
faults, and ground movement. Written primarily by David D. Jackson of the 
University of California, Los Angeles, the report covered the southern 40 
percent of the state.

 The SCEC study concluded that magnitude 6 and larger earthquakes should have 
occurred once every 1.6 years -- twice their actual rate. To relieve all the 
energy that had accumulated in the crust, earthquakes would eventually have to 
strike more frequently or smaller faults would have to join together to produce 
a giant quake, Jackson and his colleagues reported.

 A reanalysis of the SCEC study has uncovered subtle flaws that combined to 
overestimate the amount of energy building in the crust, reported a team of 
scientists at a meeting of the Seismological Society of America in Boulder, 
Colo., earlier this week. Edward H. Field and James F. Dolan of the University 
of Southern California in Los Angeles and Jackson collaborated on the new 
study. When they constructed an improved model, no deficit emerged.

 Thomas C. Hanks and Ross S. Stein of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, 
Calif., questioned the SCEC study for other reasons. The report relied on a 
list of magnitude 6 and larger earthquakes since 1850, but Hanks and Stein 
argue that the list may overlook quakes from early in that period, when 
California's inland population was sparse. The rate of observed earthquakes 
since 1903 is 40 to 50 percent higher than that since 1850, which reduces the 
apparent deficit, they report.

 While the new studies will please many Californians, they will not dispel the 
concerns of Los Angeles residents. Seismologists still believe that faults 
around metropolitan Los Angeles have a major quake deficit that will eventually 
lead to larger or more frequent tremors there. 

 References:  

 Field, E.H. 1998. An integrated seismic-hazard source model for Southern 
California: No deficit or M>8 earthquakes required. Meeting of the 
Seismological Society of America. Boulder. March.

 Hanks, T.C., and R.S. Stein. 1998. Earthquake deficits, seismic moment 
deficits, and M>6 seismicity in Southern California since 1903. Meeting of the 
Seismological Society of America. Boulder. March.

 Further Readings: 

 Monastersky, R. 1995. Los Angeles faces a dangerous quake debt. Science News 
147(Jan. 21):37.

 Sources: 

 Thomas L. Henyey University of Southern California Department of Earth 
Sciences Los Angeles, CA 90089-0740

copyright 1998
