Science News Online (3/7/98): Taters for tots provide an edible vaccine by 
Janet Raloff

 March 7, 1998 

 Taters for tots provide an edible vaccine

by J. Raloff 

 Consider the versatile potato. Even most children consume it in at least some 
form -- baked, mashed, French fried, the list goes on. Now, molecular 
biologists predict that through genetic engineering they can turn spuds into 
the darling of the medical world: low-cost, nutritious vaccines.

 William H.R. Langridge and his coworkers at Loma Linda (Calif.) University 
School of Medicine say they have inserted into potatoes a gene that enables the 
tuber to make a nontoxic component of the cholera toxin. The research could 
lead to protection against a scourge that afflicts 5 million people annually, 
they assert.

 Moreover, because the toxins produced by the bacterium that causes cholera and 
by the more common Escherichia coli are nearly identical, Langridge says, 
vaccines against one germ may head off or ameliorate disease caused by the 
other.

 Cholera locks open crucial pores in cells lining the gut. "So water pours from 
the blood into the intestines and then out of the system," Langridge notes. 
People with this diarrhea can quickly become dehydrated and die.

 Langridge's team added the cholera toxin's B-protein to potatoes. This portion 
of the toxin not only binds to cells in the gut, it also triggers the 
production of antibodies against cholera.

 Mice ate the altered potato raw once a week for 4 weeks and downed a booster 
meal some 40 days later. The scientists then removed pieces of intestine from 
the animals and added cholera toxin to the tissues. In the March Nature 
Biotechnology, Langridge's team reports that tissue from the treated mice 
leaked about half as much as tissue from mice that ate only regular potato.

 Because people seldom eat potatoes raw, the scientists cooked the medicinal 
spuds and found that at least half of the vaccine survived in biologically 
active form -- a donut-shaped ring of five linked B-protein molecules. Taking 
into account the fact that to develop immunity, people need far less of the 
vaccine than mice do, Langridge calculates that one cooked potato a week for a 
month should provide enough active B-protein to immunize against the cholera 
toxin. However, because immunity falls over time, periodic booster spuds would 
be required.

 Langridge plans to refine the potato further, adding genes to make its vaccine 
target not just the toxin but also the bacterium that produces it. Such 
potatoes would constitute a medicine, he emphasizes, and should not be eaten 
too often. Overexposure to their vaccine could suppress a person's production 
of disease-fighting antibodies.

 Charles J. Arntzen of Cornell University's Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant 
Research was one of the first scientists to engineer a potential vaccine into 
potatoes, but the E. coli protein he uses breaks down at high temperatures. He 
says he is especially interested in the results from cooked potatoes in the 
Loma Linda project.

 Concern that heating would inactivate vaccines had led to an expectation that 
any useful ones would eventually need to go into foods eaten raw, such as 
bananas, observes Carol Tacket at the University of Maryland's Center for 
Vaccine Development in Baltimore. "But now that we know you can cook them, 
maybe potatoes will become the ultimate vehicle."   


