Science News Online (4/18/98): Courting Reliable Science Judges seek to improve 
use of scientific experts in trials By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 April 18, 1998 

 Courting Reliable Science Judges seek to improve use of scientific experts in 
trials

 By RICHARD MONASTERSKY

 In some of the most complex cases currently crawling through the U.S. courts, 
upwards of 500,000 women are suing the makers of silicone gel breast implants, 
claiming a range of medical problems caused by the occasionally leaky packets 
buried under their skin.

 At their core, these cases rely on scientific experts to weigh in on whether 
the implants can damage the human immune system, trigger connective tissue 
diseases, or precipitate a host of other disorders, from allergies to vertigo. 
The litigation pits one team of experts against another. Judges and juries must 
listen to the scientific arguments and then decide which side bears the 
preponderance of the evidence.

 To many observers, such battles of the experts appear to be straining the 
judicial system. "This is a circumstance where the information that the courts 
must consider is so inherently complex that even the best efforts by skilled 
advocates to educate the court often fall short of the mark," says Joe S. 
Cecil, a lawyer and psychologist who conducts research for the Federal Judicial 
Center in Washington, D.C.

"I believe the breast implant cases are the most challenging cases that are in 
federal courts today," Cecil said in February at a meeting sponsored by the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in Philadelphia.

 In Alabama, a federal district judge is experimenting with a potential 
solution to the problem of complex scientific arguments. Judge Sam C. Pointer 
Jr. has appointed a panel of four independent scientists to examine the 
available evidence about silicone gel breast implants and disease. These 
court-appointed experts -- an epidemiologist, an immunologist, a 
rheumatologist, and a toxicologist -- have been asked to offer their own 
assessments of the state of the science and examine the validity of dissenting 
opinions.

 Their conclusions will be particularly influential because Pointer is 
presiding over a multidistrict litigation -- a procedure that has grouped 
together more than 20,000 individual suits in order to make the pretrial phase 
more efficient. When these cases go back to their separate federal courts for 
trial, judges across the nation will decide how they wish to use the report 
from this independent panel.

 Judges have had the authority to appoint independent experts since 1975, but 
relatively few have done so, in part because of widespread opposition from 
lawyers. The practice is now gaining increased attention. In December 1997, 
Justice Stephen G. Breyer of the U.S. Supreme Court supported the use of 
court-appointed experts in a concurring opinion he wrote in the case of General 
Electric Co. v. Joiner.

 Breyer expanded on the issue of expert witnesses in an address at the AAAS 
meeting, noting that "as society becomes more dependent for its well-being upon 
scientifically complex technology, we find that this technology increasingly 
underlies legal issues of importance to us all."

 The legal system, he says, "has begun to look for ways to improve the quality 
of the science upon which scientifically related judicial determinations will 
rest."

 Legal professionals and scientists are quick to point out that they face what 
appear to be irreconcilable differences. Recognizing the problem-plagued 
relationship, the AAAS called its session on scientific litigation "Disorder in 
the Courts." 

 Joseph Sanders, a law professor at the University of Houston, explained. "What 
the title reflects is a widespread belief that the law is basically doing a 
poor job with scientific evidence and perhaps even a more fundamental 
perception that law and science are like oil and water. They're good things in 
their own place, but they don't mix together very well."

 At the most fundamental level, participants at the AAAS meeting noted that 
science and the law represent wholly different approaches to seeking solutions. 
Science represents an unending search for explanations, one in which the 
questioning process prevails and answers are temporary. Courts, on the other 
hand, must make decisions on the basis of the information available, without 
the luxury of putting off a conclusion to await further research.

 This conflict appears most dramatically in toxic tort cases, in which 
plaintiffs claim to have suffered injury or disease from toxic substances. 
Besides the breast implant controversy, these cases have involved asbestos, the 
Dalkon Shield, toxic shock syndrome, Agent Orange, lead, tobacco, and, 
recently, fen-phen (SN: 10/18/97, p. 252).

 In such tort cases, the plaintiff must prove, among other points, that he or 
she has suffered damages and that the defendant caused those damages. In an 
asbestos suit, for example, the plaintiff needs to convince the jury that 
exposure to asbestos more likely than not caused his or her lung disease. "The 
causal question is the center of controversy," says Sanders.

 In the past, science and the courts enjoyed a better relationship because 
toxic tort cases usually arose only after a body of solid scientific evidence 
had accumulated, Sanders notes. Asbestos law-suits in the 1970s relied on 
scientific evidence, collected in the 1960s, that linked lung disease to 
asbestos fibers. Dalkon Shield suits followed after scientific studies 
established the hazards of this intrauterine birth-control device.

 The sequence of events has reversed in the last 2 decades, making toxic tort 
cases much more difficult to adjudicate, says Sanders.

 In part, money has motivated this trend. Plaintiffs' lawyers stand to make 
much more if they file suit before hundreds or thousands of similar cases 
develop. When substantial numbers of similar suits are brought against the same 
defendant, the cases get bundled together under the direction of an executive 
committee of plaintiffs' lawyers.

"It's the plaintiff's lawyer who gets in the door first that's going to have a 
good argument for being one of the members of this committee and will cash in 
on all of this money. If you wait for the science to develop, someone else will 
have been there first," says Bert Black, a Dallas defense attorney who has 
represented pharmaceutical and chemical companies. Black cochairs the National 
Conference of Lawyers and Scientists, a joint committee of the AAAS and the 
American Bar Association.

 The statute of limitations also forces plaintiffs' lawyers to bring cases 
forward quickly, sometimes in advance of the science, says Sanders.

 Some of the problems surrounding the use of expert witnesses may have been 
precipitated by changes in the law. When the federal rules of evidence were 
amended in 1975, they removed some of the procedural hurdles facing lawyers who 
wanted to introduce testimony from their own experts.

 By making it easier to use such witnesses, however, the rule change also led 
to the misconception that the standards for allowing testimony had loosened. 
According to this thinking, judges were bound to admit expert testimony and 
juries would decide its merit.

"The rules do not express any more preference for admitting unreliable evidence 
than was traditionally the case under the law," says Black. Nonetheless, the 
perception of looser standards led to the proliferation of so-called junk 
science in trials.

 The Supreme Court clarified the admissibility standards in its 1993 decision 
regarding Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (see sidebar). That 
decision called on judges to serve as gatekeepers who "must ensure that any and 
all scientific testimony or evidence admitted is not only relevant, but 
reliable." As part of this process, the Court instructed judges to assess the 
reasoning and methodology of proposed expert testimony before a trial starts.

 A federal district court judge in Oregon made headlines recently when, on the 
recommendation of four independent experts, he disallowed all testimony that 
silicone gel breast implants cause immune system disorders. In a pretrial 
decision, Judge Robert E. Jones said that the opinions of the plaintiffs' 
experts contained major flaws.

 Jones ruled, for example, that a key witness had not submitted her results for 
peer review, that one type of diagnosis was untested, and that the experts had 
extrapolated so far from experimental data that their conclusions amounted to a 
"leap of faith." Jones' decision effectively ended all claims except those 
relating to tissue damage near the implant, although he has deferred his ruling 
until the scientific report from the Alabama district court emerges.

 For those who support the use of independent experts in trials, the Oregon and 
Alabama cases provide examples of how to improve the quality of science in 
court. "Our advocacy system of justice in America has served us very well 
because it ensures that each side has a vigorous representation by a loyal 
advocate, namely, an attorney. But it's not necessarily a good way to present a 
scientific story and to present scientific material to a trier of fact, whether 
it's a judge or a jury," says Deborah Runkle of AAAS. "In most cases, judges 
and juries have little or no scientific training or background, so you're 
presenting them with very complicated matters in a style that is not conducive 
to learning scientific matters."

 The two cases also illustrate the difficulty of identifying appropriate 
neutral experts. In Oregon, the presiding judge relied on a cousin, who 
happened to be a noted scientist, to help select four specialists. The judge in 
Alabama enlisted the aid of six so-called special masters, legal and scientific 
scholars who performed the task of identifying and interviewing potential 
independent experts.

 The special masters spent over 300 hours trying to find appropriate people who 
had no conflict of interest. "It was difficult and time-consuming," says 
Margaret A. Berger, a professor at the Brooklyn Law School in New York, who 
served as one of the special masters. "We were looking for people who did not 
work directly in that field, but people who worked close enough to that field 
that they didn't have to start at square one in terms of the necessary 
information."

 The AAAS hopes to streamline the process of finding neutral experts. It has 
proposed a 5-year demonstration project to help courts identify appropriate 
scientists and engineers to serve as court-appointed experts. The AAAS and the 
American Bar Association developed this plan several years ago but have thus 
far failed to secure suitable funding. However, Breyer's opinion in the Joiner 
decision and his support for the demonstration project have raised the profile 
of this issue

 Judges have wide latitude in using such independent experts. In the pretrial 
phase, the independent expert can help the judge assess the testimony offered 
by the opposing parties' expert witnesses and decide what elements can be 
presented to the jury. During the trial, the independent expert can testify, 
answering questions from the judge and from the lawyers.

 The idea of court-appointed experts does not get a warm welcome from many 
lawyers. At the AAAS meeting, Thomas W. Henderson, a plaintiff's attorney from 
Pittsburgh, rose to say, "I want to weigh in on the side of extreme reservation 
regarding the appointment of experts by the court." Even independent experts 
have biases, he notes, and they have tremendous power over juries.

 A study by the Federal Judicial Center backs Henderson up. When Cecil and a 
colleague investigated a set of cases involving court-appointed experts, the 
verdicts matched the guidance offered by the expert 56 out of 58 times. In the 
other two cases, judges reached decisions based on legal grounds unrelated to 
the scientific and technical issues.

 Some lawyers view this as evidence that independent experts can exert undue 
influence, in essence replacing judge and jury in a trial. Cecil counters that 
court-appointed experts filled a void in these trials. "Experts are frequently 
appointed where the adversarial process has failed to provide information 
that's necessary for a reasoned and principled resolution of the dispute. In 
that case, when there's not adequate information for a thoughtful resolution of 
the issue, if a court appoints an expert, it's not surprising that the expert 
would, in fact, be influential in that decision."

 Cecil and other proponents of independent experts acknowledge that they need 
to be used only rarely, when it has grown clear that the traditional 
adversarial system is not working. "In my opinion," says Cecil, "appointment of 
an expert will always be an extraordinary event that will nonetheless be an 
important tool for resolving some of the most difficult issues of science that 
come before the courts."

 How courts screen scientific evidence

 Until recently, judges often used a seemingly simple test for determining 
whether or not to allow expert scientific testimony into a trial. According to 
this rule of thumb, known as the Frye test, the scientific techniques at issue 
had to be "generally accepted" as reliable by the scientific community.

 In 1993, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Frye test was not the correct 
standard. In the case of Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the 
Court held that judges must assess whether the reasoning or methodology 
underlying any proposed testimony is scientifically reliable and relevant.

 The general acceptance test is only one of several questions that could help 
in this evaluation, the Court said. The Daubert decision offered a partial 
checklist of other factors to consider: Whether a theory or technique can be, 
and has been, tested. The Court noted that the issue of testability relates to 
the most basic definition of science. Various philosophers have held that 
scientific explanations differ from other ideas principally because scientific 
ones can be tested, or falsified. Whether a theory or technique has been 
subject to peer review and publication. Whether there are standards or error 
rates that apply to a particular technique.

 The Daubert decision included potentially confusing language, stating that 
"the focus, of course, must be solely on principles and methodology, not on the 
conclusions that they generate." For some people, this meant that judges could 
not evaluate conclusions, only the information on which conclusions are based.

 Last year, in General Electric Co. v. Joiner, the Court addressed this issue 
by stating that "conclusions and methodology are not entirely distinct from one 
another." It went on to say that "a court may conclude that there is simply too 
great an analytical gap between the data and the opinion proffered."  

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 16, April 18, 1998, p. 249. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 References:  

 Sanders, J. 1998. Disorder in the court: Silicone breast implants and other 
scientific litigation. Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science. Philadelphia.


