Science News Online (3/7/98): Bone marrow cells can build new muscle by John 
Travis

 March  7, 1998 

 Bone marrow cells can build new muscle

by J. Travis

 Scientists may have found the source of Mighty Mouse's strength. They've 
discovered that mouse marrow, the soft tissue inside bone, harbors cells 
capable of forming new muscle. This finding suggests novel avenues to explore 
in treating muscular dystrophies and other muscle-wasting diseases.

 In the March 6 Science, Italian scientists describe the ability of marrow 
cells to journey to the site of a muscle injury, where they seem to help mend 
damaged tissue. "They are recruited from the marrow, travel through the blood, 
actively pass through the blood vessel barrier, and repair muscle," says study 
author Fulvio Mavilio of the H. San Raffaele-Telethon Institute for Gene 
Therapy in Milan.

 Bone marrow has long been known as a reservoir of hematopoietic stem cells, 
which develop into white and red blood cells. Indeed, that's why bone marrow 
transplants are used to reconstitute a person's immune system.

 In recent years, researchers have also gathered evidence that some marrow 
cells, grown in the laboratory under particular conditions, can form bone, 
cartilage, fat cells, and muscle, says Darwin J. Prockop of Allegheny 
University of the Health Sciences in Philadelphia.

 Yet there has been little proof that marrow cells actually pursue such career 
choices inside the body. Mavilio's evidence came serendipitously. In 
experiments unrelated to muscle research, a colleague injected bone marrow 
cells into muscle and noticed that they appeared to form new muscle.

 To examine this unexpected phenomenon further, the researchers used snake 
venom to destroy limb muscle. They then took bone marrow from mice engineered 
to include a gene that expresses a marker protein only in muscle cells. When 
they transplanted this marrow into the damaged muscles of the other mice, they 
found that some regenerated muscle tissue displayed the marker, indicating that 
the foreign marrow cells had developed into muscle.

 Mavilio and his colleagues also injected bone marrow into the bloodstream of 
mice with damaged muscles and later saw muscle cells with the marker protein at 
the site of regeneration.

 The damaged muscle tissue must somehow lay down a chemical trail that attracts 
the marrow-derived muscle precursors, suggests Mavilio. "We don't know what 
those signals are. We have no idea at all," he says.

 Noting that most new muscle develops from so-called satellite muscle cells 
near the injured tissue and thus does not carry the marker, Mavilio cautions 
that his group has not yet proved that the marrow cells contribute 
significantly to regeneration.

 Indeed, Eric P. Hoffman of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
told Science News that several years ago, he and his colleagues found that bone 
marrow transplants had no therapeutic effect on a mouse version of a muscular 
dystrophy.

 Nevertheless, Hoffman says this latest research should renew interest in 
whether marrow-derived cells are more effective in treating muscular diseases 
than transplants of myoblasts, or mature muscle cells. That controversial 
technique has been abandoned by most investigators.

"If we could identify the muscle stem cells -- a true population that lives, 
proliferates, and regenerates skeletal muscle -- that would be critical for 
developing transplants as a true form of therapy," says Hoffman. He notes that 
few of the transplanted myoblasts have survived for long in patients.

 Furthermore, while physicians inject myoblasts into muscles, they might be 
able to inject the marrow-derived muscle precursors into the bloodstream, which 
would carry them to the appropriate muscles, speculates Mavilio.

 He warns that scientists have yet to show that marrow-derived muscle 
precursors exist in people. "All of this could still be a biological 
curiosity," he says. 


