Science News Online (4/25/98): Scooping Up a Chunk of Mars Fresh samples from 
the Red Planet By RON COWEN

 April 25, 1998 

 Scooping Up a Chunk of Mars Fresh samples from the Red Planet

 By RON COWEN

 Except for a gentle wind that whined softly through the empty houses, it was 
deathly silent. Bodies lay everywhere, heaped and flung across the ground in 
frozen surprise.

 In Michael Crichton's 1969 novel The Andromeda Strain, an unmanned government 
spacecraft returns to Earth, contaminated by an alien organism that destroys an 
entire town.

 NASA is striving to ensure that fact won't collide with fiction a decade from 
now, when a small capsule containing a canister the size of a soda can, packed 
with soil and rock fragments from Mars, is scheduled to parachute onto Earth.

 Even if the container carries living material from the Red Planet -- a 
possibility scientists consider remote -- the organisms aren't likely to 
survive in Earth's environment. Nonetheless, researchers plan to handle the 
canister as gingerly as if it contained the Ebola virus.

"You must assume that what you bring back is hazardous until proven otherwise," 
says planetary ecologist Margaret S. Race of the Search for Extraterrestrial 
Intelligence (SETI) Institute in Mountain View, Calif.

 Race and other scientists outlined plans for gathering and retrieving Martian 
samples at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science in Philadelphia in February and at a conference on astrobiology at 
George Washington University in Washington, D.C., in March.

 Contaminating Earth with critters from Mars is one concern, but scientists 
also want to make sure that any samples scooped up from the Red Planet are 
pristine, unsullied by stray organisms from our own planet. Dead or alive, 
terrestrial life could hitch a round-trip ride on the two robotic missions, now 
scheduled for launch in 2001 and 2003, that will be the first to gather and 
cache material from Mars. If organic compounds from Earth found their way into 
a storage canister, they could confound analysis of the samples.

"You have to be extremely careful not to carry along your own evidence of 
life," says Doug Blanchard of NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston. In other 
words, you don't want to send a craft to Mars, only to discover life from New 
Jersey.

 Arguments over the origins of amino acids and other organic compounds in the 
famous Martian meteorite ALH84001 highlight the problems faced in analyzing 
fresh samples from Mars, notes Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey in 
Menlo Park, Calif. "So much of the debate about ALH84001 has been about what's 
terrestrial -- what has come from the ice in Antarctica -- and what is 
intrinsically Martian," says Carr (SN: 1/24/98, p. 54). Planetary scientists 
want to avoid a repeat of these arguments when spacecraft bring back samples 
from Mars.

 To minimize such debate, engineers and scientists are contemplating several 
ways of sterilizing the rovers on the 2001 and 2003 missions. Crude, but highly 
effective methods of sterilization were once applied to entire craft traveling 
to Mars. Before their launch in 1976, every component of the twin Viking 
missions was heated to temperatures above the boiling point of water. Then each 
craft was baked in a giant oven for 36 hours. "The sensitive electronic 
equipment we have now could never withstand that kind of heat sterilization," 
says Race.

 Instead, each rover may be suffused with hydrogen peroxide gas before launch. 
A powerful oxidizer, the gas kills living material clinging to the vehicle and 
degrades biological molecules and membranes. After the peroxide bath, the rover 
might be sheathed in a protective skin, or bioshield, that it would shed only 
after landing on the Red Planet.

 To ensure that the craft is sterile, biologists will take swabs of different 
parts of the craft and let any cells propagate into colonies in a laboratory. 
In addition, they will search for signs of individual microbes or fragments of 
microbes that might not grow in culture, says microbiologist Roger Kern of 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. He notes that such testing 
will need to take place before the launch of the Mars-bound mission, as well as 
after its return.

 To gain a better assessment of earthly contamination, scientists may install 
small slides, known as witness plates, on various components of the craft, 
including the canister that will hold the Martian samples. After the craft 
returns to Earth, scientists will compare the material accumulated on those 
plates with the composition of the samples, as well as any matter deposited on 
a set of archived plates that never left Earth.

"This should give plenty of control to determine whether biological entities 
are the real Martian enchilada or merely contaminants that originated on 
Earth," says Race.

 By the time the Mars-bound slides return to Earth, instruments for detecting 
compounds will undoubtedly be more sensitive, and standards for contamination 
may be more stringent.

"The techniques for detecting proteins and little pieces of DNA and so on are 
just unbelievable compared to what they were 5 years ago," says Carr. "Surely 
there is going to be a similar evolution over the next decade or so. This 
presents a challenge for us: The sample won't be back on Earth until 2008, so 
how do we make a set of requirements in the face of this rapidly changing 
capability?"

 The first expedition takes off in 2001. It will feature a vehicle five times 
the size of tiny Sojourner, the six-wheeled rover on Mars Pathfinder that 
became a staple on the nightly news last July. Roaming a few tens of kilometers 
from its mother ship -- Sojourner traveled only a few meters -- the rover will 
use a pencil-thin drill to dig a centimeter or so into a selection of boulders 
lying on the Martian surface.

 After analyzing the composition of each sample, the rover will transfer the 
nugget to a tiny treasure chest -- a box with enough cubbyholes to hold 91 
samples of rock and 13 of soil, amounting to about half a kilogram of material. 
Two years later, according to current plans, the 2003 rover will fill a similar 
treasure chest on another part of the Red Planet.

 In 2007, another lander and rover will arrive to pick up the booty. In a set 
of carefully choreographed moves, the new rover will retrieve one of the two 
boxes -- from whichever site seems have a more intriguing set of samples -- and 
deposit it in the lander. In the current strategy, the lander will blast off 
from the planet but will not return to Earth. To break the chain of possible 
contamination, the lander will rendezvous with a waiting craft, in orbit about 
Mars, that had never touched the surface. The lander will hand over its 
precious cargo, and the orbiting craft will begin its journey back to Earth.

 While the samples are in transit, scientists hope to maintain them at chilly 
temperatures and low pressures similar to those on Mars. The canister will also 
be carefully monitored: A drop in pressure inside the container may indicate 
that Martian material is leaking out. Under such circumstances, ground 
controllers will redirect the craft so that it whizzes past Earth instead of 
landing.

 If monitoring reveals no problems, however, the canister will break loose from 
its return vehicle as it nears Earth and parachute onto solid ground. A team of 
scientists -- it's not yet known whether the initial handlers will be from 
NASA, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the military, or some 
other group -- will transport the canister to a designated research facility.

 In a report issued last year, the National Research Council recommended that 
the facility be up and running for several years before the Martian cargo 
arrives. "It's not just a matter of it being a check-out stand at the 
supermarket," says John D. Rummel, planetary protection officer for NASA. "We 
need to be ready to deal with whatever cards we're dealt."

 Because the samples will be tiny, they may be best analyzed inside a small, 
closed compartment known as a biosafety cabinet, or glove box, says Race. 
Researchers manipulate material by inserting their hands into gloves that are 
sealed tightly to the compartment.

"The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a great deal of experience 
in dealing with known pathogens," says Kern. "We just have to make sure that 
NASA follows those procedures and has experience in that."

"There's nothing about what we know on Mars so far that would lead us to 
believe that we're going to find anything weird," says Race. "We are not 
finding anything physical or chemical that is different than on Earth."

 She adds, however, that the search for life in the Martian samples won't be 
restricted to seeking familiar molecules like DNA. On Earth, she notes, living 
materials "are little bags of chemical reactions that require a vessel" such as 
a membrane or a cell wall. Finding some similar sort of structure would be one 
indicator of life in the Martian samples.

"They'll slice and dice and chop it up and look at it in all different ways," 
says Race. Even if they find nothing, they still plan to see if the Martian 
material affects cells growing in the laboratory.

"We had better go the most cautious route, even though there's not a lot of 
people around who think we'll find little green men inside when we open the 
canister."

"There's always the potential that you'll find there's life on Mars but that 
it's so wimpy that it gets eaten by anything that runs into it," says Rummel. 
It would be difficult to detect organisms that are destroyed by common microbes 
or chemicals native to Earth.

 Visions of some malevolent alien organism, like the rubber-eating microbe in 
The Andromeda Strain, are "not something I'm going to be losing any sleep 
over," says Kern.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 17, April 25, 1998, p. 265. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


