Science News Online (4/18/98): Internet access: A black-and-white issue by J. 
Raloff

 April 11, 1998 

 Internet access: A black-and-white issue

by J. Raloff 

 One commonly cited estimate holds that at some point in their lives, roughly 1 
million African Americans have logged onto the Internet. A new 
study suggests that the actual number is five times that -- with more than 1 
million having used the World Wide Web in the previous week.

 Nevertheless, this is only a small fraction of the African Americans who would 
like Internet access and could benefit from it, say Donna L. 
Hoffman and Thomas P. Novak, marketing analysts at Vanderbilt University in 
Nashville. In the April 17 Science, they note "a persistent racial 
divide on the Internet" and observe that unless this unequal access to the 
Information Revolution is redressed, it may limit the workforce 
available for jobs requiring computer literacy and exacerbate racial 
differences in income.

 Hoffman and Novak analyzed data from a recent survey of Internet use among 
nearly 6,000 U.S. respondents. Not surprisingly, as education 
climbs, so does workplace access to the Internet -- by blacks and whites. 
However, regardless of education, whites were significantly more 
likely to own a computer and to have used the Web recently than were blacks.

 The investigators also found that as income rises, so does computer ownership, 
though not equally. For households earning less than $40,000, 
whites were twice as likely to have a computer. Above $40,000, African American 
households were slightly more likely to have a computer at 
home -- and at work.

 The latter "suggests a very powerful bias," Hoffman contends. "To achieve 
parity [in home access to the Internet], African Americans have to 
be much better educated, wealthy, and work in computer-related professions" -- 
a very narrow slice of society. Among those who are not online, 
more blacks than whites said they desired Web access.

"The most shocking finding," Hoffman argues, "is one not explained by income or 
education." High school and college students were the group 
most likely to have used the Web, and black and white students with computers 
at home had logged onto the Internet about equally in the last 6 
months (64 versus 67 percent, respectively). In homes without computers, 
however, black students were only half as likely as white students to 
have used the Internet (16 versus 38 percent), even if their schools have 
computers.

 This means that "white students are finding [Web] access that blacks are not 
enjoying," she says. So "if we have limited resources, we need 
to first be sure students have [Internet access] at home," she maintains -- 
before society worries about getting the public schools wired.

"I think the Internet is really the wave of the future, and all homes should be 
so equipped," especially if they have children in third grade 
or above, says Francis I. Molina of Project 2061, an educational program run by 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 
Washington, D.C.

"Personally, I agree with that," says Gerald Wheeler, president of the National 
Science Teachers Association in Arlington, Va. "But that's not 
the only solution," he says. Such home access "needs to be reinforced by 
teachers cognizant of how to use this technology."   

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 16, April 18, 1998, p. 248. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

  

 


