Science News Online (4/11/98): Internal fight settles size of body parts by J. 
Travis

 April 11, 1998 

 Internal fight settles size of body parts

by J. Travis

 Most animals compete fiercely for limited resources, as the phrase "survival 
of the fittest" suggests. An unusual new study showing that the absence of one 
growing organ or tissue allows another to become larger now hints that a 
similar competition exists internally as animals develop.

 The experiments -- in which butterflies grew large front wings in response to 
missing hind wings and male beetles deprived of their characteristic horns 
developed big eyes -- address the intriguing biological question of what 
determines how large various body parts become.

 While much of the information seems hardwired into an animal's genes, the new 
results indicate that to some extent, growing body parts directly influence 
each other's ultimate size. "Each tissue or organ isn't just running on its own 
genetic program and knows how big it's supposed to get," says H. Fred Nijhout 
of Duke University in Durham, N.C.

 Nijhout and his colleague Douglas J. Emlen, now at the University of Montana 
in Missoula, describe their manipulation of insect development in the March 31 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

"This is an absolutely delightful paper and really original. My bet is it's 
going to be a landmark," says Sean Carroll of the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison.

"It's pretty amazing work," agrees Rudolf A. Raff of Indiana University in 
Bloomington. "Here's a situation in animals where you can see competition, 
developmentally, between parts of the body."

 More than a century ago, in his book The Origin of Species, Charles Darwin 
pondered whether developing body parts clash with each other for nutrients. 
Until now, investigators had never found a way to view such conflict.

 Nijhout and Emlen approached the issue by working with holometabolous insects. 
In their larval stage, these insects stop feeding just before most adult 
structures form, providing a closed system in which the developing organisms 
have a finite supply of nutrients and other resources.

 In the case of the butterfly Precis coenia, the scientists removed from 
caterpillars the tissues that give rise to the adult's hind wings. After the 
caterpillars metamorphosed, the butterflies had larger front wings than 
butterflies from untreated caterpillars. The size increase was greater if 
larval tissue for both hind wings, rather than just one, had been removed.

 As for the beetle Onthophagus taurus, whose males sport horns that they use to 
fight for females, the investigators treated larvae with a hormone known to 
stunt the horns' growth. The beetles that emerged from this treatment had short 
horns, or none at all, and had larger eyes than untreated beetles of the same 
size.

 To examine whether the hormone was causing the larger eyes, the scientists 
gave it to female beetles, who have no horns. Their eyes remained the normal 
size.

 In neither species did shrinking or removing a body part spur widespread 
changes in the developing insect, notes Nijhout; rather, it increased the size 
only of body parts growing near the treated area. He plans to study why the 
response is localized and whether it stems from reallocating scarce resources, 
such as nutrients, or from the removal of growth inhibitors that one developing 
body part directs at others.   

 References: 

 Nijhout, H.F., and D.J. Emlen. 1998. Competition among body parts in the 
development and evolution of insect morphology. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 95(March 31):3685.

 Sources: 

 Douglas J. Emlen Duke University Department of Zoology Durham, NC 27708-0325

 H. Fred Nijhout Duke University Department of Zoology Durham, NC 27708-0325

 copyright 1998
