Science News Online (4/18/98): When lava and ice clashed on Mount Rainier by R. 
Monastersky

 April 18, 1998 

 When lava and ice clashed on Mount Rainier

by R. Monastersky

 During prehistoric eruptions of Mount Rainier, rivers of lava poured out over 
the glacier-shrouded volcano, leading to epic battles of fire against ice. In 
most of those contests, the ice won, according to new geologic research on the 
mountain.

 Unable to burn its way through the thickest part of the glaciers, the lava was 
forced to skirt the edges of the ice fields, leaving behind unusual rock 
formations that have deceived geologists for decades, report David T. Lescinsky 
of Arizona State University in Tempe and Thomas W. Sisson of the U.S. 
Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif.

 The new understanding "very much changes how you think about the history of 
the volcano," says Sisson.

 Lescinsky and Sisson made their discovery by studying the Washington volcano's 
large lava flows, many of which sit on top of ridges separating major valleys. 
These formations have intrigued geologists because lava, like any other fluid, 
should flow through a valley rather than along the top of a ridge.

 When researchers first mapped Mount Rainier in the late 1950s, they tried to 
explain the unusual deposits by suggesting that the current topography 
represents the reverse of the former landscape. According to this theory, the 
molten rock originally flowed through low-lying valleys, shifting the rivers 
that had occupied them. Over time, the hardened lava resisted erosion, and the 
displaced rivers ate away at the softer rock on either side of the deposits. 
Eventually, the ancient lava flows ended up high on the ridge tops.

 Lescinsky and Sisson abandoned this explanation when recent dating of the lava 
flows revealed that they are much younger than previously supposed -- in some 
cases only 40,000 years old. Erosion could not have formed major valleys on 
either side of the lava deposits in so short a time, say the researchers in the 
April Geology.

 When they examined the deposits in detail, evidence of an icy past emerged. 
Along the sides of the flows, the lava has a glassy texture and breaks into 
telltale hexagonal columns -- twin indications that the flows cooled rapidly.

 Lescinsky and Sisson hypothesize that the lava erupted at a time when glaciers 
covered more of the mountain than they do now. As the lava crept down the 
slope, its front hardened where it hit thick, glacier-filled valleys, forcing 
the lava to flow along the line of least resistance, usually the ridges between 
the valleys. There, where the ice layer was thinnest, the lava cut steep-sided 
channels.

 As it flowed along the ridge top, the ice-cooled lava hardened in place. When 
the glaciers retreated, the lava deposits remained perched on top of the 
ridges, say Lescinsky and Sisson. They think the same process has occurred on 
many other glaciated volcanoes.

 Their explanation has won over Richard S. Fiske, one of the researchers who 
proposed the original river valley hypothesis almost 40 years ago. Fiske and 
his coworkers had assumed that the lava flows were extremely old, but modern 
dating techniques were not widely available then. "With these new ages, I don't 
see how our earlier interpretation can be sustained," says Fiske, a geologist 
with the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.

 The new hypothesis forces geologists to revise their ideas about past 
eruptions. "What it says to me is that a lot has happened on Mount Rainier just 
in the last 100,000 years rather than being stretched out over a long period of 
time," says Fiske.

 Geologists consider Mount Rainier one of the greatest volcanic hazards in the 
United States (SN: 5/28/94, p. 341). Water from its glaciers has seeped into 
the mountain and corroded much of the rock, making it prone to collapse. During 
large landslides, glacial ice and rock combine to form massive mudflows. Future 
slides could sweep over nearby towns. 

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 16, April 18, 1998, p. 246. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 References:  

 Lescinsky, D.T., and T.W. Sisson. 1998. Ridge-forming, ice-bounded lava flows 
at Mount Rainier, Washington. Geology 26(April):351.

 Further Readings:  

 Monastersky, R. 1994. Mount Rainier threatens with fire and ice. Science News 
145(May 28):341.

 Sources:  

 Richard S. Fiske Smithsonian Institution Mineral Science NHB 119 Washington, 
DC 20560

 Thomas W. Sisson U.S. Geological Survey Mailstop Code 910345 Middlefield Road 
Menlo Park, CA 94025

 copyright 1998
