Science News Online (4/4/98): Ecologists Go to Town Investigations in Baltimore 
and Phoenix forge a new ecology of cities by M. Jensen

 April 4, 1998 

 Ecologists Go to Town Investigations in Baltimore and Phoenix forge a new 
ecology of cities

 By MARI N. JENSEN

 It was a typical field trip. A group of ecologists inside a Chevy Suburban 
worked on a laptop computer and talked as they bounced along the gravel road 
that would end up 14 hours later at a small field station in northern Alaska. 
As they traveled, they discussed what areas to add to the Long-Term Ecological 
Research (LTER) network -- the exclusive list of sites selected for prolonged 
scrutiny by U.S. ecologists.

 The traditional choice would have been a virtually untarnished spot -- one 
that had thus far managed to escape much human interference.

"The draw for ecologists has been the natural environment," says James R. Gosz, 
an ecologist at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque who heads the 
committee overseeing the LTER network. But Gosz and the others riding through 
the Alaskan wilderness to the Toolik Lake LTER site 8 years ago recognized that 
people are part of the environment and that ecologists needed to start 
examining the landscape most influenced by people -- the city.

 Those conversations in the wilderness, Gosz says, ultimately resulted in the 
November 1997 addition of Baltimore, Md., and Phoenix, Ariz., sites to the LTER 
network.

 These choices mark a new direction in ecology. "Ecology is the science of the 
relationship among organisms and their environment. What could be more 
ecological than studying humans and their environment? For a large number of 
people in this world, that means humans in the context of cities," says James 
A. MacMahon, an ecologist at Utah State University in Logan and president of 
the Ecological Society of America.

 The new sites join a network of research areas designed to answer questions 
about ecological processes that occur over long periods. The National Science 
Foundation (NSF) began the LTER program in 1980 with six sites representing 
such ecosystems as lakes, forests, and prairies. Now, with the addition of 
Baltimore and Phoenix, the network has expanded to 20 sites.

 Part of every LTER site's research program is designed to answer five core 
questions, Gosz says. What controls the growth of plants? What causes plant and 
animal populations to vary over time? What happens to the organic matter that 
plants produce? How do inorganic nutrients move through soil and water? How do 
disturbances such as fires, drought, or timber cutting affect the biology of 
the system?

"Research at these long-term sites is challenging long-held perceptions about 
ecological systems," says ecologist Scott L. Collins, who oversees the LTER 
program for NSF. For example, he says, researchers at the Harvard Forest LTER 
station in Massachusetts have shown that dramatic disturbances, such as 
hurricanes, may have little long-term effect, whereas subtle, human-induced 
changes in the nitrogen cycle are altering the basic ecosystem processes in the 
forest.

 Unlike most ecological research projects, which are funded for only 3 years, 
LTER programs are initially funded for 5 or 6 years, at the end of which the 
funding is usually renewed. As a result, scientists now have more than 18 
years' worth of information on some of the oldest LTER sites. To kick off the 
Baltimore Urban LTER project and the Central Arizona-Phoenix Urban LTER 
project, NSF provided each with $875,000 for the first year and $700,000 for 
each of the succeeding 5 years.

"The long term really gives you a different way of thinking about your 
project," says Collins. "You can do more risky experiments."

 He adds, "Long-term research allows you to understand surprises. If you get a 
surprise year -- double the amount of rain, or half the amount of rain, or an 
outbreak of grasshoppers -- if you don't have a lot of time, you don't get to 
follow that very well."

 To organize their inquiries about cities, the investigators at both urban LTER 
sites plan to use a popular method for figuring out how ecosystems vary from 
place to place and over time.

 In the past, while studying an ecosystem such as a forest or field, ecologists 
drew a boundary around it and assumed the region inside was uniform, says 
Steward T.A. Pickett, project director for the Baltimore site and an ecologist 
at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies in Millbrook, N.Y. However, over the last 
two decades, he has promoted a different model.

 Ecosystems aren't really homogeneous, he says. When ecologists look at an 
ecosystem close up or over the long term, they find variation.

"It's like a quilt," he says.

 At every scale, from the hands-and-knees viewpoint of a small child to the 
continentwide view of a satellite image, the scientists see patches. They also 
see patches within patches.

 This patchiness "means something about how the system is built, how it works, 
how it changes through time," Pickett says. Different types of ecosystems are 
made up of different types of patches. A meadow may have a distinct set of 
plants that grows only in the lowest, wettest parts. In a forest, a patch may 
be a gap left by a fallen tree where light-loving plants can thrive. Ecologists 
use a computer model to explore how the different types of patches shift around 
in space and in time -- and why.

"Because we don't know ecologically how metropolitan areas function," says 
Pickett, "we need an organized approach that will let us take them apart and 
put them back together."

 However, ecologists are not used to studying the patches within patches that 
make up cities. "We don't have a theory that was built for cities," he says, 
"and we don't have the kinds of data sets that you have to have to understand 
cities." Therefore, Pickett has teamed up with 35 other researchers to 
understand the patches that make up the Baltimore city ecosystem. The team 
includes ecologists, sociologists, educators, geographers, and economists, many 
of whom have conducted research in the region for years. Recently, a similar 
group led by Charles L. Redman and Nancy B. Grimm of Arizona State University 
in Tempe have taken up the challenge in Phoenix.

 The interdisciplinary teams will collect information in a way that is new for 
both the ecologists and the social scientists. Imagine, Pickett suggests, the 
team going out to investigate an area where rows of new townhouses are marching 
up a hillside near Owings Mills, Md. Not long ago, the whole region was 
agricultural land. Today, the grassy remnants of pastures, still surround the 
relatively treeless development.

"Traditionally, the social scientists would go to the built part and ask what 
the people were doing, how they made their decisions, and the ecologists would 
go over to the green spots and count the bugs," he says. "Now, we have to ask 
how people's decisions influence the green spots, and how the green spots 
influence people's decisions."

 Once the researchers do that, he says, they will have defined a new kind of 
patch, one where the parking lot, buildings, and small green strips are all 
considered together. "Now," he says, "you can ask how that new patch functions, 
how sustainable its social processes are, and how it affects ecological 
processes [outside the patch]."

 Two neighborhoods might have the same area, equal amounts of lawn, and the 
same total number of trees and buildings yet function very differently 
ecologically, says Alan R. Berkowitz, a team member from the Institute for 
Ecosystem Studies. Those neighborhoods would represent two different patch 
types, he says, if one had houses clustered together near a small woodland park 
and the other had buildings and trees spread evenly over the landscape, with 
bits of lawn in between. "Somehow we want to come up with a way of defining 
those [patches] that embraces their difference," he says, "not just say they 
both have the same number of trees."

 In Baltimore, the first place the team will define new patches is the 
17,150-hectare watershed drained by a stream called Gwynns Falls. The watershed 
starts in the forested and agricultural areas near Reisterstown, Md., and runs 
southeast, ending in concrete-covered inner-city Baltimore. The researchers 
want to understand how the watershed's patchiness works ecologically as the 
landscape grades from farms and forests into suburban housing developments and 
terminates in the city.

 Pickett says that, unlike many metropolitan areas, Baltimore still has much of 
its native topography. The city government is beginning to organize its park 
management around watersheds, a natural landscape feature. That's unusual, he 
says, because most governments manage pieces of land defined by drawing some 
straight lines on a map, and "that doesn't have much to do with how nature 
moves things around."

 Ecologists, hydrologists, and other natural scientists often use watershed 
boundaries to delineate their research sites. Therefore, Pickett says, 
organizing the LTER site's initial research around a watershed provides a good 
conceptual tool for the research team and connects the researchers with 
citizens' groups and city managers and planners.

 Forging links with community members is a special aspect of the urban LTER 
projects. "Part of this LTER is to bring in the public to monitor and interpret 
the environment where they live," says social ecologist William R. Burch Jr., a 
team member from Yale University who has been working with citizens in 
Baltimore since 1989. He has run inner-city revitalization projects, such as 
offering science education and cleaning up vacant lots. "We can have training 
programs to help ordinary citizens map and monitor what's going on where their 
children play or in the air they breathe."

 One such effort will recruit kids to plot the location, identity, and size of 
trees onto maps of city neighborhoods. Those maps will help researchers 
interpret satellite images of the city. In return, research results from the 
LTER project will help Baltimore's Parks and People Foundation focus its 
efforts to protect the urban forest, says Jacqueline M. Carrera, an LTER team 
member and the foundation's director.

 Researchers at the Baltimore site plan to share both the research process and 
its results with the people of Baltimore. "It's not that we're studying people 
-- we are conducting research with people," says team member J. Morgan Grove of 
the U.S. Forest Service in Burlington, Vt.

 Some social science researchers question whether the urban LTER programs 
represent a true collaboration between social scientists and natural 
scientists, as program supporters have advertised.

"It has a hard-core ecology focus -- which is both a boon and a bane," says 
geographer B.L. Turner II of Clark University in Worcester, Mass. "Because the 
stimulus first came so much from the ecological community, it was not truly a 
50-50 split in defining what's important."

 Turner acknowledges that the social sciences do not have the spatial analysis 
models needed for such research projects. What's more, he says, urban LTER 
projects offer the potential for much greater collaboration between social 
scientists and natural scientists than most universities or institutions have 
ever provided.

 Redman says that forging a truly interdisciplinary perspective is a tremendous 
hurdle. "I think when we look back on it, in a real sense, that will be the 
hardest part . . . getting people to speak meaningfully to each other and 
consider each other's approaches."

 Cross-disciplinary collaboration is a necessary part of working on a frontier, 
says Grimm. "I'm really interested in whether it's possible to bring some of 
the social science models for how human decisions work and how humans drive 
land-use changes and integrate those [models] with our ecological 
understanding," she says. "I think that there will be new ecological theory. . 
. . I'm not sure how that will be done. It's really daunting, actually."

 Like Grimm, Pickett says he finds himself looking onto a new frontier. He 
feels a kinship with the zoologists and botanists of 100 years ago, who 
envisioned a novel way of looking at the natural world by integrating the 
studies of organisms and their environment. That approach would come to be 
known as ecology.

"They developed a new perspective," he says. "That's the kind of opportunity we 
have presented to us now. It's really hard to say exactly how it's going to 
look . . . to combine with the economists and social scientists and civil 
engineers and ask not just How does it affect the green spots? but How does the 
whole thing work?"

 References:  

 Information available at: .

 Information available at: 

 Information available at: .

 Further Readings: 

1991. How and why to curb urban sprawl. Science News 140(Nov. 16):316.

 Peterson, I. 1996. The shapes of cities. Science News 149(Jan. 6):8.

 Pickett, S.T.A., et al. 1997. Baltimore-Washington integrated regional 
framework and research: A test case for implementation of urban ecosystem 
concepts. Urban Ecosystems 1(October):183.

 Weiss, R. 1990. Eco-tutelage. Science News 138(Sept. 22):187.

 Sources: 

 Alan R. Berkowitz Institute for Ecosystem Studies Box AB Millbrook, NY 12545

 Jacqueline M. Carrera Foundation for Baltimore Recreation and Parks Parks and 
People1901 Eagle Drive Baltimore, MD 21227

 Scott L. Collins National Science Foundation Division of Environmental 
Biology4201 Wilson Boulevard, Room 635 Arlington, VA 22230

 James R. Gosz University of New Mexico Biology Department Albuquerque, NM 87131

 Nancy B. Grimm Arizona State University Department of Biology Tempe, AZ 
85287-1501

 J. Morgan Grove USDA Forest Service Northeastern forest Research Station705 
Spear Street Burlington, VT 05401

 James A. MacMahon Utah State University College of Science4400 University 
Boulevard Logan, UT 84322-4400

 Steward T.A. Pickett Institute for Ecosystem Studies Box AB Millbrook, NY 12545

 Charles Redman Arizona State University Center for Environmental Studies P.O. 
Box 873211 Tempe, AZ 85287-3211

 B.L. Turner, II Clark University Department of Geography Worchester, MA 01610

 copyright 1998
