Science News Online (4/4/98): Private Eyes Biometric identification is set to 
replace passwords and PINs by C. Wu

 April 4, 1998 

 Private Eyes Biometric identification is set to replace passwords and PINs

 By CORINNA WU

 In the 1983 James Bond movie Never Say Never Again, a villain gains access to 
the United States' nuclear arsenal by foiling a presumably fail-safe passkey 
system -- a scan of the president's right eye. This, of course, left the dapper 
British secret agent to set things right and save the world.

 Now, eye-scanning technology has moved beyond Hollywood. By next year, some 
automated teller machines (ATMs) may use scans of the human iris -- the ring of 
colored tissue surrounding the pupil -- as a way to verify bank customers' 
identities. One application of iris scanning debuted this year, when the 
security-conscious officials of the 1998 Winter Olympic Games in Nagano, Japan, 
required biathletes to go through such a system to check out their rifles.

 The iris can serve as a human bar code, its unique features captured and 
translated into a biological personal identification number (PIN). Iris 
scanning is just one technology in the burgeoning field known as biometrics. 
The word "biometrics" originally meant the statistical study of biological 
variation. However the term now also refers to technologies that analyze human 
traits for security purposes.

 Many groups are developing biometrics to replace or supplement PINs, 
passwords, and access cards. In this way, banks and other businesses hope to 
reduce theft, improve security, and make consumer transactions more convenient.

"In a couple of years, biometrics will be everywhere," predicts Raj Nanavati of 
the International Biometric Group, a consulting firm in New York City. Although 
researchers have explored these technologies for years, devices have only 
recently become cheap enough to be integrated into common products.

 Fingerprinting is the most widely known biometric, but other approaches, such 
as face recognition, hand geometry, voice printing, and signature verification, 
also have potential. Calculating the degree of security actually provided by 
these various biometrics is a difficult task, however, and researchers are 
still exploring this problem, even as actual devices are being rolled out into 
the marketplace.

 When credit and ATM cards are lost or stolen, an unauthorized user can often 
come up with the correct personal codes. Despite warnings, many people continue 
to choose easily guessed PINs and passwords: birthdays, phone numbers, and 
social security numbers. Recent cases of identity theft have heightened the 
need for methods to prove that someone is truly who he or she claims to be. 
Biometrics may solve this problem, since a fingerprint or an iris is undeniably 
connected to its owner. The system can then compare scans to records stored in 
a central or local database or even on a smart card (SN: 2/1/97, p. 78).

 Iris scanning is one of the most secure biometrics, simply because of the 
large number of independent features that can be coded. Consisting of fibrous 
and vascular tissue and pigment granules, the iris possesses about 266 
measurable features. "No other part of the body has this many [useful 
attributes]," says Leonard Flom, an ophthalmologist in Westport, Conn. 
Fingerprints run a distant second, with about 40 characteristics.

 In 1981, after reading many scientific reports describing the iris' great 
variation, Flom and San Francisco ophthalmologist Aran Safir proposed using the 
iris as the basis for a biometric. In 1987, they began collaborating with 
computer scientist John Daugman of Cambridge University in England to develop 
iris identification software. Their system separates a black-and-white image of 
the iris into a pattern and converts it into a mathematical code. The system 
then compares the code to a stored one and decides whether they match.

 The researchers eventually formed a company called IriScan in Mt. Laurel, 
N.J., which has licensed the technology to about 10 other groups, including the 
Japanese company that made the Olympic biathlon security system. Other 
companies want to develop iris scanning for automobile or Internet security, 
and even as a mass transit fare system. 

 Sensar in Moorestown, N.J., has incorporated iris scanning into ATMs. Eye 
scans ordinarily require a person to look directly into a camera and therefore 
can be intrusive. Sensar has combined the iris-scanning system with an advanced 
camera setup that can detect the customer's eye from 1 to 3 feet away. Sensar 
licensed the camera technology from Sarnoff Corp., in Princeton, N.J. which 
originally designed it for the military so that high-flying helicopters could 
take pictures of tanks on the ground.

 As a customer walks up to an ATM, a system of three cameras identifies his or 
her torso, head, and eyes, then zooms in on the iris, says Michael Negin, 
Sensar's chief technology officer and vice president. One of the cameras takes 
several pictures, which are then divided into a gridlike pattern and translated 
into a bar code. The entire process takes only a few seconds.

 Contact lenses don't affect the image, and the software corrects for 
reflections from eyeglasses, says Negin. However, "scratches [on the 
eyeglasses] do distort the image and reduce comparison values."

 The researchers also took advantage of another unique trait of the iris: the 
constant dilation and contraction that adjust the size of the pupil. 
"Initially, people discouraged us because the pupil moves all the time," says 
Flom. "How do you attack a moving target?" The system now detects that subtle 
movement, to ensure that a live human being and not just a picture of an iris 
is in front of the camera.

 Even identical twins don't have the same iris, though they may have the same 
face shape or fingerprint, says Negin. Proponents of other biometric 
technologies, such as face recognition, argue that this is a minor concern, 
since in the real world, most crimes aren't committed by an evil twin. Even in 
James Bond's universe, the impostor needed a surgical eye implant to bypass the 
system.

 Nearly 140 biometric identification products exist now, although "not all are 
key players," says David Harper of the International Computer Security 
Association (ICSA) in Carlisle, Pa. The proliferation of so many new and 
largely untested technologies begs for some systematic way of sorting out the 
claims. Researchers at the National Biometric Test Center at San Jose (Calif.) 
State University are working to do just that. "We're trying to establish a 
science to evaluate biometric devices and technologies," says director James 
Wayman.

 A good biometric has two basic characteristics: stability and distinctiveness. 
A stable biometric doesn't change over time. "Clearly, hair length would not be 
a good biometric identifier," says Wayman. A distinctive biometric is unique to 
an individual. Iris patterns fulfill these requirements, as do -- to varying 
degrees

 -- fingerprints, face shapes, hand geometries, voices, and signatures. Some 
biometrics, like fingerprints, "may be stable and distinctive but can be 
temporarily damaged," says Wayman.

 No biometric is perfect, says Nanavati, and the one chosen for a particular 
use depends on a variety of practical considerations. Nanavati, along with his 
brother and partner Samir, analyzes biometric technologies by their cost, 
intrusiveness, accuracy, and ease of use. The relative importance of these 
factors depends on the application. For ATMs, rapid identity checking is 
essential, but for employees at a nuclear facility, for example, a lengthier 
and more intrusive process would be acceptable, he says.

 Biometrics fall roughly into one of two categories: physiological and 
behavioral, says Wayman.

 Fingerprinting, used widely in forensics and in government databases, is the 
most well-known physiological biometric. Finger-scanning devices avoid the 
messy ink associated with fingerprinting by having users touch a glass plate or 
silicon chip, which records an image of the fingertip's ridges and valleys.

 Hand geometry devices take an image and measure the three-dimensional shape of 
the fingers and knuckles. "Your hand is a pretty big and stable object," says 
Wayman, although it doesn't definitively differentiate one person from another. 
"My estimate is that if you checked 50 to 100 people, you'd find someone with a 
similar hand geometry." For many purposes, such as controlling access to a 
building, that's good enough, he adds. Also, hand shape is less easily changed 
than fingerprint pattern.

 Face recognition is being tapped for applications such as controlling access 
to a personal computer. A digital camera can take a picture of the person 
sitting in front of the screen, and comparison software can make sure it 
matches the owner.

 Iris and retina scanning are the most intrusive and expensive technologies, 
yet the most accurate. People tend to feel wary about exposing their eyes to a 
camera, harmless as it may be. By eliminating the need for a person to stare 
into a lens, Negin says, Sensar's machines reduce that intrusiveness. Sensar is 
currently reengineering the devices to bring down their cost, he adds.

 Voice recognition technology is the obvious choice for phone-based systems. 
Experts in the field disagree over whether voice is a physiological or a 
behavioral biometric, says Wayman, but it does contain a behavioral component, 
since a person's voice changes with mood. Voice recognition is one of the 
cheapest technologies because it uses existing phone equipment, but it is less 
accurate than other methods.

 Dynamic signature verification, a behavioral biometric, assesses the style and 
speed with which a person signs his or her name. Signatures are already widely 
used to certify identity, which makes this one of the least intrusive 
biometrics; however, it is also one of the least accurate.

 The ICSA is trying to establish a simple method of certification for biometric 
technologies and has formally tested eight or nine products, says Harper. The 
group will release the results at the CardTech/ SecurTech Conference in 
Washington, D.C., later this month.

 Testing biometric technologies is complicated, says Wayman. "Data is very 
expensive [to acquire] because it involves human beings. We're trying to 
estimate errors at very low levels from very limited amounts of data." 
Moreover, he adds, "predicting from those error rates how an actual system will 
perform is not trivial."

 Take iris scanning, for example. IriScan claims, based on the number of 
possible iris patterns, that the probability of two irises producing the same 
code is vanishingly small. The company provided Wayman with test results 
showing no false matches in 5,000 tests. However, that doesn't mean the error 
rate is zero, he says, because "we don't have enough files yet."

 Wayman is working with statisticians from the University of California, 
Berkeley on this problem. "It's slow and painstaking," he says.

 Requiring an exact match, even if possible, might be counterproductive. Unlike 
a PIN or password, the performance of a biometric technology depends a lot on 
the person using it. Growing a beard or wearing a different type of makeup 
could trip up a face recognition system. Even pressing a finger down on a glass 
plate too hard could alter a fingerprint, causing the device to cry impostor.

"Some days, you're just not yourself," Wayman notes.

 To accommodate those off days, biometric systems can be made to be somewhat 
forgiving. They can be set to require that only a certain percentage of the 
pattern match.

 Biometrics also bring up legal and privacy issues that will have to be 
addressed as these technologies come into popular use. Consumers already 
concerned about widespread distribution of personal information are likely to 
be suspicious of data banks that record encoded details of their body parts.

 In a poll, the International Biometric Group asked about 100 people how they 
would react to a finger scan at a bank. About 60 percent of the people who only 
heard a description of the procedure reacted positively toward the idea, says 
Nanavati, but "once they tried it, favorability shot up to 90 percent. If it 
makes a transaction easier and cheaper, customers are more apt to use it."

 Much of the wariness may come from the strangeness of a new technology, 
Nanavati suspects. ATMs suffered from the same problem when they made their 
first appearance 2 decades ago. If biometrics do find their way into computers, 
automobiles, and cash machines, perhaps their familiarity will also breed 
content.

 Further Readings: 

 Peterson, I. 1997. . Science News 151(Feb. 1):78.

 copyright 1998
