Science News Online (4/25/98): Dust Disks Hint at Baby Solar System by R. Cowen

 April 25, 1998 

 Dust Disks Hint at Baby Solar System

by R. Cowen

 Radio and infrared images unveiled this week suggest that three nearby stars 
have recently spawned planets and may still be in the throes of forming 
complete planetary systems. These portraits, showing dust surrounding youthful 
stars from 10 million to about 350 million years old, may offer snapshots of 
what the Milky Way looked like shortly after the birth of the sun 4.5 billion 
years ago.

 Planets are thought to arise from a disk of gas, dust, and ice swirling around 
young stars. As material within the disk collides and sticks together, small 
bodies build up into bigger ones. Tiny grains of dust in the inner part of the 
disk may evolve into rocky planets like Earth, while agglomerations of gas and 
dust may create more massive bodies like Jupiter and Saturn. It is primarily 
these heavyweights that clear out the dust and leave a hole in the inner part 
of the disk, which begins to resemble a doughnut.

 Astronomers have glimpsed numerous newborn stars -- too young to have begun 
making planets -- swaddled in thick disks of dust. After more than a decade of 
searching, however, researchers had found only one example of a young star 
whose thinning, doughnut-shaped disk indicated it was well on its way to making 
planets. The disk around that star, Beta Pictoris, was first glimpsed in 1984 
(SN: 2/3/96, p. 77).

 Astronomers now report that they have detected thinning or doughnut-shaped 
disks around three additional stars.

 At a NASA press briefing, two teams of astronomers presented infrared images 
of a disk of glowing dust encircling the youthful star HR 4796A, which lies 
about 220 light-years from Earth. The inner part of the disk radiates 
considerably less heat than the outer part, indicating that it contains 
significantly less dust.

 One explanation is that one or more unseen planets have swept the region clear 
of debris, the researchers suggest. Although the star is only 10 million years 
old, theorists believe that Jupiter and Saturn had already formed by the time 
our sun was that age.

"This may be what our solar system looked like at the end of its main planetary 
formation phase," says Michael W. Werner of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 
Pasadena, Calif.

 He and his colleagues made their observations with a large, mid-infrared 
camera on Keck II, one of the twin 10-meter telescopes atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea. 
A separate team, which includes Ray Jayawardhana and Lee W. Hartmann of the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., used a 4-meter 
telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in La Serena, Chile.

 Like the disk surrounding Beta Pictoris, which is 30 million years old, the 
doughnut encircling the more youthful HR 4796A is seen edge-on. Its inner edge 
is roughly the same distance from HR 4796A as Pluto's average distance from the 
sun, and its outer edge extends at least three times that distance. As a tool 
for understanding the formation of the solar system, says Hartmann, "this 
pushes us a lot closer to the time when we think the planets first formed."

 Two other stars, still quite youthful but more than 10 times as old as HR 
4796A, also sport dusty disks, a third team of astronomers announced this week. 
Using the James Clerk Maxwell submillimeter radio telescope on Mauna Kea, 
researchers have found that two of the brightest stars in the sky, Fomalhaut 
and Vega, possess disks that may have begun to spawn planets. Wayne S. Holland 
of the Joint Astronomy Center in Hilo, Hawaii, Ben M. Zuckerman of the 
University of California, Los Angeles, and their colleagues report their 
findings in the April 23 Nature.

 Fomalhaut, about 200 million years old and 26 light-years from Earth, appears 
to be surrounded by a disk roughly centered on a cavity that may have been 
cleared by planets. The brightest emissions come from the parts of the disk 
located as far from Fomalhaut as a reservoir of comets beyond Pluto is from our 
sun.

 A radio image of Vega, estimated to be 350 million years old, has proved a 
puzzle, notes Zuckerman. The brightest emission comes from a single blob twice 
as far from Vega as Pluto's average distance from the sun. One possibility is 
that the blob represents dust orbiting a massive planet at that location. 
Alternatively, the blob might represent emissions from a distant galaxy located 
in the same region of the sky.

 To their surprise, the researchers also found a blob adjacent to Beta 
Pictoris. That blob may be related to a much fainter one on the opposite side 
of the disk. The two blobs could represent material blown out in opposite 
directions from the center of the disk.

 Taken together, the observations suggest that HR 4796A is twice as dusty as 
Beta Pictoris, which in turn has 100 to 1,000 times more dust than Vega or 
Fomalhaut. "This is a beautiful illustration of dustiness decreasing in time, 
and all these stages may have counterparts in the history of our solar system," 
says Pawel Artymowicz of Stockholm Observatory.   

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 17, April 25, 1998, p. 260. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 
