Science News Online (4/4/98): Colorful gene marks mosquito manipulation by J. 
Travis

 April 4, 1998 

 Colorful gene marks mosquito manipulation

by J. Travis

 Vampires may star in movies and television shows, but mosquitoes are the 
deadliest bloodsuckers around. While feeding, mosquitoes infect millions of 
people with the microorganisms that cause killer diseases such as dengue and 
yellow fevers and malaria.

 Eradicating these insects has proved impractical, and vaccines for the 
illnesses are unavailable, so some researchers are exploring another option: 
genetically engineering mosquitoes so they can no longer pass on the pathogens.

 Investigators have now taken a major step toward that goal by showing that 
they can add to one mosquito species a working gene that is inherited by future 
generations.

 The method used to transform the insects, developed in concert by research 
groups led by Anthony A. James of the University of California, Irvine and 
Frank H. Collins of Notre Dame University in South Bend, Ind., appears in the 
March 31 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 In these initial studies, the added gene merely provides a visible marker -- a 
change in eye color -- that registers the technique's success. The scientists 
envision eventually inserting genes that would make mosquitoes unable to 
transmit viruses or the parasite that causes malaria.

"This achievement opens a wide vista of possibilities of introducing and 
testing foreign DNA sequences in the mosquito germ line for both basic research 
and the development of a wide array of biological control methods," note 
Margaret G. Kidwell and Alice R. Wattam, both of the University of Arizona in 
Tucson, in an accompanying commentary.

 The investigators worked with Aedes aegypti, a species that spreads the 
viruses causing dengue and yellow fevers. A natural mutant strain, which has 
white eyes instead of dark purple ones, offered a clear test of their 
manipulations. If they could alter the mutant's eye color, say by inserting the 
fruit fly gene that gives those flies' eyes a reddish tint, the investigators 
would have visible proof of their ability to add genes.

 To deliver the genetic cargo, they turned to transposable elements, unusual 
DNA sequences that can cut themselves out of chromosomes and insert themselves 
elsewhere in DNA, even in a different chromosome. Collins' group spliced the 
gene for eye color into two different transposable elements, one from fruit 
flies and one from house flies, and James' team injected copies of this DNA 
construct into Aedes aegypti embryos.

 Several of the manipulated insects were born with a reddish eye color 
uncharacteristic of the species. Moreover, in some cases, this coloring has 
persisted for 10 generations, attesting to the added gene's stable integration 
into the mosquito genome.

 Other scientists have shown that they can infect mosquitoes with viruses 
engineered to carry genes that thwart human pathogens (SN: 5/11/96, p. 295). 
That protection isn't heritable, however, so investigators are planning to take 
such protective genes and use transposable elements to install them in the 
mosquito genome.

 By introducing resistant insects into nature, the scientists hope ultimately 
to spread the protective genes to most mosquitoes in the wild. To combat 
malaria, researchers must duplicate their genetic engineering feat in Anopheles 
gambiae, the mosquito primarily responsible for spreading that disease.   

 References:  

 Kidwell, M.G., and A.R. Wattam. 1998. An important step forward in the genetic 
manipulation of mosquito vectors of human disease. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 95(March 31):3349.


