Science News Online (5/16/98): Study tracks violence among mentally ill

 May 16, 1998

 Study tracks violence among mentally ill

by B. Bower

 According to national surveys, many people believe that individuals diagnosed 
with mental disorders are prone to violence. Now, the most comprehensive 
follow-up study to date of patients discharged from mental hospitals indicates 
that those who do not abuse alcohol or illicit drugs commit violent acts no 
more frequently than a random selection of their neighbors in urban communities.

 Discharged psychiatric patients and nonpatients who do exhibit signs of 
substance abuse have markedly higher rates of violence, reports a research team 
led by sociologist Henry J. Steadman of Policy Research Associates in Delmar, 
N.Y. Substance abuse was more widespread among the former patients, and in the 
first 10 weeks after discharge it showed a stronger link to violence in this 
group than in the neighborhood comparison group.

"Important distinctions can be made among discharged psychiatric patients in 
assessing which [of them] are at an increased risk of committing violent acts 
against others," Steadman says. "Whether patients are abusing alcohol or 
illegal drugs in the community turns out to be one of the key distinctions."

 Most violent acts carried out by former patients, as well as by their 
neighbors, were aimed at family members or friends and occurred at home.

"These findings clearly indicate that the public's fear of violence on the 
street by discharged psychiatric patients who are strangers to them is 
misdirected," contends study coauthor John Monahan, a psychologist at the 
University of Virginia in Charlottesville.

 The new report appears in the May Archives of General Psychiatry.

 Some earlier community studies, based solely on arrest records, found 
increased rates of violence among the mentally ill. However, researchers have 
noted that substance abuse often accompanies violent acts by individuals with 
or without psychiatric disorders.

 Steadman's team interviewed 951 people shortly after they had been admitted 
for brief stays in psychiatric facilities in Pittsburgh, Kansas City, and 
Worcester, Mass. Participants, who ranged in age from 18 to 40, included white, 
black, and Hispanic men and women.

 Their self-reports of violent behavior were gathered in interviews conducted 
every 10 weeks for the first year after their discharge. A family member or 
friend was also interviewed every 10 weeks about the former patient's behavior. 
Police and hospital records for each volunteer provided a third source of 
evidence.

 The comparison group, interviewed once about their violent behavior in the 
past 10 weeks, consisted of 519 people selected at random from the 
neighborhoods in which the Pittsburgh patients lived. Additional information 
came from interviews with family members or friends and from arrest records.

 Violent acts consisted of threats with weapons, physical assaults, and pushing 
or hitting that caused injuries.

 The proportion of patients who committed a violent act during the study year 
was 18 percent for those with a major mental disorder (such as schizophrenia or 
manic depression) who showed no signs of substance abuse, 31 percent for 
patients with both a major mental disorder and substance abuse, and 43 percent 
for patients with another mental condition (such as a personality disorder) and 
substance abuse.

 In Pittsburgh, non-substance-abusing patients and their community counterparts 
exhibited comparable violence rates.

 During the follow-up period, violence rates gradually fell among patients who 
abused drugs, the scientists note.

 These results "further challenge the dangerousness stereotype" attached to 
psychiatric patients, assert epidemiologists Bruce G. Link and Ann Stueve of 
Columbia University in an accompanying commentary.

 Community surveys directed by Link find a moderate association between 
violence and certain psychiatric symptoms-feelings of being controlled by 
external forces, having thoughts put into one's head, and being targeted for 
harm by others (SN: 1/7/95, p. 8).

 Steadman's group plans to examine the relationship of specific mental symptoms 
to violence. The researchers will also compare violence rates among male and 
female patients.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 20, May 16, 1998, p. 309. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 References:  

 Link, B.G., and A. Stueve. In press. New evidence on the violence risk posed 
by people with mental illness. Archives of General Psychiatry.

 Steadman, H.J., E.P. Mulvey, J. Monahan, et al. In press. Violence by people 
discharged from acute psychiatric inpatient facilities and by others in the 
same neighborhoods. Archives of General Psychiatry.

 Further Readings: 

 Bower, B. 1995. Law and disorders. Science News 147(Jan. 7):8.

 Sources:  

 Bruce G. Link Columbia University722 W. 168th Street New York, NY 10032

 John Monahan University of Virginia School of Law Charlottesville, VA 22906

 Henry J. Steadman Policy Research Associates Inc.262 Delaware Avenue Delmar, 
NY 12054

 Anne Stueve Columbia University722 W. 168th Street New York, NY 10032

copyright 1998
