Science News Online (5/23/98): Seizure prelude found by chaos calculation by P. 
Weiss

 May 23, 1998

 Seizure prelude found by chaos calculation

by P. Weiss

 Concertgoers take delight in hearing the cacophony of tuning transform into 
the harmony of a symphony. In the brain, however, the subtle shift from a 
disorderly chatter of neurons into a more synchronized pattern can be a step 
toward the uncontrolled electrical storm of a seizure.

 Epilepsy researchers have long suspected that too much synchrony among too 
many neurons may be dangerous. Now, a German research team has demonstrated 
that a "loss of complexity" due to coordinated nerve firing is detectable in 
brain waves an average of 11 minutes before the onset of a seizure.

 In reaching this finding, University of Bonn researchers Klaus Lehnertz and 
Christian E. Elger made innovative use of a mathematical property from chaos 
theory, known as dimension, that many scientists had deemed useless for highly 
complicated biological systems such as the brain.

 The finding opens a possible way to preempt seizures, the researchers state in 
a report slated to appear in the June 1 Physical Review Letters.

 They are already testing whether patients whose seizures originate in the 
hippocampus, a region associated with memory and learning, can avoid the 
paroxysm by means of mere remembrances or learning tasks, Lehnertz says. The 
team also expects to develop in the next 3 to 4 years an implantable monitor 
capable of providing a warning or automatically delivering drugs or electrical 
stimulation.

"It's a good, solid piece of work," says Steven Schiff, a neurosurgeon and 
epilepsy researcher at Children's Research Institute in Washington, D.C. "In 
the future, if we're going to develop technologies to have electrical control 
of seizures, we'll need techniques like this."

 On the other hand, he says, many hurdles lie in the path of stopping seizures 
electrically, not the least of which is safely putting electrodes on or in the 
region where seizures originate, called the focus.

 Lehnertz and Elger analyzed electroencephalograms, or EEGs, from 16 awake 
patients whose epilepsy could not be controlled with drugs. One set of 
measurements covered periods just before seizures, and the other looked at 
periods at least 24 hours before or after seizures.

 Using an array of 30 parallel-linked personal computers to calculate dimension 
throughout each of their 68 observation periods, Lehnertz and Elger found that 
its numerical value tended to take markedly deep, long dips just before a 
seizure. Also, this pattern was more pronounced in tissues near the focus.

 By using dimension to assess EEGs, the researchers have revived a practice -- 
using chaos theory to study the brain -- that had lost credence with many 
researchers.

"My eyes glazed over," says Daniel T. Kaplan, a specialist in nonlinear 
analysis at Macalester College in Saint Paul, Minn., when he first heard of the 
EEG analysis. In this case, though, "it really seems to work."

 The epilepsy researchers took pains to avoid the pitfalls of earlier research 
by making no claim that their dimension data represent some functional 
characteristic of the brain's wiring.

"We don't say the brain is linear or nonlinear or chaotic or whatever. We just 
compare different states and nothing else," Lehnertz says.   

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 20, May 23, 1998, p. 326. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


