Science News Online (5/23/98): Monkeys provide models of child abuse by B. Bower

 May 23, 1998

 Monkeys provide models of child abuse

by B. Bower

 Some parents neglect or physically harm their young. Their abuse of helpless 
offspring mirrors the practices of other adults in their families, reflects 
hostile or emotionally ambivalent parenting styles, and intensifies in response 
to various types of social stress.

 Such parents are more than dangerous -- they're monkeys. Evidence of links 
between maltreatment of their young among monkeys and people suggests that 
nonhuman primates hold great promise as models for investigating this poorly 
understood behavior, say two psychologists who study monkey families. Their 
review of research in this area appears in the May Psychological Bulletin.

"Promising animal models of [child maltreatment] are already available, and new 
ones can and must be developed," hold Dario Maestripieri of Yerkes Regional 
Primate Research Center in Lawrenceville, Ga., and Kelly A. Carroll of Berry 
College in Rome, Ga.

 Records extending over 35 years at Yerkes indicate that, in both pigtail 
macaques and sooty mangabeys, 5 percent of infants are abandoned by their 
mothers and another 5 percent to 10 percent suffer severe physical abuse from 
their mothers, the scientists report. These conservative estimates roughly 
match neglect and abuse rates in human populations, they say.

 In group-living monkeys such as macaques and mangabeys, neglect and abuse 
rarely occur together and may represent separate phenomena, Maestripieri and 
Carroll argue. Neglect typically takes place among young, inexperienced mothers 
that abandon only one child, usually the first-born, as an infant. In contrast, 
abusive mothers span a wide age range and frequently harm successive offspring. 
Abusive monkey mothers, which also tend to exhibit overprotectiveness and 
rejection, invest considerable time and energy in their infants. This parenting 
pattern often runs in families, report Maestripieri and Carroll.

 Social stress, such as experiencing low status, clearly evokes infant abuse in 
pigtail macaques, they add. This species, known for its sensitivity to 
environmental changes, may provide a good model for investigating the effects 
of social stress on abusive human parents, the researchers propose.

 Monkeys might help illuminate human child neglect, but the diverse forms and 
causes of child abuse in human societies probably do not have counterparts in 
nonhuman primates, argues primatologist William A. Mason of the University of 
California, Davis in an accompanying comment.   

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 20, May 23, 1998, p. 324. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service. 


