Science News Online (5/30/98): Novel bacteria have a taste for aluminum

 May 30, 1998 

 Novel bacteria have a taste for aluminum

by J. Travis

 Although aluminum is the most abundant metal in Earth's crust, no living 
organism has been known to utilize it. In fact, this ubiquitous element is 
often considered toxic: Aluminum-contaminated soil can dramatically reduce 
yields of many crops, for example.

 Now, as a result of a chance encounter on a hike in Yellowstone National Park, 
a research group believes it has found a bacterium that requires aluminum to 
thrive. 

 Some scientists are less convinced, drawing caution from a history of 
unconfirmed claims of a biological role for the metal. "Skepticism is the best 
place to start," says microbiologist Simon D. Silver of the University of 
Illinois at Chicago. "Anyone with sense or experience, or both, will think this 
is exceedingly unlikely to lead to a biology of aluminum."

 The bacterium stirring this debate came to light when Judy E. Brown of the 
University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute in Baltimore was hiking near a 
geyser. She noticed bright flecks in water running over a greenish microbial 
mat and later identified them as the mineral aluminum silicate.

 Brown collected a sample from the mat and, working with her Maryland 
colleagues, eventually isolated a bacterium whose growth seems to depend upon 
having access to sufficient aluminum. Like many bacteria found in or near 
Yellowstone's geysers, this one is a thermophile, which lives and prospers at 
high temperatures. In fact, the microbe grows fastest at 70@ Celsius, Brown and 
her coworkers reported last week at a meeting of the American Society for 
Microbiology in Atlanta.

 Curiously, the bacterium seems to need more aluminum when grown at higher 
temperatures, notes Brown's colleague Frank T. Robb.

 The bacterium's apparent demand for aluminum has its limits, however. If 
exposed to high concentrations of the metal, the microorganism will not grow.

 The scientists have noticed dense inclusions inside the bacteria and are 
investigating whether they contain aluminum. Meanwhile, the role of the 
aluminum in the microbe remains mysterious. One possibility, says Robb, is that 
the metal is incorporated into enzymes used by the bacterium, a function 
performed by other metals, such as magnesium. If the bacterium instead relies 
on aluminum as a source of energy, it might someday be used to clean up soil 
contaminated by the metal, he further speculates.

 Silver doubts that the bacterium studied by Robb and his colleagues employs 
aluminum directly. He suggests that the metal may alter the biochemistry or 
environment of the microbes in a way that affects growth. Aluminum "could be 
freeing up something that is a nutrient," he says.

 Still, not all microbiologists are so willing to dismiss the idea of 
aluminum-dependent bacteria. "The finding would be, in principle, quite 
interesting for basic biology. It would bring to life, literally, a previously 
almost ignored element," says Carlos Cervantes of the University of Michoacana 
in Mexico.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 22, May 30, 1998, p. 341. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 
