The Fat Fracas Researchers weigh in on body size By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 May 2, 1998 

 The Fat Fracas Researchers weigh in on body size

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 When the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine published an editorial on 
body weight and health on Jan. 1, the public and press seemed 
ready to embrace its message: "Losing weight -- an ill-fated New Year's 
resolution."

"Given the enormous social pressure to lose weight," the editorial read, "one 
might suppose there is clear and overwhelming evidence of the 
risks of obesity and the benefits of weight loss. Unfortunately, the data 
linking overweight and death, as well as the data showing the 
beneficial effects of weight loss, are limited, fragmentary, and often 
ambiguous."

 Press reports followed the editorial's lead, giving the impression that being 
too fat doesn't really matter much.

 The editorial ignited a firestorm of debate among public health authorities. 
In a letter to the editors of the journal, former U.S. Surgeon 
General C. Everett Koop called the message "a disappointing one that 
trivializes the second leading cause of preventable death in the United 
States."

 Even the authors of the research report that triggered the editorial are at 
odds with its message. "We showed that body weight does affect 
survival up to age 75," June Stevens of the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill told Science News. Stevens says the data indicate that 
obesity is a moderate risk factor, one that may lead to an untimely death.

"Thirty percent of Americans are overweight, so the effect on the public health 
is huge, absolutely huge," Stevens says.

 Who's right? Although some questions about body weight and health have yet to 
be answered, most experts agree that the insidious process of 
gaining a few pounds each year can add up to a health risk that includes 
diabetes and heart disease.

 Before delving into the imbroglio over obesity, one should consider the 
research report itself, which also appeared in the Jan. 1 New England 
Journal of Medicine (NEJM).

 Stevens, Michael J. Thun of the American Cancer Society in Atlanta, and their 
colleagues studied more than 62,000 men and 262,000 women who 
had participated in a study on cancer prevention. The volunteers had never 
smoked cigarettes and had no history of heart disease or cancer 
when they entered the study in 1959 or 1960. All of them completed a 
questionnaire that asked their weight and height. The researchers then 
calculated each person's body mass index by dividing weight in kilograms by 
height in meters squared. Researchers believe this index is a 
better predictor of health risks than body weight alone.

 For 30 years, the researchers kept track of volunteers who died and noted the 
causes of death. They sought to answer a simple question. Were 
the overweight people at risk of dying earlier than the others in the study? 
The researchers found that until age 75, a higher body mass index 
was associated with a greater risk of premature death from all causes, 
including heart disease.

 Although this observation supports the majority view, the researchers also 
calculated the relative risk of increased body weight at different 
ages -- a move that triggered the controversy. Relative risk is a statistical 
method that compares a particular risk factor to other causes of 
death.

 The researchers found that the relative risk associated with obesity declined 
with age in people between 30 and 74. "For both death from all 
causes and death from cardiovascular disease, the increase in risk associated 
with a higher body mass index tended to be greater among younger 
subjects," the researchers reported.

 Numerous age-related disorders can increase an older person's risk of death; 
such conditions usually prove more important in causing death 
than obesity does. Younger people have fewer disorders, so the relative risk of 
obesity is higher. "The association is highly age-dependent," 
Jerome P. Kassirer and Marcia Angell, the editors of NEJM, wrote about the work 
of Stevens' team. "It declines steadily with age until about 
74 years."

 Relative risk is important for epidemiologists trying to gauge the importance 
of various diseases and conditions, but is it the best measure 
of a common public health risk? Probably not, Thun says.

 Absolute risk, the actual number of deaths linked to obesity, is probably a 
more telling figure. The absolute risk associated with obesity 
goes up after age 30.

 Simply put, carrying too much weight becomes more hazardous as a person ages. 
"Obesity is associated with early mortality," Thun says, "and 
in absolute terms that continues throughout life [until age 75]."

 The debate over relative versus absolute risk may seem arcane to many people 
who find that no matter what they do, the scale keeps inching 
up. The question for many Americans is, How bad is it to gain weight year after 
year?

 To gain perspective on that question, one can consider the weight guidelines 
provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. In 1990, for the 
first time, those guidelines allowed for an expanding waistline as a person 
ages. One could almost hear the collective sigh of relief -- but 
the reprieve was temporary.

 JoAnn E. Manson, Charles H. Hennekens, both of Harvard Medical School in 
Boston, and other researchers published a report in the Sept. 14, 
1995 NEJM showing that women who had gained 22 pounds or more since age 18 ran 
an increased risk of dying. Not surprisingly, U.S. weight 
guidelines in 1995 went back to a single weight for each height and sex 
category.

 Although the 1998 NEJM report has been used to support the position that it's 
not so bad to gain weight as you get older, Stevens says the 
study shows that the optimal body mass index ranges from 19 to 25, a range that 
does not change as one ages.

 What happens to people who dip below the optimal range? Some researchers have 
noticed that the risk of mortality goes up for very thin 
people, but critics contend that the risk of death attributed to being skinny 
may actually be caused by smoking or cancer.

 The 1998 study didn't have enough participants in the very lean category to 
offer any advice on the health risks or benefits to people with a 
body mass index below 19, Thun says.

 Should people who find themselves above the optimal index go on a diet? The 
study didn't address the question of whether weight loss reduces 
risk, but the editorial did. 

 The cure for obesity may be worse than the condition itself, the editors note. 
"Countless numbers of our daughters and increasingly many of 
our sons are suffering immeasurable torment in fruitless weight-loss schemes 
and scams, and some are losing their lives."

 There's no question that certain weight-loss attempts can be detrimental. 
Olestra, the fake fat now appearing in some snack food products, 
has been shown to deplete the body's supply of healthful nutrients (SN: 2/3/96, 
p. 68). Last year, the diet drug known as fen-phen was linked 
to a serious heart valve disease (SN: 10/18/97, p. 252). In addition, the 
editorial points out that the desire to be as thin as a fashion 
model has triggered an epidemic of life-threatening eating disorders.

"Doctors should be cautious about exhorting patients to lose weight, especially 
when they are only mildly obese," say Kassirer and Angell.

 The researchers agree with the concern about some weight-loss schemes, but 
they argue that the editorial made light of tried-and-true methods 
of losing or maintaining weight (see sidebar).

"I was very surprised," Stevens says about the tone of the editorial. "There 
was a bottom-line message to physicians that said, Don't make 
body weight a priority in your practice." She adds, "I think that's too bad, 
especially since the prevalence of obesity is skyrocketing in 
this country."

 The editorial unfairly presented a "fatalistic view of dieting and weight 
loss," says Tim Byers, an obesity researcher at the University of 
Colorado School of Medicine in Denver. A letter submitted to NEJM by Koop and 
two prominent obesity researchers seconds that view. "The 
irresponsible use of editorial privilege to withdraw people's hope [of losing 
weight] is a disservice to clinical medicine and to the American 
public," it said.

 Readers of the journal will not see that letter. The editors say they won't 
publish it because it has already appeared in a newsletter put 
out by Shape Up America!, a nonprofit fitness group founded by Koop and based 
in Bethesda, Md.

 Koop, Byers, and others say that even a modest reduction in weight can lower 
blood pressure, reduce concentrations of fat in the bloodstream, 
and improve sugar metabolism. "There's a lot of benefit to just 5 or 10 pounds 
of weight loss," Byers says.

 Glenn A. Gaesser of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville is not 
convinced that those benefits come directly from weight loss. People 
who exercise regularly gain such benefits -- even if they don't take off 
pounds, he says.

"Health problems frequently blamed on excess body weight are more likely caused 
by an unhealthy lifestyle rather than obesity itself," he 
argues in a letter to the April 16 NEJM. "If so, then a singular focus on 
weight loss for medicinal reasons is entirely off target."

 The controversy over weight loss is likely to continue, even though experts 
agree that most people would benefit from a strategy of 
prevention when it comes to body weight. "We believe that [health care 
providers] should counsel all patients who are overweight (who have a 
body mass index of 25 or above) to avoid further weight gain," says a letter 
published in the April 16 NEJM by William H. Dietz and his 
colleagues at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. 
"Controlling our calories and figuring out how to build physical 
activity into our lives is a very important public health goal," Thun adds.

 Hennekens agrees with that assessment. "We've made remarkable gains in 
diagnosing and treating high blood pressure and high blood 
cholesterol. But we're faltering on the body weight issue."

 That misstep may prove a serious one. Although heart disease rates have come 
down in the last 25 years, Hennekens believes they will start to 
climb again because U.S. teenagers weigh more, smoke more, and exercise less 
than their parents did.

"I think obesity remains a major public health problem, probably second only to 
cigarettes as an avoidable cause of death," he says.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 18, May 2, 1998, p. 283. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 



