Science News Online (5/30/98): Wash-Resistant Bacteria Taint Foods

 May 30, 1998 

 Wash-Resistant Bacteria Taint Foods

by J. Raloff

 Foodborne microbes trigger some 81 million cases of disease in the United 
States each year, according to the General Accounting Office (GAO), an 
investigative arm of Congress. Moms-and the Food and Drug Administration-have 
long advocated washing fresh fruits and vegetables to evict any germs they 
harbor. However, it takes more than simple washing to eliminate all of the 
bacteria, new studies find. 

 Elizabeth Ehrenfeld of IDEXX Labs, a diagnostic testing service in Westbrook, 
Maine, examined 39 samples of fresh bean sprouts, all purchased from local 
grocers. On average, each gram of sprouts hosted more than 10 million coliform 
bacteria, she reported last week at an American Society for Microbiology 
meeting in Atlanta. Though not usually posing a disease risk themselves, these 
bacteria, also present in soil, point to the potential for coincident 
contamination of crops with pathogens that might be present in fresh manure or 
human feces. Both are common crop fertilizers throughout much of the world.

 Moreover, Ehrenfeld found that 10 samples of the fresh sprouts harbored E. 
coli--some with around 7,000 of the bacteria per gram. The presence of such 
fecal bacteria indicates that the samples were tainted by dirty hands during 
harvesting or distribution, she says.

"The surprise for me," she told Science News, "was that washing the sprouts did 
not drop the bacterial counts very much." After depositing up to 100 million E. 
coli or Salmonella on bacteriafree sprouts, she washed them three times in 
clean water. While this reduced the bacterial population, it still left up to 1 
million microbes per gram of food--many thousands of times the number needed to 
sicken someone with a weakened immune system.

 At the meeting, John Lopes of Microcide in Troy, Mich., reported finding an 
average of 63,000 Listeria and Aeromonas bacteria per gram of cauliflower from 
local groceries and 16 million per gram of radish. The bacteria detected do not 
cause human disease, but their presence shows that these foods can harbor live 
bacteria encountered in food handling-including deadly forms of Listeria.

 Contributing to the problem of tainted foods, an April 30 GAO report argues, 
is the increasing share of U.S. produce coming from countries without strict 
laws governing hygiene in food production and handling. Though federal law bans 
the importation of meat from nations without food safety systems equivalent to 
those in the United States, no similar prohibition exists for other foods.

 Lacking resources to inspect even 2 percent of nonmeat imports, FDA cannot be 
relied upon to keep pathogen-tainted products out of the U.S. food supply, the 
GAO report concludes.

 Taken together, these data are fueling the development of antimicrobial agents 
safe enough for kitchen use on foods.

 Susan S. Sumner of Virginia Polytechnic Institute in Blacksburg finds that 
washing tainted produce with water "is better than doing nothing--but not a 
whole lot better." Later this year, however, she and graduate student Jim 
Wright plan to report that they can infect apples with a deadly strain of E. 
coli at a concentration of 10,000 bacteria per gram, then eliminate them all by 
dipping the fruit in a nontoxic mix of vinegar and off-the-shelf hydrogen 
peroxide. This E. coli, known as O157:H7, has been implicated in the deaths of 
people who consumed tainted cider or hamburgers.

 This week, Ecolab of Saint Paul, Minn., announced it had received approval 
from the Environmental Protection Agency to market a patented version of the 
disinfectant combo to food distributors for treating fresh vegetables, 
including mushrooms, lettuce, onions, and bell peppers.

 Lopes says his company has EPA approval but is awaiting FDA approval of 
another chlorinefree, antibacterial product for kitchen use. "You just dissolve 
it in tap water, spray it on foods, and kill the germs," he says.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 22, May 30, 1998, p. 340. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 
