Science News Online (5/30/98): Stealth, Lies and Cowbirds

 May 30, 1998 

 Stealth, Lies, and Cowbirds

 One of the most despised birds in North America is puzzling researchers

 By Susan Milius

"People hate cowbirds, yet people love hawks," observes Stephen I. Rothstein of 
the University of California, Santa Barbara. "Hawks catch adult birds and rip 
them to pieces. Maybe people hate cowbirds because they're tricky."

 Cowbirds are the stealth bombers of the avian world, dark shapes that whip 
into another species' nest just before dawn, often while the owner is away. In 
less than a minute, the female cowbird lays an egg for the victims to tend and 
feed, commonly at the expense of the rightful nestlings' lives.

 Concern that this behavior, unsporting from the human point of view, threatens 
beloved species has lured scientists to cowbirds in the last decade. The birds 
have been implicated in the decline of five rare species now on the brink of 
extinction.

 In the course of checking the danger to other species, researchers are 
beginning to provide a more accurate picture of the cowbird itself. Studies are 
looking at its unexpectedly mainstream love life, its wiles in picking targets, 
its life as a commuter, and the evolutionary arms race it runs with victim 
species.

"Even people who really dislike cowbirds have said it's got to be the most, or 
certainly one of the most, interesting birds in North America," says Rothstein, 
whose articles crop up throughout the current flood of research on cowbirds.

 The temptation to park the kids in another nest, at least occasionally, may be 
widespread in the animal kingdom, but few creatures routinely do so. Some 
social insects parent by proxy, as does an African catfish. The female catfish 
releases her eggs when 1 of some 10 targeted species of cichlids is spawning. 
As the unwary cichlid mom gathers her own eggs into her mouth to brood, she 
scoops up catfish offspring too. The catfish develop faster, hatch earlier, and 
then eat their foster siblings.

 Some ornithologists have estimated that this practice, called brood 
parasitism, has evolved at least seven times in birds. Some parasites, like the 
common cuckoo, mimic the shading and speckling on the foster parents' eggs. 
Others, like the cowbird, get away with outrageous mismatches, leaving their 
cream eggs with black speckles even in nests of solid blue eggs.

 Parasitic nestlings range in behavior from piggish to truly murderous. Some of 
the cowbirds triumph over their nest mates by merely eating more than their 
share. Little cuckoos wriggle backwards against any not-yet-hatched eggs, 
eventually rolling all the nest's rightful inhabitants over the edge. Newly 
hatched honeyguides peck their nestling competition to death with heavy, hooked 
bills.

 Not all of the five cowbird species are total deadbeats as parents. Bay-winged 
cowbirds in South America sometimes take over a nest built by another bird, but 
they do raise their own offspring. In turn, however, their nests can be 
parasitized by the screaming cowbird.

 The cowbird species that rules North America is the brown-headed cowbird, 
which ranges from sea to shining sea in the United States and sweeps north 
through much of Canada. Its eggs have been noted in nests of some 220 other 
bird species. A creature of forest edges, it thrived as development and 
agriculture chipped the continent's great woodlands into splinters during the 
last century. Since the 1960s, however, U.S. cowbird numbers seem to have been 
gently declining, except in a few hot spots, Rothstein says.

 The mating habits of cowbirds have intrigued researchers since predictions 
early in this century that cowbirds would be examples of free love. With no 
need to stick together for the sake of the kids-that burden falls on a 
different species--why bother with mate fidelity?

 That view got turned upside down early in the 1990s when David Yokel, now of 
the Bureau of Land Management in Fairbanks, Alaska, made unusually detailed 
observations. He concluded that the cowbirds he was watching in the wild were 
largely monogamous.

 Observers can easily miss a liaison with another partner, so H. Lisle Gibbs of 
McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, and his colleagues are now checking 
DNA markers to determine chick paternity. The results, not yet published, 
reveal a "moderate" level of mating outside the regular pairing. Rates vary 
from year to year, but he estimates that some 25 percent of cowbird females 
mate with more than one male. Such infidelity fits into the mainstream of bird 
species that have been studied. What puzzles Gibbs is why the number isn't 
higher. "We still have to explain the other 75 percent," he says.

 Comparison with other child-care moochers deepens the mystery. "Cuckoos seem 
to be wildly- I hate this terminology, but-promiscuous," Gibbs reports. 

 When pushed to speculate about cowbird moderation, Gibbs suggests some 
influence of their unusual sex ratio, about two males for every female.

 How the ratio developed is a puzzle in itself. In the cowbird population that 
Gibbs has been analyzing, with data going back to 1992, males and females hatch 
and grow into nestlings in roughly equal numbers. Mortality of adults on the 
nesting ground, about equal for males and females, doesn't explain much either. 
Gibbs therefore assumes that something must be happening when the birds fly 
south from Canada and winter in the United States. Something? "We don't have a 
clue what it is," he says.

 Just how a female cowbird chooses the nests she invades is another area of 
active research. "We don't really know what the female cowbirds are doing; 
they're sort of lurking in the background," observes Ethan D. Clotfelter of the 
University of WisconsinDMadison.

 He lurked in Diehls Prairie in southern Wisconsin, watching to see what 
factors predict which red-winged blackbird nests the cowbirds chose. His 
results appear in the May Animal Behaviour.

 One commonsense prediction didn't hold up on this prairie. Smack-in-the-eye 
obvious nests don't get more cowbird eggs than nests hidden in vegetation. 
Clotfelter found no link between conspicuousness of nests and the chance of 
getting a cowbird visit, although some nests are evident from a car driving by 
and others remain invisible to a researcher a boot's length away.

 Instead, he discovered that the noisier blackbird females were more likely to 
end up with a cowbird egg in their nests. "It may be that cowbirds are spending 
more time listening and less time looking.

 Clotfelter monitored a slurred, descending trill that female blackbirds often 
make when leaving or returning to the nest. The eight blackbirds whose nests 
got hit by cowbirds tended to be chatty, making the call nearly 30 times in 30 
minutes. The 20 females who escaped the cowbirds' intrusion called only half as 
often. "The cowbirds are eavesdropping," Clotfelter concludes.

 A more visible nest has proved a drawback for other birds, reports wildlife 
ecologist Michael L. Morrison of California State University, Sacramento. He 
therefore favors protecting lush tangles of vegetation where desirable birds 
might hide their nests. He points out that wildlife managers are beginning to 
recognize the limitations of anticowbird programs in reviving faltering 
species. Relieving pressure from cowbirds may not help a species that is 
limited by disappearing habitat. "How long can you keep treating the symptom?" 
he asks.

 Making predictions about bird vulnerability won't win friends, points out 
Wisconsin's Christopher B. Goguen. In northeastern New Mexico, he and Wisconsin 
colleague David Curson are studying how far cowbirds commute to deposit their 
eggs. "The old dogma was about 7 kilometers," he says. Relying on this 
traditional wisdom, wildlife managers have discussed creating 7-kilometer 
buffer zones between grazing areas, where cowbirds feed, and the nesting areas 
of vulnerable birds.

 Early results suggest that these buffer zones may be too narrow. The 
researchers are finding that cowbirds routinely fly 8 to 10 km to lay eggs and 
can even make a 12-kilometer commute.

"This finding has implications for managing wildlife. It also has implications 
for really annoying a lot of ranchers," Goguen observes regretfully.

 Another ongoing research project suggests that cowbirds may be "farming" other 
species. A cowbird can only lay its eggs during a brief phase of a host's 
nesting cycle; otherwise, the eggs will lag too far behind the legitimate 
residents. If cowbirds were to disrupt the nest, however, the victims might lay 
eggs anew, reopening that window of opportunity.

 Evidence is building that cowbirds routinely disrupt song sparrow nests, 
according to work by James N.M. Smith of the University of British Columbia in 
Vancouver and his colleagues. They presented data gathered in 1996 and 1997 to 
the North American Ornithological Conference in St. Louis this April. When 
trappers removed cowbirds, they found, failure rates of song sparrow nests fell 
by 60 to 100 percent and showed different patterns from times when cowbirds 
abounded.

 Once a cowbird has chosen a nest, laying an egg takes only 10 to 30 seconds, 
reports another long-time cowbird researcher, Spencer G. Sealy of the 
University of Manitoba in Winnipeg. That's fast, he says. Although cuckoos have 
been reported to produce an egg in 3 seconds, other birds routinely spend 30 to 
90 minutes laying an egg.

 The nest owners frequently are not home in the near-dawn hour when a cowbird 
zips in and out, but even their presence doesn't seem to stop the invaders. 
Sealy has watched a cowbird dive into a Baltimore oriole's saclike nest, only 
to find the female oriole roosting. "There was a major tussle," he remembers. 
"The nest was bouncing." The struggle lasted 110 seconds before the cowbird 
flew away. Sealy later confirmed that the cowbird had managed to lay an egg 
during the fracas.

 That incident brings up a perplexing issue. Baltimore orioles are among the 
bird species that remove cowbird eggs from their nests-no mean feat in a 
swinging sac. Hanging upside down, the oriole stabs a hole in the offending egg 
and tosses the pieces out of the nest. Some other birds pick up the whole egg 
in their beaks and fly away, dropping the egg as far as 50 meters from the nest.

 Sealy is not surprised that hosts of birds have evolved defenses. "What is 
more puzzling is that so many species haven't," he says. Robins remove a pale 
cowbird egg when it shows up in their blue clutches, yet wood thrushes, who 
also lay solid blue eggs, just accept the anomaly.

 Rothstein advocates one explanation-evolutionary lag. The birds that put up 
with cowbird eggs haven't had time to develop defenses, he argues. He points 
out how poorly tuned and full of disadvantageous quirks both the parasitism and 
the defenses are.

 That's just the sort of sloppiness one would expect from a work in progress, 
he says.

 Sievert Rohwer of the University of Washington in Seattle adds to the 
explanation. As part of the overall picture of cowbird parasitism, he says, 
"evolutionary lag has to be true. Nothing evolves overnight." However, he 
proposes that other forces are also at work. Tiny birds may never evolve 
ejection behavior because they risk cracking their own eggs. Even orioles 
damage one of their own eggs, on average, for each five parasite eggs they 
eject.

 Egg-tolerating species in the ancient heart of cowbird territory tend to be 
smaller than egg rejecters, he reports. Complicating the picture, Sealy 
reported in 1996, is the fact that the smallest egg ejector, the 15-gram 
Eastern warbling vireo, routinely punctures cowbird eggs and heaves the pieces 
out of the nest, whereas warbling vireos west of the Great Plains generally do 
not.

 Even though a number of birds fight back by throwing cowbird eggs out of the 
nest, none has been found to eject newly hatched cowbirds. Such a defense could 
be simple, Rothstein proposes. Flycatchers, for example, whose nestlings beg 
with gaping yellowish mouths, could simply eject all pink or red mouths. Why 
not?

"No one has really come up with a satisfactory answer," Rothstein says, 
shrugging almost happily. A lot of people may hate cowbirds, but as far as 
scientific puzzles go, what's not to love?

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 22, May 30, 1998, p. 345. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


