Science News Online (5/23/98): Banquets in the Ruins Archaeologists hunger for 
a better understanding of feasts

 May 23, 1998

 Banquets in the Ruins Archaeologists hunger for a better understanding of 
feasts

 By B. BOWER

 Luo mourners in western Kenya conduct a funeral ritual that is accompanied by 
extensive feasting.

 For the Aka, who number about 500,000 people living in villages built along 
mountain ridges in northern Thailand, life teems with feasts.

 Families hold feasts on occasions as diverse as the naming of babies, the 
completion of new houses, the honoring of women entering menopause, and the 
presentation of offerings to deceased ancestors. Villagewide feasts take place 
to celebrate special holy days, strengthen community ties, and seek divine 
protection from natural calamities. Villages also hold joint feasts, often to 
encourage marriages between the offspring of politically powerful individuals.

 Aka funerals evoke elaborate communal banquets that run from a few days to 
several weeks. Those attending a funeral feast partake of alcoholic beverages 
and special delicacies, including meat from chickens, goats, and water buffalo 
raised solely to be eaten at such events.

 Despite their consuming passions, the Aka hardly qualify as affluent party 
animals or jaded gluttons. Villagers eke out a living by growing and selling 
rice, ginger, and a few other crops, as well as by gathering edible wild plants.

 Feasts act as an all-purpose ritual oil that lubricates Aka society's 
interconnected parts, from struggling nuclear families to powerful coalitions 
of village chiefs, according to archaeologist Michael Clarke of Simon Fraser 
University in Burnaby, British Columbia. Clarke has worked among the Aka for 
the past 2 years.

 Not everyone shares the Aka's extreme fondness for feasting, but many 
populations throughout the world consume food and drink in public ceremonies 
and have done so for centuries. Some archaeologists now argue that a more 
concerted effort to pick out the material leftovers of feasting will yield a 
heaping portion of insights into prehistoric and modern societies.

"Feasts may serve as valuable keys to understanding how ancient rituals and 
social life produced changes in political structures," contends archaeologist 
Michael Dietler of the University of Chicago. "Feasts have long been a 
fundamental theater of human relations."

 Dietler and Brian Hayden, also of Simon Fraser, organized a session at the 
March meeting of the Society for American Archaeology in Seattle to highlight 
some of the latest research on feasts past and present.

 Decisions to hold feasts depend largely on the existence of a food surplus, 
Hayden says. Groups that generally operate without copious food reserves, such 
as the !Kung in southern Africa and other modern hunter-gatherers, rarely hold 
feasts.

 Hunter-gatherers also tend to abide by an ethic of regular food sharing among 
all group members, which probably discourages the stockpiling of goodies for 
special occasions, Hayden adds.

 Still, feasting ceremonies have arisen in a variety of locales since the dawn 
of farming communities around 10,000 years ago, he asserts. Moreover, feasts 
may have occurred in the Stone Age as well (see sidebar). The challenge facing 
archaeologists is to identify signs of particular kinds of feasts in the ruins 
of defunct groups.

 Prehistoric earthen mounds built by inhabitants of the southeastern United 
States -- dating to between 100 B.C. and A.D. 700 -- may have been sites of 
ritual feasts designed to strengthen local communities, proposes Vernon James 
Knight Jr. of the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa. Investigators usually 
view these massive protrusions from the landscape as the remains of seasonal 
camps (SN: 9/20/97, p. 180).

 Many mound sites contain signs of having hosted public ceremonies that 
included feasting, Knight says. Clusters of postholes dot the tops of many 
mounds; large wooden poles or scaffolds were probably inserted in the holes and 
would have created an impressive setting for ritual activities, he maintains.

 Mound excavations have also unearthed dense accumulations of pottery and 
animal bones, along with the remains of ample hearths -- all of which may 
derive from feasts, according to Knight. For instance, his analysis of animal 
remains recovered at two mound sites reveals a preponderance of white-tailed 
deer bones, mainly from the haunches and other prime meat-bearing areas.

 The meat was apparently butchered elsewhere and carried to the mound areas for 
consumption, Knight contends. White-tailed deer have long held great spiritual 
significance for Native Americans living in this part of North America; the 
eating of deer meat probably took place during ceremonies intended to 
perpetuate the universe and ensure healthy crop yields, the Alabama researcher 
theorizes.

 Similar feasts occurred at around the same time in a South American farming 
community, says Linda A. Brown of the University of Colorado at Boulder. Brown 
participates in excavations at Ceren, a village in El Salvador that was 
blanketed by ash when a nearby volcano erupted in about A.D. 590.

 Ceren contains a large "feasting facility," a building once used to prepare, 
store, and dispense food that people apparently ate elsewhere. The compacted, 
flattened earth leading up to one of the structure's doorways indicates that 
many people walked across that area, probably to obtain food through the narrow 
entryway, Brown says.

 Along with abundant food-related items, the feasting structure contains ritual 
items, including a headdress made from a deer skull.

 A small house situated nearby yielded numerous artifacts used for grinding 
corn and preparing other types of food that would have contributed to feasting 
supplies, Brown adds.

"Ceren festivals must have been relatively frequent, because they needed 
permanent buildings devoted to feasting," Brown says. Based on what is known 
about other ancient cultures in Central America, Ceren feasts may have 
coincided with ritual attempts to maintain a balanced universe and a healthy 
community, she adds.

 Feasts have also served as platforms for leaders to forge political alliances 
that feed their authority. Written accounts of Chinese travelers describe 
ceremonial feasts of this kind in the Philippines as many as 1,000 years ago, 
says Laura Lee Junker of Vanderbilt University in Nashville. Local chiefs 
reinforced their power by hosting feasts at which they negotiated political 
arrangements with influential families in the vicinity.

 Excavations of such families' houses, ranging from 900 to 400 years old, have 
unearthed abundant bones of pigs and water buffalo. These animals were eaten 
primarily at feasts, notes Junker. Chinese porcelain, a high-status 
accompaniment to upper-class feasts, has also turned up.

 Around 500 years ago, she adds, lower-status folks started to emulate the 
elite. They left behind evidence of less elaborate feasts at which they used 
inexpensive, knockoff versions of cherished Chinese porcelain.

 In other societies, feasts served starkly competitive or coercive purposes. 
The potlatch ceremonies of Native Americans in the Pacific Northwest, perhaps 
the most intensively examined feasts, require a host to demonstrate wealth and 
generosity with a lavish distribution of goods or even the destruction of 
personal property. Celebrants are expected to return a host's favors and, if 
possible, to up the ante at their own potlatch observances.

 Tribal chiefs in 19th century Hawaii embraced feasts as special symbols of 
their power and superiority over their subjects, points out Patrick V. Kirch of 
the University of California, Berkeley. Hawaiian chiefs were literally big men, 
corpulent hulks who collected tribute from the populace to support their 
constant royal feasting.

 Rulers' reliance on feasts as a kind of tax collection mechanism extends back 
more than 4,000 years to ancient Sumeria, the earliest known civilization, 
asserts Denise Schmandt-Besserat of the University of Texas at Austin.

 She finds many artistic portrayals of feasts on Sumerian monuments, plaques, 
and cylinder seals. Economic records written on clay tablets list feasts from 
throughout the year and tally up the offerings associated with each of them.

 Sumerian rulers organized a feast each month in honor of specific gods, the 
Texas researcher says. Large processions of worshippers, including 
representatives of government groups and professional guilds, brought various 
foods and other gifts to the royal palace. Part of this bounty was consumed in 
a community banquet. The queen was responsible for divvying up portions of the 
remainder for the royal family's use and for divine offerings.

"The feast was a means of collecting surplus goods that then constituted the 
wealth of the royal palace," Schmandt-Besserat contends.

 Sumerian citizens feared the wrath of deities who received inadequate awards, 
she adds. Households worked hard to produce surpluses of food and other goods 
so that they could surpass their neighbors in the quantity and quality of their 
offerings to the gods -- via the royal family.

 In the United States, feasts are still going strong, even if tax-collecting 
rituals now revolve around 1040 forms and IRS audits. Evidence of relatively 
frequent household feasts appears in an analysis of discarded artifacts, 
otherwise known as garbage, obtained during 1994 from Tucson trash collectors.

 The Garbage Project, directed by William L. Rathje of the University of 
Arizona in Tucson, has tabulated characteristics of solid waste in 15 North 
American communities over the past 25 years.

 A feast occurs in the average Tucson household around every 100 days, 
according to Rathje and his colleague Douglas C. Wilson. Communal eating and 
drinking occur on all sorts of occasions, from Christmas and Presidents' Day to 
end-of-the-work-week celebrations, Wilson says. Tucson feasts, which are 
intended primarily for entertainment, usually feature a variety of snack foods 
and considerable alcohol.

 These events are relatively small, usually attracting between 15 and 45 
people, Wilson remarks.

 Larger feasts accompany events such as weddings, but these gatherings also 
emphasize entertainment rather than community cohesiveness or spiritual 
connections, he adds.

"We've emasculated and secularized many feasts by transferring them to 
restaurants, where debts are not entered into a social and political order but 
are paid off with a credit card," Wilson asserts.

 Archaeological payoffs in the quest to illuminate ancient feasts remain rather 
meager, acknowledges Hayden. Many investigators who stumble upon the remnants 
of a vast repast think they have simply arrived unfashionably late to what was 
once a big party, he argues.

"There are signs of improvement, but the theoretical understanding of feasting 
behavior has been pretty abysmal," Hayden notes.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 21, May 23, 1998, p. 331. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 References: 

 Dietler, M. 1998. "Commensal Politics" and the ritual of the feast: 
Theoretical constructs and African contexts. Meeting of the Society for 
American Archaeology. March. Seattle.

 Soffer, O., et al. 1998. Perishable industries from Dolni Vestonice I: New 
insights into the nature and origin of the gravettian. Meeting of the Society 
for American Archaeology. March. Seattle.

 
