Science News Online (6/13/98): Infant Deaths Linked to Odd Heartbeat

 June 13, 1998 

 Infant Deaths Linked to Odd Heartbeat

by N. Seppa

 Few medical tragedies compare with sudden infant death syndrome, or SIDS, in 
which a baby dies from no apparent cause.

 Now, researchers in Italy have found a surprising correlation between SIDS and 
a particular type of unusual heartbeat. Infants with this abnormality face a 
41-fold greater risk of SIDS in their first year than those with normal 
heartbeats, the scientists report in the June 11 New England Journal of 
Medicine.

"I would make a conservative estimate that at least one-third of SIDS cases are 
related to [the abnormal heartbeat]," says study coauthor Peter John Schwartz 
of the University of Pavia. The finding could pave the way for 
electrocardiogram (EKG) screening of some newborns and will probably lead to 
closer monitoring of infants found to have the abnormality.

 The results also provide a basis for preventive drug treatment for newborns 
found to be at high risk, Schwartz says. In addition, the work may lead to 
genetic testing of newborns and their parents in families that have a history 
of either SIDS or the unusual heartbeat.

 Between 1976 and 1994, researchers in seven Italian cities took EKGs of 33,034 
infants at age 3 or 4 days. Of these infants, 34 died in their first year, 24 
inexplicably. The researchers measured the space between two points, Q and T, 
on the EKG. Adults with a long interval between those points, or long QT 
syndrome, sometimes suffer irregular heartbeats; some of them die without 
warning.

 Twelve of the 24 SIDS victims in the Italian study had a long QT 
interval-defined as greater than 440 milliseconds (msec). This condition 
indicates that muscle cells in the heart, which is paced by electric signals, 
aren't recharging fully with each beat to maintain an even pace. The 24 SIDS 
babies averaged a QT interval of 435 msec, compared to 400 msec for 9,725 
babies selected at random from those that survived.

 A long QT interval was by no means a death sentence. Only 1.5 percent of 
children with such an interval died of SIDS. In contrast, far fewer children 
with normal EKGs-0.037 percent-died inexplicably.

"This is a highly valuable study," says G. Michael Vincent, a cardiologist at 
LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City. A long QT interval may directly increase a 
baby's chances of SIDS or may be a marker of some other lethal problem, he says.

 As early as 1976, Schwartz suggested that irregularities in the autonomic 
nervous system could trigger SIDS, and he began the recently published study to 
test that hypothesis. The autonomic system regulates involuntary functions of 
the body, including heartbeat and breathing.

 Meanwhile, research by Vincent and others has established that long QT 
syndrome has a genetic basis (SN: 7/26/97, p. 55). Mutations of several genes 
encoding the proteins that regulate electric charges in the heart have been 
linked to a long QT interval.

 The Italian results "obligate all physicians in perinatal work to take better 
histories of the families," says Richard S. Crampton, a cardiologist at the 
University of Virginia in Charlottesville.

 An EKG typically costs $50 to $90. If a less costly, computerized EKG that 
could accurately determine QT intervals were developed, Vincent says, "I could 
see that being used as a routine screening, maybe in every baby."

 Infants diagnosed with long QT intervals should be given beta blockers, the 
same preventive treatment used for children and adults with long QT syndrome, 
Schwartz says. The drugs, however, can have serious side effects.

"To think of a large population of babies being treated with beta blockers 
gives me reason for concern," says pediatrician Ronald L. Ariagno of Stanford 
University School of Medicine. He worries that there have been no large-scale, 
long-term studies of these drugs in infants. However, Richard A. Friedman, a 
pediatric cardiologist at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, notes that 
babies often tolerate beta blockers better than adults do.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 24, June 13, 1998, p. 372. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


