Science News Online (6/20/98): Power Cracking of Cash Card Codes

 June 20, 1998 

 Power Cracking of Cash Card Codes

by  I. Peterson

 Loaded with electronic cash that has been protected by an encryption scheme, a 
smart card represents a convenient, versatile medium for business transactions. 
Roughly the size of a standard credit card, it incorporates circuitry for 
processing information and keeping records.

 That microcircuitry also makes it vulnerable to attack. Cryptographers have 
now identified techniques for breaking the security system built into a smart 
card. They cracked the codes by monitoring power consumption as the circuitry 
performed its cryptographic operations.

"We have implemented these attacks against a large number of smart cards and, 
at this point, do not believe that any cryptographic smart cards on the market 
are immune to these analysis techniques," says Paul Kocher of the consulting 
firm Cryptography Research in San Francisco.

 Last week, Kocher and his coworkers Joshua Jaffe and Benjamin Jun posted their 
report revealing the security flaw. It can be found on the World Wide Web at .

"[The flaw] is indeed a serious security threat to many existing systems," says 
Ross Anderson of the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in England. 
"It allows relatively low-budget attackers to get at key material that 
previously required a moderately well-equipped lab."

 The integrated circuits on smart cards consist of vast arrays of transistors, 
which act as voltage-controlled switches. Different microprocessor instructions 
initiate characteristic switching patterns. The resulting motion of electric 
charge consumes power and generates electromagnetic radiation, which can be 
detected outside the card.

 Researchers have already demonstrated that it is possible to accumulate enough 
data to deduce secret keys -- strings of 1s and 0s -- required to decrypt 
confidential information stored on smart cards. Using sophisticated tools, 
they've measured the duration of cryptographic operations (SN: 12/16/95, p. 
406) or exploited processing errors (see , SN: 2/1/97, p. 78).

 In the new threat, an attacker can use less expensive equipment to monitor a 
smart card's electronic responses. Fluctuations in power consumption correspond 
to different stages in a cryptographic process. By magnifying the signal, it is 
possible to detect individual microprocessor instructions and distinguish 
between various arithmetic operations.

 A more sophisticated analysis of these data relies on the application of 
statistical and error-correction techniques to extract information useful for 
deducing secret keys. Once the secret key is found, a criminal could make a 
copy of the smart card and obtain unauthorized access to someone else's account 
or, in some systems, automatically refill the card with cash.

 Such threats, however, require that criminals have special equipment attached 
to or physically near the card. Smart cards are safe when stored in a wallet or 
purse, Kocher says.

 Stolen or lost smart cards are another matter, because they can be connected 
to a power sensor and computer.

 One approach to increased security is to recognize a smart card's 
vulnerability. An electronic cash system used by Visa International, for 
example, checks for unusual account activity. When that system was designed, 
Anderson says, "we did not know as much about breaking into smart cards as we 
do now, but we suspected that it would be done." Other companies have also 
started to adopt countermeasures.

 Security expert Peter G. Neumann of SRI International in Menlo Park, Calif., 
notes that "unfortunately, attacks such as Paul Kocher's merely remind us of 
how difficult -- if not impossible -- it is to achieve security that can 
withstand very determined and well-funded attacks."  

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 25, June 20, 1998, p. 388. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 References: 

 Additional information about differential power analysis is available at .

 Further Readings: 

 Peterson, I. 1997. . Science News 151(Feb. 1):78.

______. 1995. Timing attack beats cryptographic keys. Science News 148(Dec. 
16):406.

 Sources: 

 Ross Anderson University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory New Museums Site 
Pembroke Street Cambridge CB2 3QG United Kingdom Web site: 

 Paul Kocher Cryptography Research870 Market Street, Suite 1088 San Francisco, 
CA 94102 Web site: 

 Peter G. Neumann SRI International333 Ravenswood Avenue Menlo Park, CA 94025

  

copyright 1998
