Science News Online (5/2/98): Pollution conundrum has fishy solution by J Raloff

 May 9, 1998

 Pollution conundrum has fishy solution

by J. Raloff

 To understand why industrial chemicals taint even uninhabited Arctic regions 
thousands of miles from where the pollutants were released, scientists have 
focused on air pollution. Many organic pollutants leapfrog the globe, 
periodically vaporizing from sites on the surface to ride the winds in a slow, 
polar-bound trek (SN: 3/16/96, p. 174).

 Few scientists had considered biological means of transport, yet 
ecotoxicologists now report that much of the DDT, polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs), and other persistent organic chemicals in one seemingly pristine lake 
arrived via spawning salmon.

 A research team headed by Goran Ewald of Lund University in Sweden compared 
organic pollutants in grayling -- a top predator and game fish -- from two 
neighboring Alaskan lakes: Round Tangle, which is self-contained, and Lower 
Fish, which drains into the final leg of a spawning run for sockeye salmon. 
Grayling in Lower Fish Lake have up to four times the concentrations of organic 
pollutants in their fat as grayling in the salmonfree lake, the team reports in 
the just-published March Arctic.

 Ewald explains that the salmon go to sea after spending a year or two in the 
freshwater lake. A few years later, they return to the lake to spawn. His team 
collected the fish throughout their 410-kilometer migration from the Gulf of 
Alaska.

 Analyses showed that as the fish burned fat to power their trip home, they 
didn't metabolize the pollutants in it. Instead, the chemicals became 
concentrated in the remaining fat. After spawning, the fish died, and their roe 
and carcasses introduced these pollutants into the food chain of Lower Fish 
Lake. Concentrations in the water, expected to be low, were not measured.

 Ewald's team reports that the proportions of DDT breakdown products and PCBs 
in Lower Fish Lake grayling match the pattern in salmon rather than the 
concentrations present in the air. Since the data show that both lakes received 
equivalent inputs of airborne pollutants, the grayling in Lower Fish Lake must 
be picking up most of their pollutants "from eating the fish and roe," Ewald 
says.

"This finding is exciting and really important," says Derek C.G. Muir of 
Environment Canada's National Water Research Institute in Burlington, Ontario. 
"It might explain much of the variation [in pollution] in regions where there 
are a lot of migratory fish," he says. It could also help regulators identify 
areas that might need more stringent advisories to limit consumption of tainted 
fish.

 In reality, people know little about freshwater-spawning marine fish, observes 
Phyllis Weber Scannell of the Alaska Department of Fish and Game in Fairbanks. 
For instance, biologists had thought that the repeat-spawning Dolly Varden char 
stay in local ocean waters between successive Alaskan migrations. In fact, some 
fish tagged in Alaska by her group later visited Russia. "What an opportunity 
for picking up pollutants," she speculates.   

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 19, May 9, 1998, p. 293. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

  

 References:  

 Ewald, G., et al. 1998. Biotransport of organic pollutants to an Inland Alaska 
lake by migrating sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka). Arctic 51(March):40.

 Further Readings: 

 Raloff, J. 1996. The pesticide shuffle. Science News 149(March 16):174.

______. 1995. Fishy clues to a toxaphene puzzle. Science News 148(July 15):38.

 Sources:  

 Goran Ewald Lund University Department of Ecology S-223 62 Lund Sweden

 Derek C.G. Muir Environment Canada National Water Research Institute867 
Lakeshore Road P.O. Box 5050 Burlington, Ontario L7R 4A6 Canada

 Phyllis Weber Scannell Alaska Department of Fish and Game1300 College Road 
Fairbanks, AK 99701

copyright 1998
