Science News Online (6/13/98): European crab leaps to Pacific prominence

 June 13, 1998 

 European crab leaps to Pacific prominence

by J. Raloff

 Andrew Cohen made a disturbing discovery last week while poking around coastal 
mud flats in southwestern Washington.

 State researchers had invited Cohen, a marine ecologist with the San Francisco 
Estuary Institute in Richmond, Calif., to survey a stand of non-native cord 
grass that was invading the shallow waters of Willapa Bay. Just 30 minutes 
after donning his boots and wading into the water, Cohen stumbled upon the 
first evidence that an even more reviled species had emigrated to Washington. 
He had found the molted shell of a male European green crab ( Carcinus maenas).

 Cohen knows this alien crab far better than he'd like to. Nine years ago, it 
turned up in San Francisco Bay. By 1993, it was moving up the California coast, 
rapaciously feeding on any shellfish its size or smaller. Last year, it was 
spotted in a bay in Oregon.

"With the green crab on the West Coast, we are witnessing a truly astounding 
event," says Armand M. Kuris of the University of California, Santa Barbara 
(UCSB). Non-native species typically expand their West Coast range by no more 
than 50 miles in 40 years, he observes. Last week's sighting indicates that the 
European green crab has leapfrogged 700 miles in 6 years.

 What's more, wherever it invades, small, near-shore invertebrates all but 
disappear, says Elliott A. Norse, president of the Marine Conservation Biology 
Institute in Redmond, Wash.

 In Bodega Bay, Calif., for instance, Edwin D. Grosholz of the University of 
New Hampshire in Durham has shown that the green crab has culled 90 percent of 
the small shore crabs ( Hemigrapsus oregonensis) and native clams ( Nutricola). 
A single 3-inch adult green crab can eat 40 clams daily.

 To date, most of the West Coast shellfish that this invader has consumed "have 
not been economically important," Grosholz notes. That situation stands to 
change as the green crab continues its northward trek. Washington, home of the 
nation's largest oyster-rearing operations, and Oregon also have substantial 
fisheries for Manila clams, mussels, and the prized Dungeness crabs, whose tiny 
young mature in the same rocky marine shallows that green crabs prefer.

 Kuris and Kevin D. Lafferty, also at UCSB, have estimated the value of West 
Coast fisheries vulnerable to this predatory crab. In Oregon and Washington 
alone, it comes to some $44 million per year-roughly twice the value of similar 
fisheries in California.

 Though no one knows how the green crabs arrived, they probably hitched a ride 
in the ballast water of a docking cargo ship or in a box of marine bait shipped 
from the East Coast. These same crabs savaged northern East Coast waters when 
they first arrived from Europe sometime in the early to mid-1800s. They are 
blamed for destroying New England's softshell clam fishery.

 Just 2 days before finding the green crab at Willapa, Cohen and one of his 
hosts had been attending a symposium that focused on the potential introduction 
of predators to control the invasion of alien marine organisms. At the meeting, 
Kuris described his studies of a parasitic barnacle, Sacculina carcini, that 
sterilizes male and female green crabs.

 The larva of this so-called castrating barnacle, which lives throughout C. 
maenas' native range, bores into the crabs and in the course of several months 
infuses its host with a network of its own tissues. Eventually, the parasite 
forms an egg sac that extends outside the crab, beside its gonads. For all 
practical purposes, Kuris says, an infected C. maenas soon constitutes little 
more than an egg-production facility for the barnacle.

 If his studies find that introducing the alien barnacle won't present undue 
risks to native marine animals, Kuris says, this parasite might someday be 
considered for release as part of a strategy to rein in the green crab. That 
invader now controls ecosystems in portions of Australia, Japan, Canada, and 
South Africa, as well as the U.S. coasts.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 24, June 13, 1998, p. 373. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


