Science News Online (6/13/98): Immune Attack on Cancer Researchers spur the 
immune system to rout malignancies

 June 13, 1998 

 Immune Attack on Cancer 

 Researchers spur the immune system to rout malignancies

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 Abnormal cells often grow silently in the body. In most cases, though, they 
never get a chance to develop into cancer. The immune system homes in on these 
overly prolific cells and annihilates them first.

 The cancers that people become aware of occur when aberrant cells somehow 
evade the immune system and continue to divide aggressively. If left unchecked, 
such cells form a malignant tumor.

 Now, medical researchers have recruited a specialized cell from the immune 
system into the battle against cancer. A Swiss and German team has published 
results of a study in which this strategy successfully targeted the deadly skin 
cancer melanoma. A U.S. team used the same immune therapy to treat prostate 
cancer, the second leading cause of death in men in the United States.

"These studies are demonstrating that it may well be possible to immunize 
against cancer," says Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute in 
Bethesda, Md. Rosenberg has also tested an immune therapy on melanoma patients, 
with promising results.

 Such immune strategies are sometimes called cancer vaccines. Traditionally, 
vaccines prime the body to fight off an infection before it gets started. 
Cancer vaccines, in contrast, rev up the immune system to rout an existing 
disease.

 Researchers suggest that the vaccines will provide an alternative to 
chemotherapy, in which doctors give patients round after round of cell-killing 
drugs in the hope of destroying all the malignant cells. Chemotherapy may 
control a cancer for a time, but in many cases, cancerous cells break off from 
the main tumor, travel through the bloodstream, and eventually spread the 
disease.

 Since the 1980s, researchers looking for a different approach have been 
laboring to find ways of boosting the immune system's response to cancer. Their 
hard work is finally starting to pay off. "It's not just a pipe dream," says 
Harmon Eyre, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society (ACS) in 
Atlanta. "There's evidence now that this is working."

 The element of the immune system that shows the most promise for cancer 
therapy is the dendritic cell, a type of white blood cell.

 Cancer cells make proteins not usually found in healthy cells. Fragments of 
those abnormal proteins are called peptides and appear on the surface of the 
malignant cell like a red flag. Dendritic cells typically prowl the bloodstream 
in search of dead or dying cells. When it finds such a cell, the dendritic cell 
gobbles up the cellular debris and sprints to the lymph nodes, the command 
center of the immune system. This action has led Michael T. Lotze of the 
University of Pittsburgh to call dendritic cells the "track stars" of the 
immune system.

 Upon reaching the lymph nodes, the dendritic cell, which has a number of arms, 
holds out the cancer cell peptide-much as a runner would pass a baton in a 
relay race. The other white cells scan the peptide, and those best able to kill 
the cancer cell proliferate rapidly, forming an army of killer T cells. 
Released into the bloodstream, the defenders seek out the flagged cancer cells 
and trigger a self-destruct mechanism in them. In effect, the T lymphocytes 
force the cancer cells to kill themselves.

 Many cancers, unfortunately, evade recognition by dendritic cells and thus 
avoid an immune-mediated death. Recent experiments with cancer vaccines have 
attempted to encourage dendritic cells to take notice of a masked cancer threat 
and sound the alarm.

 Melanoma, a cancer that is on the rise in many countries, including the United 
States, has been a target of potential immune therapies for almost a decade. 
Frank O. Nestle of the University of Zurich Medical School and Dirk Schadendorf 
of the University of Heidelberg in Germany recently used dendritic cells to 
attack melanoma, a cancer of the pigment-producing skin cells

 The ACS predicts that more than 41,600 people in the United States will be 
diagnosed with melanoma this year. If caught early, melanoma is one of the most 
curable of all cancers. If it has spread, it is often deadly.

 Schadendorf's team recruited 16 men and women with melanoma. All had been 
treated with a variety of standard therapies, including chemotherapy, radiation 
therapy, and surgery, but their cancer continued to spread aggressively.

 The researchers obtained dendritic cells from each patient's bloodstream. To 
encourage those cells to zero in on the malignant cells, they concocted a 
cocktail of the harvested dendritic cells and appropriate tumor peptides. In 
such close quarters, the immune cells had no choice but to recognize these 
cancer markers.

 In four cases, the researchers didn't have purified peptides to mix with the 
dendritic cells. Instead, they ground up bits of the patient's tumor and 
combined that tissue with the dendritic cells.

 They hoped that dendritic cells treated in this fashion would, once injected 
back into the bloodstream, hunt down the cancer cells and initiate a vigorous 
immune attack.

 To test that approach, the researchers took each customized solution of 
treated dendritic cells and injected it into the patient's lymph nodes or under 
the skin, weekly at first and then at longer intervals.

 Surprisingly, 2 of the 18 people showed no trace of cancer more than a year 
after treatment began, Schadendorf says. Three others had a significant 
response-their tumors shrank by more than half. Such advanced cases of melanoma 
almost never show spontaneous remission and are considered incurable by 
traditional methods. Yet Schadendorf says that it's not clear what the results 
mean, even for the two people who remain tumorfree.

"We have to wait for a longer time to see if the response is close to a cure," 
he explains. Schadendorf and his colleagues published their results in the 
March Nature Medicine.

 The team described a number of innovative procedures, including injecting the 
cancer vaccine directly into the lymph nodes, comments Lotze. "It looked like 
they enjoyed extraordinary responses," he told Science News.

 Also in March, Lotze described preliminary results from his group's trial of 
dendritic cell therapy for melanoma. The Pittsburgh group treated 21 people 
with advanced melanoma. They injected dendritic cells that had been mixed with 
cancer markers.

"We now have three patients who have had prolonged stability," Lotze said at 
the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) meeting in New Orleans. "So 
far, we've seen no evidence of growth of their tumors," added team member 
Joseph Baar. One patient's tumor disappeared altogether, "and now, for all 
intents and purposes, she's been diseasefree for over a year," says Baar.

 Cancer of the prostate, the gland that produces the cloudy liquid that goes 
into semen, is less often deadly than melanoma, but it is far more common. An 
estimated 184,500 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer this year.

 Seattle scientists Michael L. Salgaller of Northwest Biotherapeutics, Gerald 
P. Murphy of the Pacific Northwest Cancer Foundation, and their colleagues have 
used dendritic cell therapy to target cancer of the prostate. The team 
recruited 33 men with prostate cancer that had spread to other sites in the 
body. For these men, traditional treatments-surgery, radiation, and hormone 
therapy-had failed to contain the disease.

 The researchers took blood samples to obtain dendritic cells. They then mixed 
the cells with two peptides. The dendritic cells took up the peptides and 
displayed them. Once a week for 6 weeks, each patient received an intravenous 
infusion of the solution.

 The team reports that in 9 of the 33 men, the treatment halted the spread of 
their disease. These patients showed a 50 percent decrease in prostate-specific 
antigen (PSA), a protein that rises as prostate cancer advances. They also 
experienced a substantial drop in the amount of cancer that had made its way 
into the bones, Salgaller says.

 In another 10 patients, the disease stabilized. In these cases, the marker 
fell less than 50 percent, and the cancer in bone decreased slightly.

 The remaining men did not respond to the treatment, and their prostate cancer 
continued to spread.

"I think we're having a very promising impact on the progression of disease," 
Salgaller says. "We have now an important percentage who are either responding 
to therapy or whose disease has stopped progressing." Nonetheless, he adds, the 
results need to be confirmed in a larger number of patients. The researchers 
presented their findings at the AACR meeting and at the ACS-sponsored Science 
Writer's Seminar held in March in Newport Beach, Calif.

 Eyre comments that Murphy and Salgaller have "some evidence that this is 
working in some men. That's a huge step forward."

 Eventually, the researchers plan to offer the therapy to men with less 
advanced prostate cancer to see whether in such cases a revved up immune 
response will actually seek out and destroy all of the cancer cells.

 Scientists are now extending immune therapy beyond prostate cancer and 
melanoma to other types of malignancies, including breast and ovarian cancer.

 One benefit of the treatment is that, in most cases, it doesn't trigger the 
deleterious side effects of traditional therapies. Chemotherapy, for example, 
is a crude treatment that poisons all rapidly dividing cells, including healthy 
cells, and thus provokes vomiting and hair loss. The side effects of immune 
therapy are typically milder: a low-grade fever and some aches and pains.

 Although many cancer patients would gladly undergo the rigors of chemotherapy 
to achieve a cancerfree future, that outcome is by no means certain. For many 
people, the cancer still wins the war. Cancer vaccines may offer a more 
effective way of attacking the disease. Proponents argue that immune therapy 
can target a malignant cell more precisely than chemotherapy's drop-the-bomb 
approach.

 Researchers have seen a handful of dramatic responses to immune therapy, but 
so far, such responses have been limited to melanoma. This cancer may be more 
vulnerable to the immune system's blitzkrieg than other malignancies, says Dawn 
Willis, director of research promotion at ACS. Although melanoma can be widely 
disseminated, individual tumors are small. In addition, this cancer strikes 
people in the prime of life, when their immune systems are likely to be robust, 
she says.

 It's uncertain whether researchers can extend such dramatic responses to other 
cancers and thus more patients. Schadendorf believes that some malignant cells 
will continue to hide from the immune system, even when confronted with a 
souped-up solution of dendritic cells. His team hopes to find a way to block 
cancer cells trying to escape the immune attack.

 While the side effects of cancer vaccines have appeared modest so far, 
investigators still have concerns. The peptides employed by many researchers as 
targets may also be present on a small number of healthy cells, Eyre says. 
Moreover, no one knows whether immune therapy could induce the body's immune 
cells to attack healthy cells. Only larger trials will prove the ultimate 
safety of this approach, he adds.

 In spite of the potential pitfalls, cancer vaccines have entered a new era. 
Researchers are testing them on larger groups of people, and if all goes well, 
the vaccines could gain federal approval within 5 years. Approval would pave 
the way for widespread therapeutic use.

"I've been in this field 20-some years," Lotze says. "There's as much, if not 
more, excitement about this than anything I've seen previously."

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 24, June 13, 1998, p. 380. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 
