Science News Online (6/20/98): Rethinking Ink Printing the pages of an 
electronic book

 June 20, 1998 

 Rethinking Ink

 Printing the pages of an electronic book

 By IVARS PETERSON

 As a display technology, ink on paper has many advantages. You can carry it 
around and read it almost anywhere, whether as a single sheet or 
packaged as a newspaper, magazine, or book.

 Ink doesn't require an external power source or an expensive, fragile screen, 
and it doesn't suffer software and hardware glitches.

 Information printed on paper can't be updated, however, says Joseph M. 
Jacobson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's (MIT) Media 
Laboratory.

 One answer to those shortcomings may be a hybrid display system that combines 
the flexibility and versatility of paper with the chameleon 
nature of a conventional computer monitor and the high capacity of electronic 
data storage. The key to such an innovation, Jacobson says, 
would be a new type of ink -- one that can change from black to white or white 
to black on command.

 Printed with such an electronic ink, a book would become a sheaf of 
high-resolution, high-contrast, electronically addressable displays. As 
with an ordinary book, a reader would be able to leaf through the pages, 
browsing the contents, making comparisons, and marking pertinent 
passages. In addition, however, a reader could adjust the format of the pages 
for readability, update the book's contents, or even download a 
whole new text.

 Indeed, printing on paper and other materials primed with electronic ink 
offers the prospect not only of digital books and regularly updated 
newspapers but also of endlessly customizable wallpaper, billboards, product 
labels, and even T-shirts and bumper stickers.

 Over the years, several research groups have investigated various schemes for 
producing and deploying an ink that changes its color in 
response to electric signals. Now, MIT finds the process Jacobson and his 
coworkers have developed promising enough to file patents, and a 
newly formed company has licensed the pending patents to commercialize the 
laboratory results.

 The letters that comprise the words on a page of this magazine (and just about 
any other modern print publication) are made up of tiny, 
closely spaced dots of ink. The ink is a light-absorbing pigment firmly affixed 
to the light-reflecting paper surface.

 The symbols or images on a computer screen are likewise composed of minuscule 
dots, called pixels. Unlike the dots of ink on paper, the 
pixels on a computer screen respond to electric signals, changing readily from 
bright to dark or dark to bright to create whatever pattern is 
required at a given moment.

 In a cathode-ray tube display, a scanning electron beam causes phosphors to 
glow at selected spots. In a liquid crystal display, an array of 
transistors controls the electric field applied to individual cells, changing 
their transparency.

 Compared with ink on paper, cathode-ray tubes and liquid crystal displays are 
bulky and heavy, and they consume considerable amounts of 
power. Jacobson's task was to find a way to achieve electronic control of dots 
printed on a paperlike sheet -- in effect, obtaining a thin, 
low-power, low-cost display. He and his coworkers turned to microencapsulation 
technology, which packages tiny parcels of gas, liquid, or 
solid within some other material.

 Coating a magazine page with microcapsules filled with perfume, for example, 
forms the basis of scratch-and-sniff perfume advertisements. 
Microencapsulation also plays a significant role in the detergent, 
pharmaceutical, and baking goods industries.

 Jacobson's scheme involved encasing microscopic particles within tiny, 
fluid-filled, transparent capsules, laid out in an array to cover a 
sheet. The researchers used spherical particles that are black and positively 
charged on one side and white and negatively charged on the 
other.

 Momentarily applying an electric field to an individual capsule rotates the 
enclosed particle and brings its white side to stick at the top 
of the microcapsule. An opposite electric field rotates the particle to the 
black side and pushes it to stick at the bottom. No additional 
power is required to keep the particle in position and, hence, maintain an 
image.

 In the complete assemblage, an upper, transparent layer printed with a web of 
digital signal-processing microcircuitry would control a lower 
layer of electronic-ink microcapsules.

 Initially, the researchers used particles about 250 micrometers (m m) in 
diameter, which permit a display with a resolution of 100 dots per 
inch -- a lower resolution than today's laser printers typically provide. 
Subsequently cutting the particle size to roughly 40 mm represented 
an important step toward fabricating working displays with an acceptable 
resolution and a thickness of about 200 mm (approximately 2.5 times 
the thickness of a sheet of paper).

 Jacobson and his team have now demonstrated that their ideas work on a 
laboratory scale. Producing electronic-ink displays of sufficient 
resolution and robustness for an electronic book, however, remains years in the 
future.

 Other materials also provide potential candidates for electronic ink. Paul R. 
Kolodner of Bell Laboratories at Lucent Technologies in Murray 
Hill, N.J., and his collaborators have focused on a protein molecule known as 
bacteriorhodopsin.

"Natural materials often perform very complex functions that cannot be easily 
obtained from manufactured materials such as semiconductors," 
Kolodner notes. Moreover, because organisms manufacture the biological 
materials by themselves, one can obtain a steady supply simply by 
providing food and harvesting the products.

 Bacteriorhodopsin is found in the intensely purple cell membrane of a 
bacterium called Halobacterium salinarium, which grows in salt marshes. 
Illuminating the protein triggers a photochemical reaction cycle, which 
transports protons along a channel spanning the cell membrane.

 The membrane's purple color comes from a bacteriorhodopsin component called 
retinal, which is strongly bound to an amino acid inside the 
membrane channel. Unbound retinal in solution is pale yellow.

 Alternating laser light of two different wavelengths on the protein molecule 
can switch it back and forth between its purple and yellow 
forms. That behavior has prompted research on the use of bacteriorhodopsin as 
the light-sensitive element in artificial retinas and as memory 
or processing units in protein-based or optical computers (see ', SN: 3/8/97, 
p. 140).

 A thin film of bacteriorhodopsin can also change its color in response to an 
external electric field. In normal bacteriorhodopsin, such a 
field causes a low-contrast color change from purple to blue. However, certain 
mutant bacteria make a form of bacteriorhodopsin that changes 
from blue to pale yellow in a strong electric field.

 Sandwiching such a protein film between transparent plates that incorporate a 
large number of electrodes can produce a display. By applying 
appropriate voltages to different parts of the film, it's possible to write a 
page of text or place an image on the screen.

 Like ink on paper, images on a bacteriorhodopsin display are visible in 
ambient light. The protein film also provides high contrast and 
switching times as short as 200 microseconds, Kolodner says.

 The main difficulty at present is that it takes a rather substantial electric 
field at several thousand volts to trigger the color change. 
"We are still working on the project," Kolodner says, "but until we make a 
breakthrough with a pigment that is much more sensitive to external 
fields, this will not become a technology."

 The MIT approach has progressed much farther, and the institution has applied 
for patents on various aspects of the electronic-ink process 
and an electronic-book system developed by Jacobson and his team.

 A company called E Ink Corp., based in Cambridge, Mass., is developing 
high-contrast displays based on electronic ink that can be printed 
onto paper and other flexible surfaces. That venture has already attracted such 
investors as Motorola and the Hearst Corp.

 The fundamental notion that you can print intelligent devices is quite 
appealing," says Russ Wilcox of E Ink. "Our goal is not just to bring 
one product or technology to market but also to create a research and 
development center at the forefront of display technology."

 With product development under way, the company has made the signage market 
its initial target. That includes traffic warning signs, theater 
marquee displays, and in-store signs. In one pilot project, E Ink plans to 
provide a pharmacy chain with signs tied to the headquarters 
computer system so that printed prices and other data can be changed 
simultaneously in all or some of the chain's stores.

"We're taking advantage of the ability to produce displays that are naturally 
reflective and lightweight," Wilcox says. "If you had it on 
plastic, you could just unroll what you need."

 That's still a long way from Jacobson's vision of an electronic book, which 
would integrate paper-thin, electronic-ink displays into a volume 
with roughly the heft and feel of a conventionally printed book.

 One possibility is to have each page electrically linked to a chip-based 
display driver embedded in the bound book's spine. An external 
computer could then deliver text and other digital information to the driver, 
which would in turn send the appropriate signals to the 
electronic-ink dots on each sheet, in effect typesetting the pages.

 Such pages could also be made responsive to a stylus so that a reader could 
resize the type, change the margins, and add notes. If it were 
possible to increase the rate at which microencapsulated particles switch from 
one state to the other, electronic-ink pages could also display 
animated images.

 Adding a high-capacity data storage capability would turn an electronic book 
into a single-volume portable library. The user could call up 
any one of hundreds of books stored on an embedded memory card.

 More than 500 years after Johannes Gutenberg completed the printing of the 
Bible, ink on paper remains an appealing, versatile, and cheap 
display technology. Jacobson and his coworkers are betting that paper coated 
with electronic ink can enhance the value and pleasure 
traditionally associated with reading a printed, bound book.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 25, June 20, 1998, p. 396. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 
