Science News Online (5/30/98): Analysis shatters cathedral-glass myth

 May 30, 1998 

 Analysis shatters cathedral glass myth

by C. Wu

 A new study debunks the persistent belief that stained glass windows in 
medieval cathedrals are thicker at the bottom because the glass flows slowly 
downward like a very viscous liquid.

 Edgar Dutra Zanotto of the Federal University of Sao Carlos in Brazil 
calculated the time needed for viscous flow to change the thickness of 
different types of glass by a noticeable amount. Cathedral glass would require 
a period "well beyond the age of the universe," he says.

 Suffice it to say that the glass could not have thickened since the 12th 
century. Zanotto reports his finding in the May American Journal of Physics.

 The study demonstrates dramatically what many scientists had reasoned earlier. 
"You would have to bring normal glass to 350@ Celsius in order to begin to see 
changes," says William C. LaCourse, assistant director of the NSF 
Industry-University Center for Glass Research at Alfred (N.Y.) University.

 Viscosity depends on the chemical composition of the glass. Even germanium 
oxide glass, which flows more easily than other types, would take 1032  years 
to sag, Zanotto calculates. Medieval stained glass contains impurities that 
could lower the viscosity and speed the flow, but even a significant reduction 
wouldn't alter the conclusion, he remarks, since the age of the universe is 
only 1010  years.

 The difference in thickness sometimes observed in antique windows probably 
results from glass manufacturing methods, says LaCourse. Until the 19th 
century, the only way to make window glass was to blow molten glass into a 
large globe then flatten it into a disk. Whirling the disk introduced ripples 
and thickened the edges. For structural stability, it would make sense to 
install those thick portions in the bottom of the pane, he says.

 Later glass was drawn into sheets by pulling it from the melt on a rod, a 
method that made windows more uniform. Today, most window glass is made by 
floating liquid glass on molten tin. This process, developed about 30 years 
ago, makes the surface extremely flat.

 The origins of the stained glass myth are unclear, but the confusion probably 
arose from a misunderstanding of the amorphous atomic structure of glass, in 
which atoms do not assume a fixed crystal structure. "The structure of the 
liquid and the structure of the [solid] glass are very similar," says LaCourse, 
"but thermodynamically they are not the same."

 Glass does not have a precise freezing point; rather, it has what's known as a 
glass transition temperature, typically a few hundred degrees Celsius. Cooled 
below this temperature, liquid glass retains its amorphous structure yet takes 
on the physical properties of a solid rather than a supercooled liquid.

"At first, I thought that the [sagging window idea] was a Brazilian myth," 
Zanotto wrote, but he soon learned that people all over the world share the 
belief. Repeated in reference books, in science classes, and recently over the 
Internet, the idea has been repeatedly pulled out to explain ripply windows in 
old houses. "For the layperson, it makes a lot of sense," says LaCourse.

 In 1989, Robert C. Plumb of Worcester (Mass.) Polytechnic Institute suggested 
in the Journal of Chemical Education that definitive proof might require an 
instruction book written in the Middle Ages advising glaziers to install glass 
panes with the thick end at the bottom. Now if only such a handbook could be 
found.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 22, May 30, 1998, p. 341. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 
