Science News Online (5/9/98): Good Health Requires Good Gums Periodontal 
infections have ties to many ailments By MARI N. JENSEN

 May 9, 1998

 Good Health Requires Good Gums Periodontal infections have ties to many 
ailments

 By MARI N. JENSEN

 Health-conscious baby boomers woke up to the specter of gum disease a little 
more than a decade ago, when even the characters in the Doonesbury comic strip 
started worrying about it. Periodontal disease gives people the 
long-in-the-tooth look associated with advancing age. Appearances may be the 
least of the boomers' concerns, however. Medical researchers view gum disease 
as a clue to serious health problems elsewhere in the body.

 It's not surprising that poor health in one part of the body can affect other 
parts. After all, young children learn that the thighbone's connected to the 
hipbone, the hipbone's connected to the backbone, and that the links end with 
the headbone. Yet family doctors have considered the teeth and gums as 
primarily the dentist's domain, while dentists have traditionally viewed 
anything beyond the mouth as the M.D.'s territory.

 Exploring the links between oral health and overall well-being has led 
researchers to challenge the myth of "the independence of parts," says dental 
researcher Robert J. Genco of the State University of New York (SUNY) at 
Buffalo. Gum infections may both stem from and cause health problems in distant 
regions of the body. Several teams of scientists are investigating the ties 
between periodontal infections and systemic disorders such as osteoporosis and 
heart disease.

"Traditionally, people have considered [periodontal disease] to be a low-grade 
infection that was pretty self-limiting," says periodontist Steven Offenbacher 
of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "But there's more at risk 
here than people's teeth."

 The connection between oral health and overall health may have far-reaching 
implications. About 60 percent of people in the United States over age 12 have 
some gum disease, according to the American Academy of Periodontology.

 Because teeth are rooted in bone, researchers anticipate a close link between 
the health of jawbones and general bone strength, which deteriorates in older 
people. The most well known consequence of fragile bones is a broken hip. Less 
obviously, weakened jawbones may be more susceptible to attack from the 
bacteria that cause gum disease, says epidemiologist Jean Wactawski-Wende of 
SUNY-Buffalo.

"The weaker your bones are, the more likely you are to have tooth loss," she 
says. "It does make intuitive sense."

 To investigate ties between periodontal disease and fragile bones, 
Wactawski-Wende, Genco, and their SUNY colleagues reviewed the medical records 
of 2,566 postmenopausal women. Osteoporosis, the weakening of bones that may 
occur as a person ages, is particularly prevalent in this group. The 
researchers found that women who had osteoporosis of the hip also had fewer 
teeth and were more likely to have gum disease than other women.

 In the body, two types of cells, which Wactawski-Wende calls the builders and 
the chewers, work to construct and tear down bone. All is well so long as the 
builders and chewers work at the same rate. However, as people age, the 
builders become lazier, she says. As the chewers outpace them, the bone 
develops holes, and as the holes get larger, the bone breaks more easily.

 The data for the SUNY study came from the third National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey, a nationwide survey conducted from 1988 to 1994. A medical 
exam ascertained bone density by using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), 
a standard method of assessing the extent of osteoporosis. To evaluate the 
women's oral health, the examiners counted teeth and measured how tightly the 
gums adhered to them.

 The analysis showed that women with osteoporosis of the hip were almost twice 
as likely to have loose teeth and more likely to have lost teeth than women 
with healthy bones. Wactawski-Wende presented the team's findings in February 
at a meeting in Philadelphia of the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science (AAAS).

 Osteoporosis researcher Charles H. Chesnut III of the University of Washington 
in Seattle says that the SUNY team's research confirms some of his group's 
findings. "Tooth loss and [decreasing] tooth attachment to the bone may be . . 
. part of a systemic osteoporosis," says Chestnut. However, he adds, the study 
cannot determine whether osteoporosis or bacterial infections of the gum came 
first -- it just shows that women who have one disorder are more likely to have 
the other also.

 Determining whether one disease causes or accelerates the other requires a 
different type of study, one that tracks women over time and regularly measures 
the health of their gums and their bones. Wactawski-Wende and other researchers 
at SUNY are planning just such a longitudinal study.

 Dentists do not screen for osteoporosis, and women do not get DXA scans unless 
their physicians suspect osteoporosis. Yet anyone who visits a dentist 
regularly has X rays taken. Those X rays might be able to do double duty, 
giving an early warning of osteoporosis and detecting oral health problems, 
says Marjorie Jeffcoat of the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

"People often see their dentist and dental hygienist more frequently than they 
see their doctors," she says. "I've been interested in whether it is possible 
to begin to harness some of the information we get from dental exams."

 Jeffcoat and her colleagues at Alabama, the Fred Hutchison Cancer Research 
Center in Seattle, and the National Institute of Dental Research in Bethesda, 
Md., hypothesize that they can use dental X rays to assess the overall health 
of a person's bones by scrutinizing the bone surrounding the teeth. To test 
their hypothesis, the team is comparing bone density seen in dental X rays to 
DXA scans of hipbone density for 450 postmenopausal women between the ages of 
50 and 85. The study began in 1996 and will continue until 2002.

 The researchers modified the traditional technique for dental X rays in one 
small way. They put a little block of aluminum on the holder that secures the 
X-ray film in the patient's mouth. Like bone, the aluminum interacts with X 
rays and thus can serve as a standard for comparison. The researchers developed 
a computer program to measure the density of the bone against the constant 
density of the aluminum block.

 Preliminary results show that women whose dental X rays reveal less dense bone 
also have weaker hipbones. Jeffcoat plans to present the team's latest findings 
at the International Women's Leadership Conference in Nice, France, in June.

 She anticipates that dental X rays could help screen for preliminary signs of 
osteoporosis. "What we would all like to avoid is having waited until [a bone] 
fractures," she says. In the future, dentists might catch people at the 
earliest stage of bone loss and refer them to their physicians.

 Chesnut is uncertain. "I doubt that many dentists or practicing physicians 
have a lot of awareness of the connection between dental bone loss and tooth 
loss and systemic osteoporosis," he says. If the connection is confirmed, 
however, he expects that doctors and dentists will work together on the 
problems of bone and tooth loss.

 A toothless grin shows obvious damage from periodontal infections, but long 
before teeth fall out, gum infections may wreak damage throughout the body.

 During the early phase of gum disease, bacteria create pus-filled pockets 
along the base of the tooth. The gums alongside the pockets eventually become 
an inflamed, oozing mass.

 Gum disease can develop into a sizable infection, Offenbacher says. An 
equivalent infection in a person's hands would be a raw, ulcerated wound that 
leaks pus, reaches down to the bone, and covers both palms, he notes.

 Unlike an infection in the hands, periodontal disease, especially in the early 
stages, does not cause pain or other annoying symptoms and therefore does not 
drive its victims to the dentist. Without treatment, the infection flourishes, 
first destroying gum tissue, then underlying bone, and, after years, causing 
the teeth to fall out.

 Researchers suspect that chronic infections like periodontal disease can 
affect systems throughout the body, including the cardiovascular system.

 Gum disease may increase the risk of coronary heart disease in at least two 
ways, suggest James Beck of North Carolina and others.

 The first mechanism stems from the chronic nature of gum disease. Bacterial 
infections activate the immune system, the body's defense mechanism. As part of 
its defense, the body generates a series of chemicals that constitutes an 
inflammatory response. In a chronic infection, the inflammatory response 
persists. Unfortunately, the chemicals that help ward off bacterial attackers 
can also damage body tissues. Such chronic inflammation launches a process that 
can lead to atherosclerosis (SN: 6/14/97, p. 374).

 Besides turning the body against itself, periodontal disease may cause acute 
damage to the heart. Because the bacteria-filled pockets are up against an open 
wound in the gum, the bacteria can -- and do -- get into the bloodstream. Such 
invasions happen all the time, says Genco. In people with severe periodontal 
disease, just brushing their teeth or eating some rough food may dislodge the 
bacteria and set them adrift in the bloodstream.

 Generally, the bacteria are cleared from the bloodstream rapidly, says Genco, 
whose research team took blood samples from patients who were having their 
teeth cleaned. Bacteria turned up in the blood samples but vanished within 2 
minutes. Because such fleeting infections do occur, people with heart murmurs 
or damage to a heart valve are advised to take antibiotics before dental 
procedures to prevent bacteria dislodged into the bloodstream from causing 
heart infections.

 Research on animals suggests that such short-lived infections in the blood may 
significantly affect even healthy hearts. At the AAAS meeting, Mark C. Herzberg 
of the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis reported that injecting rabbits 
with one strain of Streptococcus sanguis, a bacterium found in plaque, caused 
heart abnormalities.

 Herzberg and Maurice W. Meyer, also of Minnesota, began this research with 
test-tube experiments showing that some S. sanguis strains, those containing a 
surface protein called PAAP, cause human blood platelets to clump. When the 
researchers injected PAAP-containing S. sanguis into rabbits, the animals' 
heart rates, blood pressure, and breathing rates all increased within 3 minutes.

 In the recent study, the team gave the rabbits electrocardiograms (EKGs) for 
30 minutes after injecting the bacteria. Within 3 minutes, the EKGs showed 
abnormal heartbeat patterns. The aberrant beats indicated that the rabbits were 
having episodes of heart ischemia, periods when the heart muscle was not 
getting enough oxygen, Herzberg says. In humans, such ischemias are often 
precursors of heart attacks.

 All the changes seen in the rabbits indicate that the animals' hearts are 
having to work harder, he says. "We don't know if they go on to heart attacks, 
but we would certainly like to find out." The team intends to expand the 
experiments by following animals long enough to tell whether the heart muscle 
gets injured.

 Despite such findings, S. sanguis is not necessarily an enemy. A common oral 
bacterium, this species does not ordinarily appear harmful, and it may actually 
fend off other, more destructive bacteria. If a person's gums are healthy, 
there is little chance that this microbe in the mouth will get into another 
part of the body and behave badly, he says. "If people are diligent with their 
oral hygiene, I don't think these bugs should cause a problem."

 Researchers are establishing more and more links between periodontal 
infections and ailments such as heart disease and osteoporosis, Genco says. "We 
have only just begun to understand the many, many implications of chronic 
infections like periodontal disease on other diseases," he says.

"It's clear that dentists are going to have to know much more about systemic 
diseases and [that] physicians need to be more aware of oral diseases."

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 19, May 9, 1998, p. 300. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 References:  

 Beck, J. . . . S. Offenbacher. 1998. Periodontal disease and cardiovascular 
disease. Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
February. Philadelphia.

 Herzberg, M.C., and M.W. Meyer. 1998. Effects of oral flora on platelets: 
Possible consequences in cardiovascular disease. Meeting of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. February. Philadelphia.

 Offenbacher, S. . . . J. Beck. 1998. Periodontal infection as a possible risk 
factor for preterm low birth weight. Meeting of the American Association for 
the Advancement of Science. February. Philadelphia.

 Wactawski-Wende, J., R.J. Genco, et al. 1998. Factors affecting bone 
metabolism leading to osteoporosis, periodontitis and tooth loss in 
postmenopausal women: NHANES III. Meeting of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. February. Philadelphia.


