Science News Online (6/6/98):  Melanoma Madness The scientific flap over 
sunscreens and skin cancer -- Chemical studies

 June 6, 1998 

 Melanoma Madness 

 The scientific flap over sunscreens and skin cancer

 Chemical studies

 By CORINNA WU

 The parallel rise in skin cancer and sunscreen use has prompted chemists to 
reexamine the behavior of the products' active ingredients. 

 Because sunscreens absorb light energy and must then release it in some form, 
they may deliver damaging ultraviolet (UV) radiation to sensitive cells. That 
raises the troubling, but unproved, possibility that sunscreens may have a hand 
in promoting skin damage. To learn more, chemists are testing sunscreens' 
responses to UV light.

"Since [sunscreens] are so widely used, it is important to know as much as 
possible about them," says John Knowland of the University of Oxford in England.

 Surprisingly few reports on the chemistry of sunscreens have been published, 
says John M. Allen of Indiana State University in Terre Haute. So far, 
cosmetics companies have done most of the work, and they generally don't make 
their results available.

"Sunscreens have -- at least in theory -- the potential to inflict damage. That 
is, of course, a far cry from saying that they actually do inflict this damage 
in humans," says Knowland. Are they beneficial or harmful? Indeed, that's the 
burning question researchers want to answer.

 The sun bathes Earth in UV rays -- short, energetic wavelengths of light that 
can damage cells. Most of the UV light that reaches Earth falls in the 
ultraviolet A (UVA) range, having wavelengths of 320 to 400 nanometers (nm). 
Such rays penetrate deep into the base layer of the skin, or dermis. 

 Less of the light that reaches Earth's surface is in the ultraviolet B (UVB) 
range, with wavelengths of 290 to 320 nm. This light doesn't penetrate skin as 
deeply as UVA light, but it is more damaging.

 Scientists have only recently started paying attention to UVA radiation, once 
known as "tanning rays" in contrast to UVB's "burning rays." Tanning booths, 
for example, emit mostly UVA light.

 Researchers now know that UVA radiation both tans and burns the skin. 
Moreover, both UVA and UVB play a role in initiating skin cancers -- UVB by 
damaging DNA and UVA by suppressing the immune system. With the skin's defense 
and repair mechanisms held in check, damage goes unrepaired, thus leaving the 
door open for cancers to develop.

 Sunscreens prevent UV light from reaching the skin in one of two ways -- by 
absorbing it or by scattering it. Active ingredients such as Padimate O, octyl 
methoxycinnamate, and octyl salicylate absorb primarily UVB rays. The first 
sunscreen developed, para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), fell out of use because it 
stained clothing and was found to cause allergic reactions in some people. Last 
year, FDA approved avobenzone, also known as Parsol 1789, as a UVA absorber.

 Other substances, such as titanium dioxide and zinc oxide, can scatter both 
types of UV light. So-called chemicalfree sunblocks often contain these 
compounds, as did the white paste that decorated the noses of lifeguards years 
ago. Sunscreens today use smaller titanium dioxide particles, which are 
invisible.

 Most sunscreen formulations contain a mix of these compounds to provide 
broad-spectrum protection over UVA and UVB wavelengths.

 If sunscreens absorb light, they must also re-emit it. "They cannot destroy 
that energy, they can only convert it to some other form," says Knowland. 
Moreover, scattering compounds that reflect light off the skin also redirect 
some of it onto the skin.

 When exposed to UV light, a sunscreen's active compounds interact with inert 
ingredients and with each other, as well as with the skin. The first step in 
deciphering this complex interplay is to conduct test-tube studies of the 
chemicals involved.

 The results may not reveal what sunscreens actually do on the skin, but they 
do indicate what sunscreens are capable of doing -- "so that if you want to 
examine what these chemicals might do in a realistic situation, then at least 
you know what to look for," Knowland explains.

 In the early 1980s, researchers demonstrated that PABA increases the formation 
of a particular DNA defect in human cells. This defect occurs when two adjacent 
molecules of thymine, one of the four bases of DNA, link together chemically to 
form a dimer. People who lack the mechanism to repair these defects are more 
susceptible to skin cancer, says Knowland. "Thymine dimers in your DNA are bad 
news."

 Last year, Knowland and Oxford colleague P.J. McHugh found in test tubes and 
in laboratory-grown human cells that Padimate O, a derivative of PABA, does not 
generate such thymine defects. However, it does oxidize DNA, and it produces 
free radicals that break DNA strands.

 Titanium dioxide and zinc oxide create similar strand breaks. Aware of the 
compounds' potency, manufacturers coat the sunscreen particles to make them 
less active. "These treatments do indeed reduce the activity," Knowland notes, 
"but they don't seem to eliminate DNA damage altogether."

 Experiments have shown that sunscreen-protected skin seems to suffer less DNA 
damage than unscreened skin, notes Frank Gasparro of Thomas Jefferson 
University in Philadelphia. "However, DNA damage isn't the only thing that 
contributes to skin cancer." In recent years, dermatologists have also become 
concerned about sunlight's ability to suppress the immune system, but little is 
known about this effect.

 Knowland says that hydroxyl radicals probably caused the DNA strand breaks he 
observed in his laboratory experiments. Allen adds that oxygen radicals, while 
not as reactive, can also harm DNA and other cell components. In collaboration 
with Sandra K. Allen, he used a filtered lamp that simulates sunlight to 
illuminate various sunscreens and gauge their ability to produce oxygen 
radicals.

 That ability varied widely. PABA generated oxygen radicals most readily, 
whereas benzophenones, such as oxybenzone, and salicylates appeared to produce 
none. "They are not equal," Allen says. Based on these results, however, Allen 
hesitates to recommend any one sunscreen over another.

 The picture gets even more complicated when one considers how the sunscreens 
interact with the radicals they have generated. "The sunscreen actually forms 
oxygen radicals that we would like to protect the skin against, but sunscreen 
also reacts with and traps them," mitigating harmful effects, Allen speculates. 
Some scientists argue that it is by trapping radicals that sunscreen blends 
offer their protection, he notes.

 No one knows whether sunscreens form oxygen radicals under real-world 
conditions, nor, if such radicals do form, whether they would damage living 
cells, Allen cautions.

 Much of the debate rests on whether a given sunscreen penetrates the skin. If 
it stays on the outermost layer, the epidermis, the effects of free radicals 
may not matter, since the epidermis is made of dead skin cells, says Allen. If 
a sunscreen penetrates the epidermis, enters the underlying cells, and is then 
excited by UV light, the picture becomes more disconcerting.

 Studies have shown that skin does absorb certain sunscreens. The breakdown 
products of PABA, for example, can be detected in urine, Knowland says. The 
same is true of the UVA absorber oxybenzone, researchers from the University of 
Queensland in Australia reported in the Sept. 20, 1997 Lancet. Schering-Plough 
Health Care Products in Memphis, Tenn., manufacturer of several brands of 
sunscreen, countered in the Feb. 14 Lancet that the amount of absorbed compound 
the Australian team detected was too small to be harmful.

 UV-scattering compounds don't sidestep the question of absorption either. 
Reducing the size of titanium dioxide particles to make them invisible could 
also enable them to enter cells more easily, Knowland suggests. "As far as 
published literature is concerned, my own personal view is that this question 
has not been adequately addressed yet."

"The bottom line is, are sunscreens a good thing or not?" Most experts would 
say yes, perhaps dismissing as irrelevant the effects observed in the 
laboratory, Knowland continues. "They may turn out to be right, but my own view 
is that you have to continue to explore that before making an absolutely 
definitive pronouncement."

"Wishing for a result isn't going to get that result," Gasparro remarks. "More 
research and understanding of basic science and biology in the skin -- that's 
going to tell us what's going on."

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 23, June 6, 1998, p. 360. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 Also this week: 

 Epidemiologists are concerned because the rise in sunscreen use has occurred 
in tandem with an increase in skin cancer.

 Take a quiz to help determine your risk for developing skin cancer. 

 
