Science News Online (6/27/98): New tags may help diagnose turtle losses

 June 27, 1998

 New tags may help diagnose turtle losses

by J. Raloff

 Up to 8 feet long and weighing in at 1,200 pounds or more, the leatherback is 
the world's largest turtle-and one of the most unusual. Because leatherbacks 
are endangered globally, conservationists are anxious to help protect these 
behemoths of the high seas.

 And a tiny, biodegradable screw may help.

 Earlier this month, Molly Lutcavage of the New England Aquarium in Boston 
affixed a small radio transmitter to the back of a female leatherback, just 
minutes after the turtle had laid a clutch of eggs on a beach in Culebra, 
Puerto Rico. Lutcavage anchored the pocket-pager-size device to the animal's 
shell, or carapace, with screws normally reserved for orthopedic surgery 
patients. She's hoping the transmitter-the smallest satellite tracking device 
ever used on a sea turtle-will remain in place for the better part of a year, 
sending signals whenever the leatherback surfaces.

 Wildlife biologists have long known the sites where adult females come ashore 
to lay eggs. However, "we have almost no data on leatherbacks in non-nesting 
areas," observes Samuel Sadove of Long Island University in Southampton, N.Y., 
and director of leatherback research in Culebra. "A whole portion of the 
leatherbacks' life cycle-probably the most significant portion-is spent feeding 
[at sea] or traveling to and from feeding areas," he says. The paths that the 
far-ranging, virtually warm-blooded animals take and the company they keep 
remain "huge unknowns."

 Meanwhile, the species is dying out. "To say that leatherbacks are 
disappearing at a staggering rate, especially within the last 7 to 10 years, is 
an understatement," Sadove maintains.

 If scientists could map the turtles' high-seas trek with long-lasting 
transmitters, they might learn where the animals are most vulnerable, helping 
regulators design programs to protect them effectively. Until now, the 
leatherbacks' unique shell has thwarted most long-term tagging efforts.

 While biologists can glue transmitters to the bony shells of other turtles, 
the oily, flexible skin that covers the thin, loosely fused, bony plates in a 
leatherback's carapace resists adhesives. Indeed, Lutcavage spent a semester 
with chemical engineering students at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, having them test every glue they could find. The bottom line: 
"Nothing worked."

 Though some biologists have used bolts to attach transmitters to leatherback 
shells, the metal causes irritation. Eventually, the shell breaks around the 
bolt-dropping the transmitter and disfiguring the animal.

 The idea of trying biodegradable screws came from Anders G.J. Rhodin, an 
orthopedic surgeon in Lunenburg, Mass., who has made turtle biology his 
avocation. The leatherback supplies blood to the bone in its shell "in a way 
that's characteristic of mammals, but totally different from all other 
turtles," he says. So Rhodin suggested that Lutcavage take a mammalian 
approach, piercing the bone with roughly half-inch-long screws made of a 
synthetic polymer that slowly dissolves. She used screws provided by Instrument 
Makar of Okemos, Mich.

 Threaded through each screw is a nylon suture that ties on the $4,000 
transmitter. "As the screws dissolve," Rhodin explains, "they are replaced by 
bone" that continues to anchor the sutures until they weaken and release the 
transmitter. Once unburdened, a turtle will swim away with an intact shell, he 
predicts.

 If this approach works, Lutcavage says, her goal will be to tag juveniles and 
males that are accidentally hauled in by fishing fleets at sea. Indeed, while 
other sea turtles that encounter fishing gear frequently drown when they get 
hooked or held underwater, leatherbacks more often survive encounters with 
fishermen because, as jellyfish feeders, they ignore the hook-ridden bait.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 26, June 27, 1998, p. 406. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


