Science News Online (6/27/98): Clearing the Air About Turbulence

 June 27, 1998 

 Clearing the Air About Turbulence

 A fearful flier's foray

 By RON COWEN

 It's an embarrassing confession: I'm a space science reporter, but I'm afraid 
to fly.

 It's not the takeoffs. It's not the landings. It's that eternity in between, 
when the jumbo jet is cruising 30,000 feet above solid ground. Each time the 
seat belt sign comes on, my heart starts racing and my stomach begins doing 
flips.

 I dread even the hint of turbulence.

 Despite my fears, I have to admit I've been lucky-at least until April 16, 
when I boarded United Airlines Flight 925 from London to Washington, D.C. As 
usual, I asked to meet the pilots. While we shook hands, the captain, a man 
named Dan, assured me there would be only "a bit of weather" as we neared the 
U.S. coast-and even that promised to be minor.

 The first part of the trip was indeed smooth. When the sign telling passengers 
to fasten their seat belts came on 6 hours into the flight, there was nary a 
cloud in the sky, and I had no more than my usual anxiety. Then the plane began 
shaking violently. Pilot Dan ordered the flight attendants to their seats.

 Up and down, up and down. A few moments of calm and then trapped once more in 
a plummeting elevator. A rattled stewardess yelled a warning to watch out for 
objects flying through the air. I gripped my wife's fingers tightly in one hand 
and my sister-in-law's hand across the aisle in the other. My eyes were shut, 
waiting for the roller coaster ride to end. Or for the plane to crash.

 Then, after a few last tremors, the turbulence was over. A food cart had 
tumbled on its side, and the dinner-not that anyone was hungry-was in ruins. In 
a shaky voice, the stewardess announced that the last few minutes had been the 
worst turbulence she had experienced in 20 years of flying.

 Strapped tightly in my seat, I prayed we would land without another encounter.

 Aviation experts define turbulence as random, unpredictable motion that occurs 
at the boundary between layers of air moving at different speeds. Just as the 
smooth flow of an ocean wave breaks up into a maelstrom of swirls and eddies 
when it crashes on the shore, uniformly moving layers of the atmosphere that 
brush against each other fragment into vortices, and other small-scale 
disturbances. 

 Turbulence is often triggered when energy released by the sun-warmed ground or 
by a group of forming clouds heats a parcel of air at low altitude. The heated 
parcel rises, distorting the wind-flow pattern at higher altitudes and 
generating chaotic motion.

 Although rarely powerful enough to toss a 747 around, turbulence is 
essentially "a natural state of the atmosphere," says Larry Cornman of the 
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colo. In a thick 
fluid like molasses, friction between molecules smoothes out differences in 
motion and allows only broad, sluggish movements. In contrast, air molecules 
have very little friction between them. Thus, when parcels of air at different 
speeds encounter each other, they're more likely to break up into turbulent, 
unpredictable patterns, he notes.

 According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), turbulence is the 
leading cause of nonfatal accidents to airline passengers and flight 
attendants, costing commercial airlines in the United States an estimated $100 
million a year. From 1981 to 1996, the major air carriers reported 252 
incidents of turbulence, resulting in 2 deaths, 63 serious injuries, and 863 
minor injuries. Seat belts help avoid accidents: Both fatalities and 61 of the 
63 passengers who were seriously injured were not wearing them. Last December, 
turbulence caused a Boeing 747 en route from Japan to Hawaii to plummet 100 
feet. An unbelted passenger died after her head hit the ceiling. More than 100 
others were injured.

 Pilots and meteorologists don't always know when turbulence will strike, so 
buckling up only when the seat belt sign comes on isn't a reliable way to avoid 
injury. Storm clouds and heavy rain are good indicators that turbulence lies 
ahead, but about half of all passenger aircraft encounters with choppy air 
occur in cloudless skies, says Cornman. "There may not be a cloud around for 
500 miles, yet a plane gets bounced around," says Kenneth Leonard of the FAA in 
Washington, D.C.

 This kind of clear air turbulence is common above mountains. When an air mass 
slams into a mountain, it's forced upward. This parcel of air, denser than the 
surrounding air at that altitude, subsequently sinks back down to below its 
original height. The oscillations generated as the parcel continues to rise and 
fall create what's known as mountain-induced, or terrain-induced, turbulence.

"It takes a while for such a disturbance to settle out, and the [air] could be 
fairly turbulent downstream of the mountain," says Rodney Bogue of NASA's 
Dryden Flight Research Center in Edwards, Calif. The effects of 
mountain-induced turbulence may be felt more than 20,000 feet above a 
12,000-foot range, he adds.

 The jet stream, a broad ribbon of high-speed air moving from west to east at 
altitudes of 30,000 to 45,000 feet, also drives clear air turbulence. A craft 
entirely immersed in the jet stream moves at a steady, uniform rate. Indeed, 
eastbound planes often fly in the jet stream to take advantage of the wind 
pushing them along. At the boundaries of the stream, however, where it moves 
over slower air, wind shear can generate severe turbulence. In winter, when the 
stream lies at lower altitudes and latitudes, such turbulence is more common, 
Cornman notes.

 Complicating matters, the distinction between clear air turbulence and 
convective turbulence, in which storm clouds play a major role, is not always 
clear-cut, notes Cornman. Unsettled weather can create convective turbulence 20 
miles away, in regions where clouds may be few and far between.

 Convective turbulence is more prevalent during spring and summer, when storms 
over North America are more frequent, he adds. Radar systems, which bounce 
radio waves off raindrops, ice, and snow as many as 60 miles ahead of a craft, 
can warn pilots of suspicious weather patterns 10 minutes in advance.

 Researchers are investigating whether radar could detect convective turbulence 
more directly by tracking the motion of rain or ice particles entrained in a 
turbulent region. "This would be a new use for [on-board] radar," says Leonard.

 First, notes meteorologist David Pace of General Sciences Corp. in Laurel, 
Md., "we have to determine exactly what the signature of different types of 
turbulence looks like." He notes, for example, that if ice or rain particles 
are moving at wildly different speeds and directions-an indicator of 
turbulence-the frequency of the reflected radio wave will shift to higher or 
lower values, resulting in a wider spread in the frequencies of the reflected 
spectra.

"If we can develop an algorithm that will help us determine where turbulence is 
or where it might develop, based on something reflecting off the radar beam, 
that would improve both detection and forecast of turbulence," says Leonard.

 Detecting clear air turbulence poses a greater challenge, notes Cornman. Radio 
waves can only sense relatively large particles, such as rain or frozen water. 
In clear air, where no such particles exist, radar cannot detect turbulence.

 To help accomplish that feat, researchers have developed a laser system that 
shoots a beam of infrared light into the craft's flight path. Tiny dust 
particles, volcanic ash, and other natural aerosols, many less than a 
micrometer in diameter, reflect the laser light back to its source. If these 
particles happen to be entrained by turbulence, their swirling motion changes 
the frequency of the reflected light.

 Scientists tested a laser device in the mountain ridges of Colorado in late 
March and early April. During 15 hours of flying, light and moderate turbulence 
were detected 3 to 4 miles ahead of a research aircraft. "The system measured 
the turbulence, and then we felt the buffeting motion as we flew into it," says 
Bogue.

 He adds that tests of the system on commercial aircraft may begin within 3 
years. Developed by Coherent Technologies of Lafayette, Colo., in conjunction 
with NASA, the laser system may provide adequate warnings on passenger craft in 
5 to 7 years.

 Another detection strategy relies on the premise-as yet unproved-that 
turbulence produces traveling sound waves that can be detected by a craft miles 
away from the choppy air. This early warning system employs low-powered laser 
light that travels just a short distance, over a set path, before being 
reflected back to its source. The speed of the laser light, and hence its 
travel time, may vary with changes in atmospheric pressure induced by the sound 
waves.

"Sound waves generated by turbulence propagate through the atmosphere and have 
unique characteristics that we can detect, classify, localize, and track," 
asserts Sam Kovat, chief executive officer of Flight Safety Technologies, a New 
London, Conn., company that designed the experimental laser system.

 At Kennedy International Airport last month, scientists tested a two-laser, 
ground-based version of the system known as Socrates. It will take 3 to 5 years 
to perfect a ground system capable of detecting turbulence 100 miles away, says 
Kovat, and several more years before a system can be tested in the cockpit. 
Cornman cautions that if turbulence does generate sound waves, a supposition 
that is by no means certain, the waves may be too weak to be detected 100 miles 
from where they were created.

 Mountains loom above Alaska's Juneau airport, severely limiting departure 
routes and creating complex wind patterns. To take off safely, pilots typically 
have to execute a hairpin turn as the craft gains altitude. "It's one of the 
few airports where the pilots have to brief the passengers that they're going 
to be making a sharp 30@ bank to the left and a sharp 30@ bank to the right and 
then turn around," says Leonard.

 Depending on the direction and speed of the prevailing winds, some turbulence 
is almost inevitable, he adds. Even veteran flier Cornman got sick to his 
stomach when his research craft flew in and out of the choppy air above Juneau 
for 2 hours.

 To reduce the risk of accidents at the airport, the FAA and NCAR are 
attempting to develop a detection and early warning system. To measure wind 
speed more accurately, Cornman and Robert Barron of NCAR have set up a trio of 
ground-based devices known as Doppler wind profilers. These instruments gauge 
wind speed and turbulence, in 180-foot increments, from the ground to altitudes 
as high as 1.5 miles.

 Scientists at Juneau are also examining a set of radar devices, normally used 
to detect turbulence at low altitudes in the presence of rain or snow, to test 
whether these instruments can also detect turbulence at higher altitudes. In 
addition, the team is testing a laser system to search for turbulence in clear 
air.

 Cornman and other scientists are also working to improve long- and short-range 
forecasting of turbulence. To that end, they plan over the next few years to 
install devices on several hundred passenger planes that will automatically 
record and relay the severity of an encounter with turbulence. Rather than rely 
on subjective reports from the pilot, which may not be made until many minutes 
after the event, researchers will have immediate, precise data. The information 
will also warn other pilots of turbulent conditions and be used to refine 
forecast models.

 At the same time, NCAR scientists are developing a fuzzy logic forecast system 
in which selected turbulence-related parameters are fed into a computer model. 
Data that work best to help predict mountain-induced turbulence, for example, 
will be restricted to forecasting choppy air under those conditions and might 
be ignored in calculating storm-related disturbances. Cornman hopes to have a 
version of the new model in widespread use by next winter.

"It's not hard to do a better job than what's out there," he says.

 Turbulence may be scary, but encounters at cruising altitudes rarely cause 
serious injuries. The atmosphere provides a relatively stable platform for 
aircraft, says Cornman. "If you're at high altitude, there's very low 
probability of crashing. It would take an incredible amount of force to turn [a 
plane] over or put it out of control. The craft may go up and down like crazy; 
it does feel unstable, but if you look at the average motion, it's still zero.

"There's a continuum of turbulence encounters, from little bumps to pretty good 
bounces to very severe motion, where people get thrown to the ceiling, but most 
[encounters] are moderate," assures Cornman.

 At considerably lower altitudes-below 1,000 feet-the probability that 
turbulence would affect the plane "to the extent that you lose control is a lot 
greater. There's less room to recover, and you're typically going slower at a 
lower altitude, so there's less lift," says Cornman.

 Turbulence and wind shear at the lowest altitudes-during takeoff and 
landing-are much more dangerous than anything you encounter at cruising height, 
adds Cornman.

 Oh, no. Takeoffs and landings. Something new to worry about.

 Flying over mountain ridges in Colorado, researchers are testing an 
experimental laser system designed to detect turbulence in clear air and 
provide advance warning.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 26, June 27, 1998, p. 408. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 Rodney Bogue NASA Dryden Flight Research Center Mailstop 2033, Code RI 
Edwards, CA 93523-0273

 Larry Cornman National Center for Atmospheric Research University Corporation 
for Atmospheric Research P.O. Box 3000 Boulder, CO 80307-3000

 Kenneth Leonard FAA Weather TAC (GSC)600 Maryland Avenue, S.W. Suite 485 
Washington, DC 20024 

 David Pace FAA Weather TAC (GSC)600 Maryland Avenue, S.W. Suite 485 
Washington, DC 20024

copyright 1998
