Science News Online (6/27/98): Two teams find planet orbiting nearby star

 June 27, 1998 

 Two teams find planet orbiting nearby star

by  R. Cowen

 Astronomers this week reported that one of the sun's nearest neighbors-a star 
just 15 light-years from Earth-possesses a planet at least 1.6 times as massive 
as Jupiter.

 The unseen planet betrayed its presence through the characteristic wobble of 
its parent, a star called Gliese 876. Of all the stars thought to have planets, 
Gliese 876 is the closest to Earth. Weighing in at just one-third the mass of 
the sun, it is also the lightest of these stars.

 In hunting planets, researchers had previously focused on stars similar in 
mass to the sun. Finding a planet around one of the first low-mass stars to be 
examined offers a hint that planetary systems "may be a common occurrence among 
stars that are quite different from the sun," says Geoffrey W. Marcy of San 
Francisco State University and the University of California, Berkeley. He 
presented the findings at a symposium of the International Astronomical Union 
in Victoria, British Columbia.

 The newly detected planet takes 61 days to go around the star, and its average 
distance from its parent is one-fifth the separation between the sun and Earth. 
That's closer to the star than Mercury, the innermost planet of the solar 
system, is to the sun. Marcy says that this discovery brings to 12 the number 
of planets revealed by the wobble in a star's motion (SN: 5/17/97, p. 305).

 Theorist Didier Saumon of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tenn., told 
Science News that preliminary calculations indicate the surface of the 
planet-presumed to be gaseous-has a temperature around -75@C. That's far below 
the freezing point of water. The calculations also suggest, however, that in 
warmer layers not far below the surface, water could exist as liquid droplets.

 Although liquid water is thought to be a key ingredient for the development of 
life, "we shouldn't go into a feeding frenzy about this," cautions Marcy. He 
notes that within a gaseous planet, water cannot puddle and form an environment 
that can readily support organisms. Saumon adds, however, that if the planet 
has solid moons, they might lie within a temperate zone and could offer a 
foothold for living material. Jupiter's moon Europa, for example, is suspected 
of harboring a vast ocean and is a likely place to look for life (SN: 11/1/97, 
p. 284).

 Marcy and his colleagues, R. Paul Butler of the Anglo-Australian Observatory 
in Epping, Steven S. Vogt of the University of California, Santa Cruz, and 
Debra Fischer of San Francisco State, began studying Gliese 876 in 1994 at Lick 
Observatory on Mt. Hamilton in California. The faintness of this low-mass star, 
which has only about one-fortieth the intrinsic luminosity of the sun, made it 
difficult to analyze. Last year, the researchers began using one of the world's 
largest visible-light detectors, the Keck I Telescope atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea, 
to study 400 nearby stars, including Gliese 876.

 Observations with a high-resolution spectrometer attached to Keck I, including 
data recorded on June 18 and 19, revealed the presence of a planet. "It was the 
data from Keck that really nailed this planetary companion down," says Marcy.

 Two hours after Marcy announced the results at the Victoria meeting on June 
22, a colleague presented him with a startling e-mail. Another team, led by 
Xavier Delfosse of Geneva Observatory in Switzerland and Grenoble University in 
France, wrote that it had independently found evidence of the same planet. The 
researchers analyzed light from Gliese 876 using spectrometers at the 
Haute-Provence Observatory in France and the European Southern Observatory in 
La Serena, Chile.

"It's very convincing that they have confirmed [the finding]," says Marcy.

 Marcy notes that although gravitational interactions between a star and a 
nearby planet tend to make orbits circular, the new planet follows a path more 
elongated than that of Pluto. He told Science News that another star under 
study by his team appears to have a planet in an equally close but even more 
elongated orbit. "All of the planets in our solar system have more nearly 
circular orbits than these two new planets. They raise questions about how 
common the architecture of our solar system is," he says.

 One notion is that an elliptical orbit arises from the gravitational 
interaction of two giant planets that initially lie near each other but far 
from their parent star. After a close encounter between the planets, one ejects 
the other and then heads inward, in a smaller elliptical orbit (SN: 11/23/96, 
p. 328).

 In 2 weeks, a team led by astronomers in Geneva plans to announce the 
discovery of two planets orbiting stars farther from Earth than Gliese 876.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 26, June 27, 1998, p. 405. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 Marcy, G.W. 1998. Precise stellar radial velocities. Meeting of the 
International Astronomical Union. June. Victoria, British Columbia.


