Science News Online (6/20/98): Getting the scoop from the poop of T. rex

 June 20, 1998 

 Getting the scoop from the poop of T. rex

by  R. Monastersky

 Clues to the digestive habits of Tyrannosaurus rex have emerged from a 
65-million-year-old lump of dinosaur dung, discovered on an eroding hillside in 
the badlands of Saskatchewan, Canada.

 The whitish-green rock, 44 centimeters long, represents the first example of 
fossilized feces that clearly came from a carnivorous dinosaur, a group known 
as theropods, reports a team led by Karen Chin of the U.S. Geological Survey in 
Menlo Park, Calif. The rock, called a coprolite, is filled with broken bits of 
bone from an unfortunate herbivorous dinosaur. It "is rare tangible evidence of 
theropod diet and digestive processes," the team concludes in the June 18 
Nature.

 Paleontologists have previously found numerous examples of large plant-filled 
coprolites from herbivorous dinosaurs (SN: 9/21/96, p. 186). They have had 
difficulty, however, assigning coprolites to theropods because sites with 
dinosaur fossils often also contain skeletons of other carnivorous animals that 
could have produced bone-filled feces.

 Chin and her colleagues say that they can confidently identify the producer of 
the Saskatchewan specimen because the coprolite is so massive -- bigger than a 
loaf of bread. It must have come from a large theropod, and the only one known 
in these deposits is T. rex, says Timothy T. Tokaryk of the Eastend Fossil 
Research Station in Saskatchewan.

 Other researchers agree with that conclusion. "It had to be from a 
tyrannosaur, given the size of it, unless one of those smaller predators was 
very sick one day," jokes James O. Farlow of Indiana-Purdue University in Fort 
Wayne.

 Although T. rex has ruled the imaginations of children and paleontologists for 
over a century, researchers still debate such basic issues as whether the king 
carnivore captured live prey or scavenged carcasses. "It's very difficult to 
say much about their behavior," says Gregory M. Erickson of the University of 
California, Berkeley, a coauthor of the Nature article.

 The find offers new insight into the eating style of tyrannosaurs, Erickson 
says. It contains fragments of bone from a juvenile ornithischian dinosaur -- 
perhaps part of the head frill of a Triceratops, one of the most common 
dinosaurs whose remains appear in nearby rocks, say Chin and her colleagues. 
This evidence supports recent work by Erickson suggesting that T. rex's teeth 
were strong enough to crunch through bone, a topic of much debate in the past. 
At the same time, the find contradicts speculations that theropods completely 
dissolved the bones of their prey, much like modern crocodiles, which have 
extremely acidic stomachs.

 Because living reptiles often swallow large pieces of prey, the shattered 
condition of the bones in the coprolite came as a surprise, comments Peter 
Andrews, a paleontologist at the Natural History Museum in London. The bone 
fragments indicate that tyrannosaurs repeatedly crushed mouthfuls of food 
before swallowing, he says.

 Paleontologists caution against drawing too many conclusions from one 
specimen, but the recent discovery raises hope that more examples will turn up. 
"This particular find gives us an image of what theropod coprolites might look 
like," says Erickson.  

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 25, June 20, 1998, p. 391. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


