Science News Online (6/27/98): Feathered Dinosaurs Found in China

: June 27, 1998 

 Feathered Dinosaurs Found in China

by  R. Monastersky

 In the academic cockfight over bird origins, dinosaur researchers have 
discovered something to crow about. Two species of feathered dinosaurs have 
turned up in China, clinching the argument that birds arose from meat-eating 
dinosaurs, reports an international team of paleontologists this week.

"This is the most important dinosaur discovery of this century," says one of 
the researchers, Philip J. Currie of the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Paleontology 
in Drumheller, Alberta. "The credibility of the dinosaur-to-birds theory has 
just taken a gigantic leap ahead with these specimens."

 Since the 1860s, scientists have been debating whether dinosaurs sired birds. 
In recent years, numerous finds have supported the hypothesis that birds 
descended from two-legged, running dinosaurs called theropods (SN: 8/23/97, p. 
120). Dramatic evidence emerged in 1996 with the discovery of a Chinese 
theropod, Sinosauropteryx, that bore a coat of downy fibers, perhaps the 
evolutionary forerunners of true feathers.

 A few researchers, however, have pecked at the theory, arguing instead that 
birds evolved from four-legged arboreal reptiles. They regard any similarity 
between birds and dinosaurs as an example of convergent evolution, by which two 
independent groups grow to look alike. These critics maintain that 
Sinosauropteryx's fibers were not down but actually a reptilian frill.

 The plumage on the new Chinese dinosaurs brushes away such arguments because 
it is identical to bird feathers, says Currie. The structures have a central 
shaft with parallel barbs on either side, report Ji Qiang and Ji Shu-An of the 
National Geological Museum in Beijing, Currie, and Mark A. Norell of the 
American Museum of Natural History in New York at a press conference on June 23 
at the National Geographic Society in Washington, D.C., and in the June 25 
Nature.

 The two new Chinese dinosaurs-between 145 million and 125 million years 
old-come from the same fossil treasure trove in Liaoning province that yielded 
Sinosauropteryx. One of the feathered dinosaurs is named Protarchaeopteryx 
robusta because it had a more primitive anatomy than the oldest known bird, the 
150-million-year-old Archaeopteryx. Two other specimens belong to a new 
species, Caudipteryx zoui, which is the closest known relative of birds.

 The fossils are considered theropod dinosaurs rather than true birds because 
they lack a number of features seen in Archaeopteryx and more advanced birds, 
says Norell. He and his colleagues doubt that the creatures could fly because 
they had relatively short forelimbs, short feathers, and a body twice the size 
of Archaeopteryx. What's more, their feathers had a symmetrical shape like that 
seen in flightless birds today.

 Critics of the bird-dinosaur theory remain unflappable in the face of the new 
evidence. Ornithologist Alan Feduccia of the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill surmises that the new finds are actually ancient birds that lost 
the power of flight and came to resemble theropods superficially. "The fact 
that they had elongate feathers indicates that they came from a flighted 
ancestor," he says.

 Such arguments don't fly with most paleontologists, however. "These are 
animals that seem to be, by all appearances, fairly conventional dinosaurs. 
They are not flightless birds," says Lawrence M. Witmer of Ohio University in 
Athens.

 If feathers appeared first on ground-dwelling dinosaurs, then they must have 
originally served some purpose unrelated to flight. Some scientists speculate 
that down, like the Sinosauropteryx structures, evolved first and insulated the 
bodies of small theropods. Large plumes later may have served as a display for 
attracting mates.

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 26, June 27, 1998, p. 404. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.

 Qiang, J., P.J. Currie, M.A. Norell, and J. Shu-An. 1998. Two feathered 
dinosaurs from northeastern China. Nature 393(June 25):753.

 Further Readings: 

 Monastersky, R. 1998. 'Feathered' dinosaur makes debut. Science News 153(Feb. 
7):95.

______. 1997. Biologists peck at bird-dinosaur link. Science News 152(Nov. 
15):310.

______. 1997. A fowl fight. Science News 152(Aug. 23):120.


