Science News Online (7/18/98): Infanticide Reported in Dolphins

 July 18, 1998 

 Infanticide Reported in Dolphins

 By S. Milius 

 Bottlenose dolphins, the darlings of sea parks and nature tourism worldwide, 
have now received the distinction of being the first of the 
dolphin-porpoise-whale group accused of killing youngsters of their own species.

 A research team in Scotland and another in the United States say that young 
dolphins found on the shores were probably pummeled to death by adult dolphins. 
The researchers cannot tell which adults attacked or why. 

"There is this public ethos that dolphins couldn't do a thing like that," 
observes Tony Patterson of the Inverness Veterinary Centre in Scotland. Yet 
five carcasses of youngsters discovered in Moray Firth show a "specific and 
consistent pattern" of injuries typical of dolphin attacks, he says. He and his 
colleagues report their evidence in the July 7 Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of London B.

 Dale G. Dunn of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in Washington, D.C., 
found the same pattern in nine dead dolphin calves retrieved from the Virginia 
coast during 1996 and 1997. The bodies did not look badly injured, but when he 
opened the carcasses, Dunn found broken bones, ripped tissue, and bruised 
organs. "It looks like someone had taken a baseball bat and just literally 
beaten these animals to death," Dunn says. He and his colleagues presented 
their findings at the Sixth Annual Atlantic Coastal Dolphin Conference in May 
in Sarasota, Fla.

 In 1996, Ben Wilson from the University of Aberdeen in Scotland and H.M. Ross 
from Inverness, coauthors of the recent article, reported that 60 percent of 
harbor porpoises found dead on the northeast Scottish coast appeared to have 
been killed by dolphins. To identify the killers, Wilson compared teeth marks 
seen on some of the corpses with mammal jaws in museums.

 Since then, people have caught some attacks on video, Patterson reports. One 
to three dolphins chase a porpoise and ram their beaks into it hard enough to 
toss it into the air. "When [it's] thrown high out of the water, there's 
massive twisting injury," Patterson says. Blubber and muscle rip away from the 
bones.

 The attackers make no attempt to eat the victims. "Once the porpoise is dead, 
it's like flicking a light switch. The dolphins immediately lose interest and 
just go on their way," Patterson observes. What prompts the attacks remains a 
fountainhead of speculation. Hypotheses range from rough play to sexual 
frustration.

 When Patterson and his colleagues found the same kind of injuries as they had 
seen in porpoises in young bottlenose dolphin carcasses, they fingered older 
dolphins as the culprits.

 The attacks on dolphins less than a year old have spawned numerous theories. 
"Probably my favorite is male infanticide," notes coauthor Paul Thompson from 
Aberdeen. If a new suitor approaches a female that already has a youngster, 
"there's no point in hanging around for two years with the wrong male's calf," 
he says. Killing the calf might bring the female into a receptive state much 
sooner.

 From dolphin studies in Shark Bay, Australia, Richard C. Connor of the 
University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth and his colleagues predicted killer 
males. Although they observed no infanticide, they noted that females become 
fertile within 1 to 2 weeks of losing an infant.

 Murderous stepfathers are certainly a possibility, agrees Susan Barco of the 
Virginia Marine Science Museum in Virginia Beach, who collaborated with Dunn. 
"We're still very baffled about what is going on," she says.

 In 1997, she found more than four times as many dead young dolphins as she did 
in 1994, raising the possibility of a boom in infanticide. "I have the feeling 
that in the past year, it probably became acute," Barco says.

 Marine mammal specialist John Harwood from University of St. Andrews in 
Scotland notes that "these results are remarkably similar to those for large 
terrestrial carnivores like lions." Young males sometimes jump-start their 
dynasties by killing off another's offspring, he says. "It suggests that the 
evolutionary pressures in the marine environment are not so different from 
those on land."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 3, July 18, 1998, p. 36. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 
