Science News Online (7/18/98): Livestock's role in antibiotic resistance

 July 18, 1998 

 Livestock's role in antibiotic resistance

 By J. Raloff 

 Increasingly, infectious disease specialists have been campaigning against 
excessive use of antibiotics. They argue, the greater the exposure of bacteria 
to these drugs, the greater will be the chance that the microbes become 
resistant to them. While public attention has focused on the prescription 
practices of doctors, about one-quarter of the antibiotics dispensed in the 
United States aren't targeted at diagnosed disease. Instead, they're 
administered in subtherapeutic doses to promote weight gain in apparently 
healthy livestock.

 In the past year, several strains of pathogenic bacteria with resistance to 
nearly all known antibiotics have emerged. Because most human antibiotics are 
also administered to animals, the National Research Council (NRC) and the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) in Washington, D.C., convened an expert panel to 
explore drug use in livestock-especially growth-promoting, subtherapeutic 
applications-as a factor behind antibiotic resistance in foodborne bacteria.

 The panel reports that cases of antibiotic-resistant human disease have 
"clearly occurred" due to bacteria from livestock treated with the drugs. Data 
indicate that growth-promoting use of antibiotics has fostered at least some of 
that resistance, says panel member George W. Beran, a veterinarian at Iowa 
State University in Ames.

 However, Beran observes, the extent to which agricultural use is diminishing 
antibiotics' utility in fighting human disease "has not yet been quantified 
with hard data." It remains unclear whether the documented cases reflect a 
widespread problem or just a few isolated outbreaks, he says. Indeed, the new 
report concludes that antibiotic use in livestock "does not appear to 
constitute an immediate public-health concern," but it cautions, "additional 
data might alter this conclusion."

 Hoping to resolve the uncertainties, the panel calls for a standing task 
force. Its members, to be recruited from both human and veterinary medicine, 
would be charged with collecting and analyzing data not only on the emergence 
of resistant strains of bacteria but also on the ways and the places that 
specific antibiotics have been used.

 In the meantime, the panel calls for "propitious use of subtherapeutic 
antibiotics," Beran says-which means, "if there are alternatives, consider 
using them."

 As the "first authoritative U.S. report to explicitly acknowledge that use of 
antibiotics in farm animals poses a risk to human health," this is a "landmark" 
document, says Patricia B. Lieberman of the Center for Science in the Public 
Interest, an advocacy group in Washington, D.C. However, she finds its 
recommendations "soft," arguing that sufficient data already exist for the 
NRC/IOM panel to have justified "ending the subtherapeutic use of antibiotics."

 Says Beran, "We didn't consider that tenable." Where subtherapeutic 
antibiotics have been phased down or out, data show that overt animal disease 
requiring antibiotic therapy sometimes increases, he adds.

 Not in Sweden, observes Stuart B. Levy, director of the Center for Adaptation 
Genetics and Drug Resistance at Tufts University in Boston. At a World Health 
Organization (WHO) meeting in Berlin on livestock and antibiotic resistance 
last October, Martin Wierup of the Swedish Animal Health Service in Johanneshov 
described how farmers coped with Sweden's 1986 ban on antibiotics to promote 
livestock growth.

 While infectious outbreaks in the first year increased the need for antibiotic 
therapy, Levy says, use of the drugs fell thereafter. Total antibiotic use for 
food animals in Sweden is now 55 percent lower than before the ban, according 
to a report by Wierup to be published this month in the Alliance for the 
Prudent Use of Antibiotics Newsletter.

 Though Frederick J. Angulo of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
in Atlanta would also prefer that "all growth-promoting use of antibiotics be 
terminated," he would be willing to accept the more limited recommendation that 
came out of the Berlin meeting-a ban on the subtherapeutic treatment of 
livestock with antibiotics prescribed for people or with closely related drugs.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 3, July 18, 1998, p. 39. Copyright C 1998 by 
Science Service.

 
