Science News Online (6/6/98): New spermicides stop cells gently

 June 6, 1998 

 New spermicides stop cells gently

by C. Wu

 A promising new class of spermicides has the potential to perform better, and 
with fewer drawbacks, than those available today.

 Researchers at the Wayne Hughes Institute in Roseville, Minn., have found that 
in test-tube experiments, organic vanadium compounds inactivate sperm more 
quickly than the common spermicide nonoxynol-9. "A 15-second exposure will 
knock [sperm] out completely," says Osmond J. D'Cruz. Moreover, the compounds 
work at lower concentrations and may avoid the problems that currently 
accompany repeated spermicide use.

 Spermicides such as nonoxynol-9 are "basically detergents," says D'Cruz. They 
immobilize sperm by washing away their outer membranes. However, these 
spermicides also destroy the membranes of other cells, thus damaging the lining 
of the vagina. Nonoxynol-9 kills beneficial bacteria in the vagina, allowing 
bacteria that cause urinary tract infections to thrive (SN: 9/14/96, p. 165).

 The vanadium compounds, on the other hand, stop sperm by shutting down the 
motors that turn their whiplike tails. Using a microscope, the researchers 
could see that the compounds leave a sperm's outer membranes undisturbed, 
suggesting that they won't disrupt other cell membranes either, says D'Cruz. He 
and his colleagues Phalguni Ghosh and Fatih M. Uckun report their findings in 
the June Biology of Reproduction.

 The team discovered vanadium's spermicidal properties while searching for 
alternatives to a platinum-based drug used to treat testicular cancer. Knowing 
that the drug interferes with sperm production, D'Cruz and his colleagues 
decided to investigate the spermicidal properties of various organic metal 
compounds. They found that compounds containing titanium, zirconium, 
molybdenum, or hafnium did not inactivate sperm, but 12 vanadium compounds did.

 The team is now testing vanadium compounds in animals. Henry Gabelnick of the 
Contraceptive Research and Development Program in Arlington, Va., points out 
that many spermicides are now being developed, including some that show 
antimicrobial action. 

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 23, June 6, 1998, p. 359. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

  


