Science News Online (7/11/98): What's in ocean water? Shards of bacteria

 July 11, 1998 

 What's in ocean water? Shards of bacteria

 By R. Monastersky 

 When a team of oceanographers used state-of-the-art techniques to analyze 
seawater, they came to a surprising conclusion: Tattered remnants of bacteria 
constitute much of the dissolved matter in the open ocean. This finding adds to 
a growing appreciation of bacteria's role in the seas.

"Bacteria are seen as more and more central to every aspect of what's going on 
in the open ocean," says Matthew D. McCarthy of the University of Washington in 
Seattle.

 McCarthy and his colleagues collected thousands of liters of water from remote 
spots in the central Pacific, the Gulf of Mexico, and the North Sea. They 
pumped the water through a series of filters, the last of which were so fine 
that they sifted out individual biological molecules-material collectively 
called dissolved organic matter.

 The oceanographers focused on amino acids, the building blocks of peptides and 
proteins. They found that four of the amino acids in the dissolved matter 
appeared in two flavors, left-handed and right-handed forms. This observation 
indicates that bacteria produced the amino acids, the scientists conclude. All 
other types of organisms make only the left-handed versions. The amino acid 
fingerprint, the mix of the various forms, indicates that they came from 
peptidoglycans, the main structural molecules in bacterial cell walls, says 
McCarthy, who collaborated with Washington's John I. Hedges and Ronald Benner 
of the University of Texas Marine Science Institute in Port Aransas. They 
report their findings in the July 10 Science.

 McCarthy and his colleagues rule out other possible sources of the 
right-handed amino acids. These uncommon structures can form naturally when 
left-handed amino acids undergo a transformation known as racemization. This 
process, however, takes many thousands to millions of years-too long to explain 
the amino acids' presence in ocean water. Moreover, the ratios of right- and 
left-handed amino acids in the seawater samples do not match the ratios 
expected from racemization.

 Jeffrey L. Bada of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, 
Calif., agrees that bacteria are the source of the right-handed amino acids. 
"You really can't explain it any other way," he says. Bada notes that bacteria 
coat themselves with right-handed amino acids because the unusual structures 
provide a tough exterior that resists other organisms. This is what helps 
bacteria evade digestive enzymes in human stomachs, he says.

 From the ratios of right- to left-handed amino acids in seawater, McCarthy and 
his colleagues conclude that a substantial fraction of the dissolved organic 
matter comes from bacteria. This challenges the traditional view that algae 
produce most of the ocean's soluble biological material.

 Until recently, oceanographers thought of algae as the main photosynthesizers 
in the ocean, occupying a niche similar to plants on the continents. Bacteria 
were considered instead to be the consumers that break down leftover pieces of 
algae and other organisms. Researchers, however, are gradually realizing that 
bacteria play an important role as primary producers in the nutrient-deprived 
ocean areas far from land, says McCarthy. "This suggests that actually the 
trees and grasses and bushes of the open ocean are largely bacteria."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 2, July 11, 1998, p. 23. Copyright C 1998 by 
Science Service.


