Science News Online (7/11/98): Timely Surprises - Biological clocks sense light 
in obscure ways

 July 11, 1998 

 Timely Surprises

 Biological clocks sense light in obscure ways

 By John Travis

 When a New Yorker jets off to Los Angeles or Tokyo, it takes just a few 
seconds to adjust a wristwatch to local time. But as sufferers of jet lag know 
all too well, the body's internal clock isn't nearly so quick to adapt. It 
usually takes a few days for a person's biological clock to synchronize with 
the dusk and dawn of a new time zone. 

 The lethargy of jet lag sets in during this adjustment period because this 
internal clock has a profound influence on the human body. It governs when we 
feel we should sleep or be active. It establishes daily, or circadian, rhythms 
in characteristics as diverse as hormonal concentrations and body temperature.

 Fortunately for travelers, the human biological clock uses environmental cues, 
primarily light, to continually match its time to that of the outside world. 
Yet mysteries remain about this entrainment, and two new studies have added to 
them.

 In one report, two researchers counter conventional wisdom with evidence that 
light shone on skin, rather than the eyes, can reset the biological clock. In 
the second, scientists suggest that the clock's response to light depends not 
upon the well-known light-sensing molecules of the eyes but rather on proteins 
related to plant photoreceptors.

 Neither study is definitive, and skepticism remains about both conclusions. 
Still, scientists who study biological clocks and the circadian rhythms they 
generate have of late encountered a fair share of surprises. Last year, for 
example, studies suggested that fruit flies may have independent biological 
clocks throughout their tissues rather than a single clock in their brains (SN: 
12/06/97, p. 365).

"We keep finding, almost every week, that there are remarkable things we don't 
know about our circadian system. The lesson is we should keep an open mind," 
says Thomas Wehr of the National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md.

 Wehr's open mind has been tested of late by what may be the most bizarre 
result ever described in biological clock research. In the Jan. 16 Science, 
Scott S. Campbell and Patricia J. Murphy of Cornell University Medical College 
in White Plains, N.Y., report that light focused on the backs of people's knees 
reset their biological clock as readily as light shone on the eyes.

 If true, this finding might make light therapy, now used by shift workers and 
people with jet lag, insomnia, or other sleep disorders, much more practical. 
"You may be able to do it while you're asleep," says Campbell. "Compliance is a 
major issue [with light therapy]. People don't have time to sit in front of a 
light box for a couple of hours."

 Campbell and Murphy's unusual experiment is in fact the offshoot of a study 
conducted by Wehr more than a decade ago. Wehr and his colleagues had tested 
whether light therapy could offer any relief to people with seasonal affective 
disorder, a depression stemming from the shorter days-and fewer hours of 
sunlight-of winter.

 Exposing their eyes to intense light proved helpful to most of the subjects, 
but even when their eyes were shielded and the light shone just on the skin, 2 
of the 10 people still reported feeling better. Campbell recalls that when Wehr 
discussed the experiment at meetings, he frequently suggested that someone 
should repeat the study. "We finally got around to doing it," laughs Campbell.

 Instead of relying on a subjective assessment of whether a person feels 
better, the investigators examined two well-studied physiological measures of 
the human biological clock-body temperature and saliva concentrations of the 
hormone melatonin. Both body temperature and melatonin concentrations rise and 
fall with a circadian pattern, and light provided to a person's eyes can 
advance or delay those cycles.

 To test whether light directed at other body locations can produce similar 
changes, Campbell and Murphy borrowed a device normally used to treat newborns 
with jaundice. This device, called the Billiblanket, consists of a halogen lamp 
that feeds light into 2,400 fiberoptic cables, each one ending inside a woven 
pad. The fiberoptics separate the light from the heat of the halogen lamp, 
which itself could influence a person's internal clock. Participants in the 
study had these pads secured to the back of their knees and received 3-hour 
light exposures from them. To prevent the light from reaching their eyes, 
participants sat with their legs below a table draped with an opaque cloth.

 In tests of 15 people, Campbell and Murphy found that light on the back of the 
knees matched the clock-altering ability of light directed into the eyes. The 
light-delivering pads efficiently advanced or delayed a person's biological 
clock, as measured by body temperature and melatonin saliva concentrations.

 Those unexpected results leave most biological-clock scientists incredulous. 
"I'm very skeptical," says Michael Menaker of the University of Virginia in 
Charlottesville. "I'd like to see [the study] repeated a couple of times by 
other laboratories. It's so out of the ordinary."

 How could light hitting the back of knees affect a biological clock? 
Presumably, says Campbell, the light is falling on some unknown photoreceptor 
there that is tied into the circadian system. One researcher, Dan A. Oren of 
Yale University, has even suggested that light penetrates the skin and strikes 
bloodborne photoreceptors that convey their signals to the brain's biological 
clock. The molecule hemoglobin might serve that role, he says.

 The study by Campbell and Murphy underscores an enduring mystery about the 
biological clocks of people and other mammals. While scientists have long 
recognized that light can reset internal timepieces, they're still at a loss to 
explain how the circadian system perceives the light. 

 The obvious suspects, light-sensing opsin molecules in the rod and cone cells 
of eyes, appear innocent. Consider a well-studied mutant strain of mice that 
suffers retinal degeneration. "These mice lose the layers of the retina that 
contain rods and cones. After a few months, they're totally blind. But their 
response to light, as far as the circadian clock goes, is absolutely normal," 
says Aziz Sancar of the University of North Carolina School of Medicine in 
Chapel Hill.

 Despite the recent back-of-the-knee study, eyes still seem to be the primary 
route by which the mammalian circadian system senses light. If scientists cut 
the optic nerve conveying information from the retina to the brain, mice lose 
their normal circadian rhythms. To resolve this seemingly contradictory 
evidence, investigators argue that retinas must contain light-sensitive 
proteins other than the traditional opsins.

"There's something in the retina that's not a rod and not a cone but is a 
specialized circadian photoreceptor," says Menaker.

 Sancar thinks he has found that photoreceptor. He normally studies the 
DNA-repair systems of microbial cells, particularly light-activated enzymes 
called photolyases that repair genetic damage caused by ultraviolet radiation. 
Although people weren't thought to possess such enzymes, Sancar and other 
scientists recently found two human genes encoding proteins with a strong 
resemblance to microbial photolyases. These proteins demonstrated no DNA-repair 
activity, however.

 Sancar then learned that other scientists had discovered similar proteins, 
named cryptochromes, in plants. There, they serve as photoreceptors, governing 
a plant's circadian response to blue light. "That was an important conceptual 
clue for us," he says.

 Sancar and his colleague Yasuhide Miyamoto have now found that the human 
cryptochromes, designated CRY1 and CRY2, are made in retinal cells. Moreover, 
CRY1 is also made in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the brain region 
thought to harbor the master biological clock in mammals. Production of CRY1 in 
that brain region rises and falls with a daily rhythm. Finally, CRY1 is 
abundant in skin tissue.

 From those pieces of evidence, Sancar contends that the cryptochromes may 
explain how eyes-and the skin, if the back-of-the-knee study proves 
correct-senses light for the mammalian biological clock.

 Circadian scientists express both fascination and caution about Sancar's work. 
"I think what's missing is functional evidence that [CRY1 and CRY2] play a 
role, but it's very intriguing that they're in the right places. They're 
certainly a very new and interesting candidate that we hadn't been thinking 
about," says Joseph S. Takahashi of Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.

 Noting that novel opsins are continually being discovered, scientists warn 
that they may have simply missed an opsin in the retina. "When you look for 
opsins and don't find them, what it can mean is that you don't have the right 
antibodies, you don't have the right techniques, and so on. I would say [the 
identity of the circadian photoreceptor] is still very much up in the air at 
the moment," comments Menaker.

 Sancar acknowledges that he has not yet proven that the cryptochromes are the 
circadian photoreceptors, but he suggests that mice genetically engineered to 
lack the proteins may resolve the issue. Sancar has already made a strain of 
mice lacking one of the cryptochromes. The circadian behavior of these mice is 
under study by Takahashi, an investigation that may take several months.

"I think everyone is waiting for us to test the knockout mice and see that 
they're visually okay but circadian blind," says Sancar.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 1, July 4, 1998, p.24. Copyright 1998 by 
Science Service.


