Science News Online (7/11/98): Marijuana chemical tapped to fight strokes

 July 11, 1998 

 Marijuana chemical tapped to fight strokes

 By J. Brainard

 The breakfast table may someday feature not only orange juice and vitamins but 
also a more exotic health booster-a compound extracted from marijuana.

 Cannabis contains a chemical that can protect cells by acting as an 
antioxidant, a new study shows. More effective than vitamins C or E, it offers 
an appealing option for the treatment and perhaps prevention of stroke, 
neurodegenerative diseases, and heart attacks, the researchers suggest.

 However, there's no worry that those who take it will become too stoned to 
read the morning paper. The compound, called cannabidiol, doesn't make people 
high.

 Scientists have yet to test whether the chemical has a protective effect in 
people. In test-tube experiments, researchers at the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Md., exposed rat nerve cells to a toxin that is 
typically released during strokes. Cannabidiol reduces the extent of damage, 
the scientists report in the July 7 Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences.

 In follow-up studies, the researchers induced strokes in rats and treated them 
with cannabidiol. Those experiments are not yet complete, but "we're getting 
some good results," says Aidan J. Hampson, a neuropharmacologist at NIH.

 Researchers suspect that many antioxidants can reduce the severity of ischemic 
strokes, in which blood vessels in the brain become blocked. During ischemic 
strokes, which make up 80 percent of all strokes, a toxin initiates the release 
of reactive oxygen molecules called free radicals into the bloodstream. These 
harmful molecules are under suspicion as one of the agents that cause stroke 
damage, such as paralysis and loss of speech and vision. Antioxidants such as 
cannabidiol neutralize free radicals and so might limit the damage.

 The NIH researchers had suspected that the group of molecules including 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the marijuana ingredient that produces a high, 
would act as antioxidants. In their study, THC and cannabidiol provided equal 
defense against cell damage. An earlier study at the University of Arizona in 
Tucson turned up no side effects of cannabidiol in people given large doses.

 A pharmaceutical company, Pharmos in Rehovot, Israel, is already conducting 
human clinical trials using a synthetic marijuana derivative, Dexanabinol, to 
treat damage from strokes and brain injury. Like cannabidiol, this compound is 
an antioxidant and does not produce euphoria.

"This is a promising area [of research] . . . particularly because we have so 
few effective means of treating stroke," said JoAnn E. Manson, a researcher in 
preventive medicine at Harvard Medical School. Stroke is the third leading 
killer in the United States (SN: 12/21&28/96, p. 388).

 The NIH researchers don't anticipate using cannabidiol to treat hemorrhagic 
stroke, characterized by bleeding within the brain, Hampson says. Antioxidants, 
however, could help treat other diseases that appear to be caused in part by 
free radicals. These include heart disease and two neurodegenerative disorders, 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 2, July 11, 1998, p. 20. Copyright C 1998 by 
Science Service.


