Science News Online (7/25/98): Muscle cells in damaged hearts may divide

 July 25, 1998 

 Muscle cells in damaged hearts may divide

 By J. Brainard

 Crooners who lament that broken hearts never mend may need to find another 
tune. New evidence suggests that, contrary to scientific consensus, heart 
muscle cells do divide and the number of cells can increase.

 The vast majority of heart muscle cells, or myocytes, had been thought to stop 
dividing by the time a person reaches the age of 9. These cells then pump blood 
for the rest of a healthy person's life. In people stricken by a heart attack, 
the cells die and are replaced by scar tissue.

 The first report of a human myocyte caught in the act of dividing appears in 
the July 21 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The myocyte came 
from a left ventricle, the most powerful chamber of the heart and the one most 
afflicted by heart attacks. Piero Anversa of New York Medical College in 
Valhalla, N.Y., and his colleagues used a powerful optical microscope to look 
for dividing cells in tissue damaged by heart attacks. They detected cell 
nuclei that were splitting.

"When we saw that, we really jumped," Anversa says. Other scientists searching 
for dividing heart cells had not tried that technique, he adds.

 The finding strengthens the possibility that scientists can develop medical 
treatments to enhance cell division and restore healthy heart muscle, says 
Anversa. It is too soon, however, to know to what extent such treatments might 
repair damaged hearts, such as those suffering congenital heart disease (see p. 
62).

 Anversa and his colleagues at the University of Udine in Italy, studied hearts 
removed from 27 people who had received transplants. The researchers stained 
slices of heart tissue half a micrometer thick and used a confocal microscope 
to count the individual cell nuclei caught in the process of division. Judging 
from these samples, he and his colleagues estimate that 131 to 152 myocytes in 
every million were dividing.

 That proportion suggests that the cells of a damaged ventricle could be 
replaced within a year, the researchers calculate. However, many heart-attack 
victims do not recover their previous pumping efficiency nearly that quickly.

 Anversa speculates that if new cells merely enlarge the heart, the weakened 
organ may suffer further damaging strain. If the cells grow in a way that 
thickens the heart wall, however, they might make the organ stronger. 
Scientists don't yet know how to influence cell division to regenerate healthy 
tissue.

 The extent of cell proliferation that Anversa observed remains controversial. 
Myocytes can contain multiple nuclei, so dividing nuclei do not necessarily 
provide the best measure of cell proliferation, comments Kenneth R. Chien of 
the University of California, San Diego. However, Anversa says, the proportion 
of myocytes with multiple nuclei does not increase after heart attacks.

 If the findings allow scientists to modify heart cell division, "it will be 
tremendously important," says Radovan Zak of the University of Chicago.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 4, July 25, 1998, p. 54. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


