Science News Online (8/15/98): Non-estrogen morning-after pill works best

 August 15, 1998 

 Non-estrogen morning-after pill works best

 By N. Seppa

 In the 1970s, Canadian scientist Albert A. Yuzpe discovered that a multiple 
dose of birth control pills taken within a few days of sexual intercourse could 
avert pregnancy by flooding a woman's system with a burst of hormones.

 The so-called morning-after pill containing estrogen and progestin works about 
three-fourths of the time, but it often causes nausea and vomiting. Researchers 
now report that a pill without estrogen but with a larger dose of progestin, 
also called progesterone, prevents conception better than the dual pill and 
causes fewer side effects.

 A 14-country study by the World Health Organization (WHO) tested the two kinds 
of pills on 1,955 women, average age 27, who reported to clinics after having 
unprotected sex. About half were given the two-hormone pill and a follow-up 
dose 12 hours later. The other women received similarly timed doses of a 
synthetic progestin, also called levonorgestrel, but no estrogen.

 Pregnancy occurred despite the treatment in 10 of the 976 women who had 
received levonorgestrel and in 28 of the 979 who had been given the dual 
contraceptive. The researchers estimated the number of pregnancies that might 
have been expected in these groups, given the timing of the unprotected sex in 
the menstrual cycle. Levonorgestrel averted 85 percent of the potential 
pregnancies, while the dual pill prevented 57 percent.

 Only 23 percent of the women receiving levonorgestrel reported nausea, and 
less than 6 percent vomited. In the other group, 51 percent had nausea and 19 
percent vomited.

"Estrogen is a well-known cause of nausea," says obstetric gynecologist Felicia 
H. Stewart of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation in Menlo Park, Calif. The 
milder side effects of levonorgestrel and its high pregnancy-prevention rate 
make the WHO findings "very persuasive," she says.

 Scientists had been concerned that levonorgestrel taken by itself would 
disrupt a woman's subsequent menstrual cycles. This study showed no difference 
between the two pills in this regard, says study coauthor Paul F.A. Van Look, 
an obstetric gynecologist at WHO in Geneva.

 Even as scientists fine-tune the emergency contraception pill, the misnomer 
attached to Yuzpe's discovery still stands as a classic in medical science. The 
morning-after pill can in fact work up to 72 hours after intercourse. A U.S. 
study now finds that this mislabeling has had consequences.

 Stewart and her colleagues report in the August Archives of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine that U.S. teens show scant knowledge of emergency 
contraception. Of 1,510 boys and girls ages 12 to 18, surveyed by telephone in 
1996, only 23 percent knew that such pills exist. Of those aware of the 
treatment, just 9 percent understood that the window of opportunity lasts a 
full 72 hours.

"Many people got the misconception that anything after [the morning after] 
would be too late," says study coauthor Suzanne F. Delbanco, a health policy 
analyst currently at the University of California, Berkeley. In the United 
States, the pills are mostly made available at emergency rooms and college 
health centers for rape victims or other women who report unprotected sex, she 
says.

 U.S. drug companies have shied away from marketing hormone pills in 
emergency-contraception packets in part because birth control is politically 
sensitive and because contraception is often not covered by medical insurance, 
Stewart says. But some firms now have plans to package and sell them as such.

 In Seattle, a pilot project in which pharmacists could dispense 
emergency-contraception pills after taking a brief patient history resulted in 
800 treatments in the first month, she reports.

 These pills, which use hormones to prevent conception, differ from the 
so-called abortion pill RU-486 that blocks the hormones and can work beyond the 
72-hour window.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 7, August 15, 1998, p. 101. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


