The Bacteria in the Stone   Extra-tiny microorganisms may lead to kidney stones 
and other diseases

 August 1, 1998 

 The Bacteria in the Stone

 Extra-tiny microorganisms may lead to kidney stones and other diseases

 By John Travis

 In the fine tradition of transforming lemons into lemonade, here's a story of 
a laboratory annoyance and how it may lead researchers to a new therapy for one 
of the most painful maladies that people suffer.

 Almost a decade ago, E. Olavi Kajander faced a problem that has frustrated 
many a biologist. The biochemist at the University of Kuopio in Finland was 
trying to culture mammalian cells, but they simply weren't thriving. The cells 
grew very slowly, if at all, and many contained abnormal bubbles, or vacuoles, 
within their cytoplasm.

 Scientists usually grow mammalian cells in fetal bovine serum, made from the 
fluid part of cow blood. The serum is considered sterile, but viruses and 
mycoplasmas-small bacteria without rigid cell walls-sometimes contaminate it 
and cause problems. So Kajander and his colleagues examined their sickly cells 
with an electron microscope.

 The investigators didn't find any viruses or mycoplasmas, but they did capture 
images of unusually small bacteria inside many of the cells. In the years since 
then, Kajander and his colleagues have isolated and characterized the tiny 
microorganisms, dubbing them nanobacteria because they range in diameter from 
50 to 500 nanometers (see sidebar).

"They are as small as the largest viruses-and smaller," says Kajander.

 Although his group's work suggested that nanobacteria often contaminate fetal 
bovine serum, and more rarely human blood, Kajander's research was largely 
ignored by his colleagues in Finland and the rest of the world.

 Last month, however, nanobacteria stepped into the scientific spotlight. In 
the July 7 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), Kajander and 
his colleague Neva Ciftcioglu contend that nanobacteria live in urine and, by 
precipitating calcium and other minerals around themselves, induce the 
formation of kidney stones.

"We believe that they are the real starting point of most kidney stones," says 
Kajander.

 That provocative claim, along with the possibility that antibiotics might help 
people who suffer from chronic stone formation, has caught the attention of 
some researchers. "It's exciting," says Leroy M. Nyberg, director of urology 
programs at the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases in Bethesda, Md. "I think it's the first real theory as to what is the 
nucleation factor for [kidney stones]."

"I'm sure there will be a lot of controversy around this, but I think 
controversy is good if it leads to experimentation," adds Dennis A. Carson of 
the University of California, San Diego, who published a commentary on the 
research in the same issue of PNAS.

 Why have nanobacteria escaped the attention of microbiologists until recently? 
First, their small size makes them difficult, if not impossible, to see with 
traditional light microscopes, says Kajander. Moreover, many of the chemicals 
used to stain cell walls or other components of traditional bacteria fail to 
bind to nanobacteria.

 Also, the microbes don't thrive on agar, the jellylike medium used to grow 
most bacteria. Finally, while many bacteria divide every hour or so, 
nanobacteria multiply very slowly, doubling in number about every 3 days. This 
slow growth makes it tough to study their metabolism, explains Kajander.

 Despite such challenges, the Finnish researchers have put together a fair-size 
dossier on the microbes. When grown in serum, alone or with mammalian cells, 
they often form a white biofilm. The bacteria also appear able to trick cells 
that don't normally engulf microbes into incorporating them. In doing so, says 
Kajander, nanobacteria can trigger the cell suicide program known as apoptosis, 
which likely explains how nanobacteria stymie scientists trying to grow 
mammalian cells.

 The investigators have been able to develop antibodies that bind to surface 
proteins of nanobacteria and have also isolated some of their DNA. In 
particular, they've sequenced the gene encoding a component of ribosomes, the 
protein-making machinery in all cells. By comparing that gene's sequence to 
those of the corresponding genes of other organisms, the Finnish scientists 
conclude that nanobacteria are closely related to Brucella and Bartonella 
bacteria. Some species of these bacteria are also known to infect the blood of 
animals and people.

 Kajander and his colleagues have found that about 5 percent of Finnish people 
are, or have been, infected with nanobacteria. The scientists have detected 
nanobacterial proteins in human blood and also have grown the organisms from 
blood samples. Yet, blood may not be the primary habitat of these microbes. 
When injected into animals, the bacteria seem to move quickly to the kidneys 
and end up in the urine, says Kajander.

 At least one other microbiologist has confirmed the existence of the 
nanobacteria. James W. Coulton of McGill University in Montreal, Quebec, who 
specializes in the surface proteins found on bacteria, has also isolated 
slow-growing microbes that build calcified shells. Coulton says his organisms 
are the same as those observed by the Finnish group and that they are indeed 
bacteria.

"We've isolated proteins from these organisms which are quite like the proteins 
of other bacteria," Coulton says. These proteins, called porins, are usually 
employed by bacteria to form channels that allow nutrients to enter through the 
cell wall.

 As Kajander and his colleagues learned more about nanobacteria, they grew 
increasingly curious as to whether the microbes were responsible for any human 
diseases, particularly ones not normally attributed to infectious agents. Such 
connections are not unprecedented. Take ulcers, for example. Though many 
physicians resisted the idea for years, most now agree that the bacterium 
Helicobacter pylori causes the majority of ulcers.

 Although the evidence is not yet nearly as compelling, scientists have also 
built cases that illnesses as diverse as heart disease, diabetes, arthritis, 
and multiple sclerosis might in some cases stem from bacterial or viral 
infections.

 An unusual feature of nanobacteria immediately suggested that the Finnish 
researchers look into kidney stones. Under certain growth conditions, including 
the acidity and mineral concentrations found in urine, the microbes somehow 
induce precipitation of dissolved calcium, phosphates, and other minerals into 
carbonate apatite, a major component of many kidney stones.

 Through this still unexplained process, the nanobacteria build a mineralized 
shell around themselves, a structure large enough to be visible even with 
low-powered light microscopes. These "castles," as Kajander calls them, may be 
made by the microbes as a protective measure. Or they may simply result from 
the interaction of proteins on the nanobacterial surface with minerals 
dissolved in the surrounding fluid.

 Whatever the explanation for the apatite-encrusted bacteria, the researchers 
began to wonder if such microbes provided the foundation for kidney stones, as 
grains of sand or other irritants provide the nucleus for pearls.

 Kidney stones strike an estimated 10 percent of people in the United States at 
least once. Although scientists know that the painful stones form when minerals 
precipitate out of urine, they're unable to explain why this process begins.

"We still don't know what the nucleus is that starts the precipitation. We've 
never really been able to determine that," says Nyberg. "We've plateaued in 
stone research for almost the last decade. We really need something to open it 
up again."

 Nanobacteria may offer that opening. Nyberg notes that some bacteria have 
already been linked to kidney stone formation, although the mechanism behind 
that connection is dramatically different. For the 5 to 15 percent of kidney 
stones formed largely of the mineral struvite, bacteria that produce an enzyme 
called urease are to blame. Urease makes urine more acidic, a condition under 
which mineral precipitation occurs more readily, and so indirectly encourages 
kidney stone formation.

 Kajander and Ciftcioglu have linked nanobacteria more directly to kidney 
stones. In PNAS, they describe how they broke apart human kidney stones and 
then looked for evidence of the microbes.

 In all 30 stones tested, antibodies that bind specifically to nanobacteria 
proteins attached to material derived from the stone. Electron microscope 
images also showed nanobacteria in samples of dissolved stones. Finally, the 
researchers were able to grow nanobacteria from some of the dissolved stones.

 Kajander is confident enough of his group's result to suggest that physicians 
should begin testing whether antibiotics can help people with recurrent kidney 
stones. Nanobacteria are resistant to many antibiotics, perhaps because of 
their mineral shells, but tetracycline has proven effective against them in 
test-tube experiments, he notes. Because tetracycline accumulates on apatite, 
it may concentrate near nanobacteria, says Kajander.

 The association with kidney stones should draw much more attention to 
nanobacteria, predict researchers. Coulton suggests that microbiologists may 
have so far shunned these microbes because they prefer to study bacteria, such 
as Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis, that grow quickly and can be 
genetically manipulated with ease. 

"But because of the disease link, I think people are going to be a lot more 
open to the idea that [nanobacteria] warrant further study," he says.

 The medical significance of nanobacteria may eventually extend beyond kidney 
stones. In a variety of human disorders, including dementias, atherosclerosis, 
cancers, and arthritis, unexplained calcium precipitation occurs in various 
tissues of the body, notes Carson in his commentary. And people who get 
frequent blood transfusions as part of dialysis treatment often develop 
dangerous calcium deposits, he adds.

 Adding to the intrigue, Kajander and Ciftcioglu have conducted a preliminary 
study of Turkish people who are undergoing dialysis and found that 80 percent 
displayed evidence of nanobacteria in their blood.

"There is ample cause to investigate thoroughly the part that nanobacteria play 
not only in renal stone formation but also in the many perplexing diseases 
associated with pathological extraskeletal calcification," concludes Carson. 

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 5, August 1, 1998, p. 75. Copyright C 1998 by 
Science Service.


