Science News Online (8/15/98): Cracking Kepler's sphere-packing problem

 August 15, 1998 

 Cracking Kepler's sphere-packing problem

 By I. Peterson

 The familiar piles of neatly stacked oranges at a supermarket represent a 
practical solution to the problem of packing spheres as tightly as possible.

 Now, a mathematician has proved that no other arrangement of identical spheres 
fills space more efficiently. That result -- if verified -- would finally solve 
a problem that has stymied mathematicians for more than 300 years.

 Thomas C. Hales of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor announced the feat 
this week and posted his set of proofs on the Internet ().

"These results are still preliminary in the sense that they have not been 
refereed and have not even been submitted for publication," he noted, "but the 
proofs are -- to the best of my knowledge -- correct and complete."

 The proofs look convincing, says John H. Conway of Princeton University. 
"Hales has been careful to document everything, so that an auditor who has 
doubt over any particular point can actually go to the files and check that 
point."

 When supermarket personnel stack oranges, the bottom layer consists of rows 
that are staggered by half an orange. Placing oranges in the hollows formed by 
three adjacent oranges in the first layer produces the second layer, and so on. 
Such an arrangement is known as face-centered cubic packing.

 In 1611, Johannes Kepler asserted that this arrangement is the tightest 
possible way to pack identical spheres. In the 19th century, Carl Friedrich 
Gauss proved that face-centered cubic packing is the densest arrangement in 
which the centers of the spheres form a regular lattice. That left open the 
question of whether an irregular stacking of spheres might be still denser.

 In 1953, Laszlo Fejes Toth reduced the Kepler conjecture to an enormous 
calculation involving specific cases and later suggested that computers might 
be helpful for solving the problem. Hales recently worked out a five-step 
strategy to implement that approach.

 In a key step, Michigan graduate student Samuel L.P. Ferguson proved that an 
irregular arrangement based on a structure known as a pentahedral prism is less 
dense than the face-centered cubic packing. That was a crucial finding because 
preliminary computer experiments had indicated that the pentahedral prism might 
be a counterexample to Kepler's conjecture.

"There were a number of tricky things about solving the problem," Ferguson 
says. Techniques developed to handle this case were useful in carrying out the 
other steps, he explains.

 The complete, five-part proof appears in a series of articles totaling more 
than 250 pages. The computer programs and data files take up 3 gigabytes of 
memory.

 Hales used a variety of computational techniques to ensure the accuracy of his 
calculations. He also worried about the possibility of errors introduced by 
defective computer chips and any faults in the way a computer translates a 
program into instructions to a microprocessor.

"There is certainly quite a lot of room for error," Ferguson says. As one 
check, he and Hales independently wrote computer programs to verify important 
steps.

 Nonetheless, "the problem with such proofs is . . . their length, not the 
involvement with the computer," Conway says. "A long proof is inevitably weaker 
than a short one just because there are so many more places where a slip might 
have been made."

 If it holds up, the Hales proof demonstrates that Kepler was right. This feat 
may not, however, represent the last word on the problem.

"I don't see why there shouldn't be a very short proof involving totally 
different ideas," Conway says, "and [I] would hazard the guess that there is."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 7, August 15, 1998, p. 103. Copyright C 1998 
by Science Service.


