Science News Online (7/4/98): Mice help nail down gene for rare syndrome

 July 4, 1998 

 Mice help nail down gene for rare syndrome

 By J. Travis

 Randy L. Johnson is interested in how limbs form, so he wondered what would 
happen if mice lacked a gene related to one implicated in the development of 
chicken limbs. Much to Johnson's surprise, his studies of such mutant mice have 
led to the identification of the gene responsible for a rare human disorder 
called nail-patella syndrome (NPS).

 For more than a century, physicians have recognized this curious syndrome in 
which people have, to varying degrees, abnormal growth of fingernails, 
toenails, and knee caps, or patellae. At the extreme, people with NPS have no 
knee caps or nails whatsoever. Some 50 years ago, physicians linked kidney 
problems, often severe enough to require transplants, to the syndrome. Last 
year, investigators also noticed that people with the syndrome frequently have 
the eye disorder glaucoma.

 Scientists have been puzzled by this odd collection of symptoms and have even 
pondered whether more than one gene must be involved. At the Society for 
Developmental Biology meeting last week in Palo Alto, Calif., Johnson, who 
works at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, 
explained how the findings on his mutant mice strongly indicate that a single 
gene is behind NPS. Some of his team's results are also described in the May 
Nature Genetics.

 To create the mutant animals, the scientists deactivated both copies of a 
mouse gene called Lmx1b. It encodes a transcription factor, a DNA-binding 
protein regulating the activity of genes. The resulting mice, which survive 
less than a day after birth, lack patellae and nails. Further examination 
revealed kidney abnormalities as well.

 The gene's link to NPS grew stronger when the researchers realized that the 
human version of Lmx1b maps to the exact region of chromosome 9 where the 
syndrome's mutant gene is thought to reside. Finally, working with a research 
team led by Brendan Lee of Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Johnson's 
group found that three people with NPS harbor mutations in the gene and their 
unaffected parents do not.

 Curiously, it takes mutations in both copies of Lmx1b to produce symptoms in 
mice, although a defect in just one is sufficient to cause NPS in people. The 
amount of transcription factor produced may be crucial to the human disorder, 
which could explain why people with similar mutations are afflicted to 
different degrees, says Johnson.

"We want to get a handle on what causes the variation," adds Iain McIntosh of 
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, who is leading a study of 
people with NPS. "There's nothing jumping out and saying that certain types of 
mutations cause certain aspects of the [syndrome]."

 The connection between glaucoma and NPS has been strengthened by the discovery 
of Lmx1b's involvement. At last week's meeting, Johnson reported that the 
normal gene is active in the eyes of mice.

 A second research group, made up of scientists from Stanford University and 
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, has independently identified the 
nail-patella gene by studying families with members who have both the syndrome 
and glaucoma. That group, led by Stanford geneticist Douglas Vollrath, is 
publishing its results in the July Human Molecular Genetics.

 Since the condition is so variable, physicians sometimes have trouble 
diagnosing whether a patient has NPS. Testing for mutations should resolve any 
confusion. "There is real potential to having this gene in hand," notes 
Vollrath. "Anyone with nail-patella syndrome should be tested for glaucoma." 
The eye disorder is still incurable, but some therapies slow its progression, 
he explains.

 There's also a possibility, says McIntosh, that NPS's kidney problems and 
glaucoma would be treatable if the defects turn out to be reversible and if 
scientists could compensate for the dearth of the key transcription factor.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 1, July 4, 1998, p. 5. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


