Science News Online (8/15/98): The Incredible Shrinking Laboratory Microchips 
may revolutionize chemistry as they did computers

 August 15, 1998 

 The Incredible Shrinking Laboratory 

 Microchips may revolutionize chemistry as they did computers

 By CORINNA WU

 Once, computers were monolithic machines that churned out just a few 
calculations per minute. Since then, microchips have put a much faster computer 
on nearly every desktop.

 Dozens of companies are hoping that similar chips can do for chemistry 
laboratories what they have done for computers. Using the techniques of the 
semiconductor industry, researchers are etching microscopic labs onto the 
surfaces of chips made of glass, plastic, and silicon.

 Instead of shuttling electrons back and forth as chips do in computers, the 
chemistry chips move minuscule amounts of fluid -- volumes of millionths or 
even trillionths of a liter -- through labyrinths of tiny channels and chambers 
equipped with pumps, valves, and filters. A computer choreographs the complex 
interaction of these components.

 These chips could allow scientists to conduct biochemical analyses with 
greater accuracy than is now possible and in a fraction of the time. Instead of 
dealing with beakers, test tubes, and Bunsen burners, scientists could simply 
inject a small sample into a machine containing a microchip and wait a few 
minutes for the results to appear on a computer screen.

 Several chemistry chip manufacturers are making substantial progress toward 
this goal. Pharmaceutical companies have taken a particular interest in chip 
technology, putting millions of dollars into developmental research.

 The idea of chemistry chips began as a response to two research trends: 
genomics and combinatorial chemistry, says Michael R. Knapp, vice president of 
science and technology at Caliper Technologies Corp. in Palo Alto, Calif. The 
drive to sequence and identify all the genes in organisms -- the Human Genome 
Project being the most prominent example -- provided an incentive for 
entrepreneurs to develop ways to rapidly analyze large numbers of DNA samples 
(SN: 3/8/97, p. 144). 

"There's a clear need to do thousands  -- if not tens of thousands -- of genes 
at one time," says Paul Heaney, senior director of new technology and 
applications at Orchid Biocomputer in Princeton, N.J. Chips can accomplish 
these repetitive tasks quickly and cheaply, while requiring only small amounts 
of sample, he says.

 At the same time, the techniques of combinatorial chemistry have radically 
changed the way drug companies look for new drug candidates. Instead of 
painstakingly synthesizing compounds one at a time and testing each 
individually for therapeutic activity, scientists simultaneously make small 
quantities of hundreds of related substances by systematically combining a 
range of chemical ingredients. They then screen the

resulting libraries of compounds for biochemical activity.

 The faster and easier this screening can be done, the better it is for a 
pharmaceutical company's bottom line.

 Microchips may also be able to improve accuracy. Traditional chemistry labs 
are "open systems," says Jing Cheng of Nanogen, a biotechnology company in San 
Diego, Calif. Even though some steps in a complex process may be automated, a 
person has to intervene at several points, often moving materials from one 
container to another.

 Not only can material be lost when it is moved, but an open system carries the 
risk of contamination. In contrast, after the sample is added to a microchip 
system, the analysis takes place entirely within the chip.

 Chips may also be valuable to forensic scientists, who often have only small 
amounts of material to analyze, and hospital laboratories, where there is a 
need for accurate, automated diagnostic tests. The chips could be made 
disposable to prevent cross-contamination among samples.

 Companies are approaching chip design from different angles. For example, 
Caliper Technologies is developing custom chips made from glass, plastic, or 
silicon that "miniaturize more conventional ways of doing experiments," says 
Knapp. "We can design whatever we want in miniature and recreate any experiment 
we can do on the lab bench."

 Other groups are developing more generic chips that can be adapted for a wide 
variety of analyses.

 Researchers face the challenge of scaling down the pumps, valves, and reaction 
vessels found in larger lab devices. The chip components may not correspond to 
those available in traditional chemistry laboratories. There is no miniature 
centrifuge in a chip, for example, says Knapp. In fact, the chips generally 
have no moving parts at all.

 Instead of using motors to move material around on a chip, a common strategy 
takes advantage of the charged, ionic nature of the cells and molecules 
themselves.

 One trick is to use electrophoresis, a widely used technique for separating 
molecules by size. In the large-scale method, an electric voltage pulls DNA 
samples through a porous gel, moving different-size fragments at different 
rates and causing them to separate as marathon runners do in a race.

 On a microchip, a simple pump might consist of electrodes that apply a voltage 
to pull cells and fluids through channels. Similarly, a miniature valve could 
use a voltage to block a fluid's flow. The valves in Orchid's chips are simply 
breaks in the capillaries that hold back fluids with surface tension. To 
restart the flow, electrodes protruding into the capillaries give the fluid an 
electric stimulus, overcoming the tension.

 Orchid's 5-centimeter-square chips have a 12-by-12 array of chambers connected 
to form a "fluidic network," says Heaney. Made of multiple layers of glass or 
plastic, the chips are designed to perform as many as 144 simultaneous chemical 
reactions. In a three-layer chip, for example, the top layer contains the 
electronic connections, the middle layer the channels that distribute the 
fluids, and the bottom layer the chambers where chemical reactions take place.

 In the June Nature Biotechnology, Cheng and his Nanogen colleagues describe a 
chip designed to isolate the bacterium Escherichia coli from a blood sample and 
remove the microbe's DNA. The DNA is then analyzed by another chip. This type 
of sample preparation is one of the most difficult steps for researchers 
developing chip-based systems, Cheng says.

 Their silicon chip, one millimeter on a side, carries 25 round, platinum 
electrodes arranged in a 5-by-5 array. The chip is connected to two tubes: one 
carries solutions to the chip and the other escorts them away.

 A blood sample passes through the chip while an oscillating pattern of 
electric voltage is applied to the electrodes. Chemicals added to the chip 
adjust the blood's electrical properties so that a voltage pulls blood cells in 
one direction and bacteria in the other.

 Through trial and error, Cheng and his colleagues found that an electric field 
with a frequency of 10 kiloHertz caused bacteria to collect on the electrodes 
and red and white blood cells to gather in the spaces between. A fluid pumped 
in over the chip washes the blood cells away.

 Then, pulses of electric current break apart the bacteria, releasing their 
innards. An enzyme solution eats away the proteins in the cells, leaving the 
DNA and RNA intact. The resulting melange of molecules is then pumped out, and 
the genetic material is analyzed by another chip.

 The 25-electrode chip can also be used to separate cervical cancer cells from 
blood cells, Cheng and his colleagues report in the June 1 Analytical 
Chemistry. "We are creating a platform for many different assays," he says.

 Chip makers have found that miniaturizing chemical processes results in a set 
of problems different from those routinely encountered in a conventional 
laboratory. For example, Knapp says, "There's so much wall space compared to 
the volume of the sample that the wall exerts a chemical impact." Molecules or 
biological cells inside a chip so frequently encounter the material that 
contains them that they may undergo unwanted chemical reactions.

 Many companies prefer to make microchips out of glass, which interacts the 
least with samples. Plastic is cheap, which makes it a good choice for 
disposable chips, says Knapp, but it has more surface reactions and may not be 
as durable as other materials.

 Silicon dissipates heat better than glass, getting rid of temperature 
variations that can push cells where they are not supposed to go. To mask the 
reactivity of the silicon surface, researchers have developed various ways to 
put down barrier layers. For example, Peter Wilding of the University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia, who has been working on 
chemistry chips for more than a decade, uses silicon dioxide to "passivate the 
surface." At Nanogen, scientists deposit a gel on the walls that makes the 
silicon nonstick.

 These Lilliputian laboratories also come with their own "miniature plumbing 
problem," says Heaney. The physics and engineering principles that apply to 
fluids moving on a microscopic scale are so different from conventional 
properties that they have been given their own name: microfluidics. "When you 
put fluids in small spaces, things happen that surprise you," says Knapp.

 Caliper is working towards creating a device about the size of a toaster that 
could serve as a personal laboratory workstation -- "a Nintendo machine for the 
lab," Knapp says. A scientist could simply plug in a cartridge containing the 
chip appropriate for a test. Because the machine would be connected to a 
computer, "it not only does the experiment for you but collects the data, too."

 Indeed, says Wilding, companies will have to package the chips in convenient 
devices. "The real breakthrough will not be in the demonstration of the 
technology but in the completion of a system that people can use," he says.

 Eventually, the chips may even find their way into home health-testing kits, 
says Cheng.

 Now that home computers are commonplace, home chemistry labs might not be far 
behind.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 7, August 15, 1998, p. 104. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


