Science News Online (7/4/98): Fatal skin fungus found in U.S. frogs

 July 4, 1998 

 Fatal skin fungus found in U.S. frogs

 By S. Milius

 Chytrid skin fungi, which have devastated frogs in parts of Australia and 
Central America, have now turned up in the wild in the United States. Early 
signs hinted that U.S. species might tolerate the infection as no more than a 
nuisance, but new data from Arizona raise the possibility that chytrids cause 
die-offs in the United States.

 Tissue samples from dead and dying frogs in Arizona -wild lowland leopard 
frogs and captive Chiricahua leopard frogs, a rare species-show chytrid 
infection, reports pathologist Donald K. Nichols of the National Zoological 
Park in Washington, D.C. Large numbers of both species have died off in the 
wild in the last decade, notes Philip C. Rosen of the University of Arizona in 
Tucson, who had collected the samples. Just what role the fungus plays is far 
from clear, but "we're taking it very seriously."

 The chytrid fungus made headlines two weeks ago when an international team of 
scientists fingered it as the culprit in die-offs of 19 amphibian species in 
pristine tropical streams in Australia and Central America. Details will appear 
in the July 21 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 One of these outbreaks, in Panama last year, caught the attention of coauthor 
Karen R. Lips, now at Southern Illinois University in Carbondale. She collected 
some 50 dead amphibians during a single trip to Panama and sent samples to D. 
Earl Green, now at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. He found 
small, round bodies in their skin. "These were quite a conundrum," he says.

 Coauthor Lee Berger of the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Geelong also 
found the odd structures in wild frogs and toads from Australian die-offs. DNA 
analysis suggested chytrid fungi, a group not previously known to attack 
vertebrates.

 Meanwhile, another pathology team was also closing in on the fungus. Nichols 
first noted the fatal skin disease in 1991 in captive arroyo toads in 
California. In 1996, he saw it in zoo frogs in Washington, D.C., and sent 
electron microscopy images and samples to mycologist Joyce E. Longcore at the 
University of Maine in Orono. She recognized the agent as a chytrid fungus and 
suggested that it represents a new genus.

 Nichols has since found low levels of the fungus in wild cricket frogs in 
Illinois. Likewise, Green found infections in several Maryland specimens of the 
common American toad. In neither case did the animals appear to be suffering a 
fatal disease like the Arizona frogs.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 1, July 4, 1998, p. 7. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


