Science News Online (8/1/98): How a middling quake made a giant tsunami

 August 1, 1998 

 How a middling quake made a giant tsunami

 By R. Monastersky

 As residents of Papua New Guinea combed its north shore for more victims of 
the July 17 tsunami, scientists around the world struggled to explain how a 
strong-but not terribly large-earthquake could have spawned waves reaching at 
least 7 meters high.

"It's a mystery why the waves were so big," says Costas E. Synolakis, a 
hydrodynamic engineer at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles 
and a member of a postdisaster team now searching for clues in Papua New Guinea.

 Part of the explanation may emerge from seismological studies of the 
earthquake. Preliminary analyses suggest that it may have been a shallow quake 
and unusually sluggish in its development, factors known to boost the power of 
tsunamis.

 The July 17 disaster began when an earthquake rocked the north coast of Papua 
New Guinea near its border with Indonesia. Because no seismometers were 
stationed close to the event, researchers have had trouble pinpointing the 
quake's exact location. Although the USGS' National Earthquake Information 
Center in Golden, Colo., placed the epicenter onshore, four other teams 
concluded that it occurred offshore, within 19 to 32 kilometers of the coast, 
says Stuart Weinstein, a geophysicist at the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in 
Ewa Beach, Hawaii.

 Harvard researchers calculated that the quake had a magnitude of 7.1 and 
originated at a depth of 15 km. Earthquakes of that size usually don't produce 
major ocean waves, but "it was a pretty shallow earthquake. That would 
certainly help generate a large tsunami," says Weinstein.

 A quake that starts close to the ocean floor can raise or lower the sea bottom 
much farther than a deeply buried quake. This displaces more water and spawns 
larger waves.

 Tsunamis bear little resemblance to the breaking waves familiar to beachgoers 
and surfers. Moving unobtrusively through the open ocean at speeds of about 800 
km per hour, tsunamis hit the coastline like an instantly rising tide, says 
Synolakis.

 In 1992, an initially unimpressive earthquake unleashed a series of giant 
waves that devastated coastal Nicaragua and taught researchers new lessons 
about tsunamis. The earthquake produced only moderate short-period shaking-the 
kind that sends people flying-but released a significant amount of energy in 
long-period vibrations, which move the ground less rapidly. Seismologists call 
this a slow earthquake. The leisurely pace was especially efficient at moving 
water, and so it pumped up the size of the tsunami.

 Andrew V. Newman of Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., has evidence 
that the July earthquake off Papua New Guinea was also slower than normal. 
Newman compared the energy of the first seismic waves from the earthquake, 
which had periods of around 1 second, with the energy of those that arrived 
many minutes later, which had periods of around 200 seconds.

 In the Nicaraguan earthquake, the first waves were quite weak, only 
one-hundredth the strength that would be expected in a typical quake. The 
initial waves from the Papua New Guinea tremor were also relatively feeble, 
Newman found. These early vibrations measured about one-tenth the expected 
strength, partway between a normal earthquake and the slow Nicaraguan event.

 The recent tremor resembles one that hit off the coast of Peru in 1996, which 
also generated a strong tsunami, Newman says. The waves took shoreline 
residents by surprise because they had not felt the earthquake.

 To help officials recognize slow quakes that, at first glance, might seem too 
small to produce dangerous waves, seismologist Emile A. Okal of Northwestern is 
working to incorporate into tsunami warning systems the type of frequency 
analysis that Newman used.

 Newman cautions that his work is preliminary. Indeed, after cursory 
examinations of seismic data from the recent quake, other researchers find no 
evidence of a slow character. More details will surface after Synolakis and his 
colleagues return from the beaches swept clean by the killer waves.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 5, August 1, 1998, p. 69. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


