Science News Online (8/8/98): Russian Queens Bee-Little Mites' Impact

 August 8, 1998 

 Russian Queens Bee-little Mites' Impact

 By J. Raloff

 Federal scientists hope to establish a Russian dynasty throughout the United 
States-one populated by the progeny of Asian-hatched honeybees, renowned for 
their resistance to mites.

 That goal moved a step closer last week. The first generation of bees produced 
by 90 expatriate queens, just released from quarantine, has significantly 
outperformed U.S. members of their species, Apis mellifera, in resisting 
infestation by varroa mites.

 This parasite, which first turned up among U.S. honeybees 11 years ago, has 
taken a devastating toll. Feeding off their hosts' blood, the energy-sapping 
mites weaken and soon kill the bees (SN: 2/8/97, p. 92). Moreover, mites in 
four states have developed resistance to the one pesticide approved for use 
against them, notes Thomas E. Rinderer of the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
honeybee laboratory in Baton Rouge, La.

 Such pesticide-resistance leaves beekeepers defenseless, he says. Indeed, he 
notes, because wild honeybees never received treatment, "they're gone." Though 
swarms that stray from beekeepers' colonies may survive a few months in the 
wild, he says, these days "they're doomed, too."

 The parasites develop on bee pupae. Once a bee emerges as an adult, it 
normally lives 30 days or more, depending upon how hard it works. But an 
infested worker may survive only 3 to 5 days in its sickly state. The mites, 
which also attack adults, reproduce on a 10-day cycle, allowing them to quickly 
kill off a colony.

 In the new tests, Rinderer's team exposed 90 parasitefree colonies to mites. 
Each colony contained a Russian-hatched queen and up to 60,000 of her 
offspring. About 12 weeks later, the USDA scientists tallied how many mites 
infested the adults and pupae.

 From previous data on U.S. colonies, "we would have expected an 11.4-fold 
increase in mites during the test period," Rinderer says. Instead "we got an 
average 3.9-fold increase-and many colonies had no increase. This is extremely 
exciting."

 Though many honeybee populations along the Primorski region of Russia's 
Pacific coast have had a century to develop natural resistance to the varroa 
mite, bees who arrived there more recently show little ability to coexist with 
the parasite. The current tests were designed to identify and eliminate these 
weaker bees from any U.S. breeding program.

 Imported a year ago, the queens, which can live up to 3 years, are becoming 
quite elderly. Colonies headed by their daughters, however, are now beginning a 
new wave of tests to compare them directly with U.S. hives. The queens, which 
mate only once, carry sperm from descendants of Primorski-hatched bees. By next 
spring, Rinderer's team plans to begin distributing mated Russian queens to 
beekeepers for experiments to evaluate how well they pollinate plants and 
produce honey under field conditions.

 The Russian queens are fueling considerable excitement among apiarists, says 
Troy Fore of the American Beekeeping Federation in Jesup, Ga. The cost of 
treating colonies with the varroa miticide can eat up 20 percent of a 
beekeeper's gross earnings-or about 80 percent of the intended profit, he says. 
Bees with Russian genes should reduce the need for some or all of these 
expensive treatments, he adds.

 The Russian queens also "offer to throw the [mite] resistance gene into 
[stray] bees," reestablishing a self-sustaining feral community, notes 
beekeeper Kim Flottum, who edits Bee Culture in Medina, Ohio.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 6, August 8, 1998, p. 84. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

: Cowen, R. 1991. Fighting the mite: May the best bee win. Science News 
139(Jan. 5):5.

 McInnis, D. 1997. The plight of the bumblebee. Popular Science 251(Nov. 1):78.

 Mlot, C. 1997. Bees and keepers tackle mite-y problem. Science News 151(Feb. 
8):92.

 Nickens, E. 1996. Beyond the birds and the bees. Magazine of the National 
Audubon Society 98(September-October):22.

 Raloff, J. 1996.  Science News 149(June 29):406.


