Exploring New Worlds

 August 8, 1998 

 Exploring New Worlds

 Scientists puzzle over extrasolar planets

 Astronomers are puzzling over the formation and evolution of a slew of 
recently discovered massive planets that closely orbit stars near the solar 
system.

 By Ron Cowen

 There are infinite worlds both like and unlike this world of ours.

-Epicurus

 With the announcement last month that a nearby star has an orbiting companion 
more than three times the mass of Jupiter, the hunt for planets that orbit 
stars similar to the sun reached a critical milestone. For the first time, 
astronomers know of more planets circling such stars outside the solar system 
than within it.

 Scientists have no images of these alien worlds, but what little is known of 
their properties strains familiar notions of how planets form and where they 
reside. At least 6 of the 10 bodies are more massive than Jupiter, the solar 
system's heavyweight. Six revolve around their parent stars more closely than 
Mercury, the sun's innermost planet, hugs the sun. And four of the bodies 
follow a path more elongated than that of Pluto, the planet with the most 
elliptical orbit around the sun.

 With only a handful of extrasolar planets detected, it's too soon to say which 
planets follow the norm and which are freaks of nature. It may even turn out 
that the familiar orbs in our own solar system are the oddballs.

 Like some exotic fauna, however, the collection of new planets may represent a 
highly specialized sample, astronomers caution. Indeed, the most common search 
technique favors the detection of massive, closely orbiting planets. Still, 
researchers did not expect to find any planet as heavy as Jupiter to reside 
within roasting distance of its parent star.

 Click here to see a chart listing  (JPEG file, 96 KB).

 To understand just how close some of these bodies orbit, consider the 
yardstick that planet hunters use to measure distance. The separation between 
Earth and the sun is designated as 1 astronomical unit (AU). The first of the 
newly detected planets lies only one-twentieth that distance from its star, 51 
Pegasi (SN: 11/25/95, p. 358). Two other planets-companions to the stars Tau 
Bootis and Upsilon Andromedae-lie at similar distances from their parents. A 
fourth planet, whose discovery was reported in June, circles the nearby star 
Gliese 876 at 0.2 AU-half the distance at which Mercury orbits the sun (SN: 
6/27/98, p. 405).

 It's little wonder that astronomers despaired of explaining how giant planets 
could have assembled at such distances. It's too darned hot.

 Planets are thought to arise when small agglomerations of dust, gas, and ice 
gather together. These building blocks come from a flattened mass of material, 
known as a protoplanetary disk, that surrounds young stars. Close to the star, 
the temperature is too high for material in the disk to condense into the core 
of a Jupiter-size planet, says Douglas N.C. Lin of the University of 
California, Santa Cruz (UCSC). Moreover, at small distances from the star, the 
volume of material in the disk is too small to form a massive planet.

 If a planet wasn't born in the hot zone, it must have moved in from the 
outlying burbs. Lin proposed such a migration model several years ago, long 
before any extrasolar planets were discovered. In collaboration with Peter 
Bodenheimer of UCSC and Derek C. Richardson, now at the University of 
Washington in Seattle, he revised the theory in 1995 (SN: 12/16/95, p. 412), 
when the first planet orbiting a distant, sunlike star was discovered. The 
model relies on a set of intimate interactions between the protoplanetary disk 
and the fledgling planet.

 Like a planet, the material within the disk revolves around the star. The disk 
cannot rotate indefinitely in this way, however. The tug of gravity, combined 
with friction between adjacent parcels of gas moving at different speeds within 
the disk, causes material to drain onto the central star. Any fledgling planet 
that happens to be embedded in the disk gets dragged in along with it.

 A second mechanism can also propel a planet inward. This process depends on 
the transfer of angular momentum-rotational motion-between the planet and 
different parts of the disk.

 The inner part of the disk, which lies between the star and the planet, spins 
faster than the outer part, just as the inner planets in the solar system 
revolve around the sun faster than the outer ones. This difference in rotation 
causes the inner part of the disk to give up some of its angular momentum to 
the planet. In turn, the planet passes on angular momentum to the outer part of 
the disk. In this exchange, the planet suffers a net loss of energy and begins 
spiraling inward.

 So far, so good. But in this model, the planet could spiral all the way in. 
Like a moth drawn to a flame, the planet would die a fiery death as it plunged 
into the star.

 One way to avert this catastrophe is to create a loophole. The magnetic field 
associated with a spinning star sweeps up and expels ionized gas from the 
innermost part of the protoplanetary disk. This action carves a hole about 10 
times the diameter of the star, according to Geoffrey W. Marcy of San Francisco 
State University and the University of California, Berkeley and R. Paul Butler 
of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Epping, Australia.

 Once the planet enters the hole, it can remain there indefinitely, no longer 
being dragged in by the spinning disk nor forced to give up energy to it.

 This magnetically cleared opening provides a safe haven for the most closely 
orbiting of the extrasolar planets, but it's not wide enough to explain the 
stability of planets with orbits wider than that of Mercury. These include the 
planets circling 14 Herculis, 70 Virginis, and 16 Cygni B.

 For these bodies, other phenomena may have brought migration to a halt. In 
part, it may be a simple matter of timing.

 Lin envisions a parade of planets making their way inward. One by one, the 
orbiting bodies dive like lemmings into the parent star, he says. By the time 
those at the end of the parade join the death march, the protoplanetary disk, 
which only lasts for about 10 million years, may have evaporated. Without the 
disk dragging them in, these planets can remain parked in a fixed orbit.

 Stars may also help to keep planets in their place. Lin notes that rapidly 
spinning stars can transfer energy to a nearby, more slowly spinning planet. 
The net effect is to push the planet out, just as the gravitational interaction 
between the rotating Earth and its sluggishly spinning moon propels the moon 
outward. At some particular distance from the star, suggests Lin, the push 
outward balances the drag inwards, and a planet stays put.

 But maybe not forever. As the star's spin gradually slows, it can no longer 
keep a nearby planet at bay, Lin notes. Spin-down may take many millions of 
years, but ultimately some planets that have parked themselves in what had been 
stable orbits could find themselves once again in peril of spiraling to their 
death. Lin calls such planets "lemmings in waiting."

 In an entirely different model, inward migration automatically terminates 
before a planet comes within burning distance of its parent star. Renu Malhotra 
of the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston and Norman Murray of the 
Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics in Toronto and their colleagues 
propose that migration begins well after the gas in the protoplanetary disk has 
dispersed, leaving behind fully fledged planets and a debris field of 
boulder-size remnants called planetesimals.

 Malhotra and her collaborators originally devised the model to explain the 
peculiarly elliptical orbit of Pluto. In their scenario, the gravity of the 
outer planets Uranus and Neptune disturbs the orbits of planetesimals in their 
vicinity, sending some of the debris on toward Jupiter.

 As a result, Uranus and Neptune gain energy and move outward, perhaps by as 
much as 10 AU, according to Malhotra's most recent calculations. That movement 
perturbed Pluto's orbit, which Malhotra and her colleagues believe was 
initially circular, distorting it into an ellipse.

 At the same time, Jupiter's strong gravity takes control of the planetesimals. 
The giant planet hurls some of the material into the inner solar system, but it 
flings a substantial amount outward. The interaction induces Jupiter to move 
inward slightly, perhaps by a few tenths of an AU.

 In another planetary system, however-one that has a much more massive 
population of planetesimals-the interaction might push a Jupiterlike planet in 
by a far greater distance. To move a planet as heavy as Jupiter from 5 to 0.5 
AU from the sun, however, would require a population of planetesimals 20 times 
as massive as the planet. Such a mammoth population may not exist in any 
planetary system.

"The chances are small, but there is a diversity of systems," says Malhotra. In 
this model, migration ends as soon as the planetesimals inside a planet's orbit 
are cleared out. Planets thus avoid a death sentence.

 In another theory, it's the interaction between giant planets in the outer 
part of a planetary system that might draw one of them close to the star. As 
described by Frederic A. Rasio of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a 
close encounter between two or more giant planets produces a slingshot effect. 
One of the bodies gets thrown out of the system, while the other barrels inward 
(SN: 11/23/96, p. 328).

 Lin says that the interaction between giant planets may be the best 
explanation for why some have an elliptical orbit. Any giant planet propelled 
inward by this mechanism travels in an elliptical orbit. On the other hand, the 
disk model would tend to keep the path of a closely orbiting planet almost 
perfectly circular. Both models may be needed to explain the full range of 
extrasolar planets, Lin says.

 At a workshop on planet formation held last month in Santa Barbara, Calif., 
Pawel Artymowicz of the Stockholm Observatory noted an intriguing correlation. 
Three of the four extrasolar planets with the most elongated orbits have 
something in common: Their mass, relative to that of their parent star, is 
unusually high.

 That's no coincidence, Artymowicz maintains. In his work with Stephen H. Lubow 
of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and Willy Kley of the 
University of Jena in Germany, Artymowicz harks back to the time when fledgling 
planets interacted with the surrounding protoplanetary disk.

 In taking up angular momentum from the inner part of the disk and losing it to 
the outer part, a massive planet clears a gap around it: The more massive the 
planet-relative to the mass of the star it orbits-the larger the gap. Within 
the disk, the swirling matter that lies close to the planet tends to set up a 
resonance with the orbiting body. That resonance keeps the planet in a circular 
orbit.

 Calculations by Artymowicz and his collaborators show that as the gap 
increases, those interactions that keep the orb on a circular path die out and 
those that elongate the orbit dominate. Thus, a massive planet can more easily 
adopt an elliptical path than a lightweight body can, he says.

 The exception to the rule is the planet orbiting the star 16 Cygni B. Although

it's not extremely massive relative to its parent, this body has the most 
elliptical orbit of any known planet. Astronomers believe the orbit arose 
because 16 Cygni B has a massive partner, the star 16 Cygni A. The combined 
gravity of the two stars places the planet in an elongated path.

 Lin cautions that as more planets are discovered, the trend for the most 
massive planets to have the most elongated orbits may no longer hold true. All 
the proposed models, says planet hunter Marcy, "are fascinating and high 
quality. We simply can't determine, yet, which of the mechanisms [for 
generating elliptical orbits] are actually operating and dominant."

 The gap model may also solve another puzzle-why there seems to be a limit to 
how much weight a massive planet can pack on. In recent tests of their model, 
Artymowicz and his collaborators find that even after a planet clears a path 
around itself, streams of gas from the disk can still penetrate the gap, adding 
to the planet's girth. Ultimately, this small leak dies out, and the planet no 
longer has a supply of gas to feed on.

 Lubow says this may explain why observers have not found any planets with a 
mass greater than 10 times that of Jupiter (SN: 7/11/98, p. 22). The finding is 
particularly compelling, notes Marcy, because the primary search method is much 
more likely to detect extremely massive planets than lighter-weight ones.

 Some astronomers would not consider extreme heavyweights to be planets in the 
first place. They would think of them as brown dwarfs-objects that form, as 
stars do, from the fragmentation of a cloud of gas and dust, but which fail to 
shine by their own nuclear power. Indeed, a few astronomers contend that 
several of the extrasolar planets already detected may turn out to be brown 
dwarfs.

 Muddying the waters even further, theorist Alan P. Boss of the Carnegie 
Institution of Washington (D.C.), has outlined a radically different process 
for making planets as massive as Jupiter.

 In the standard model, a giant planet is built up little by little, beginning 
with the formation of a small, rocky core. The core later snares a huge, outer 
layer of gas. Boss suggests instead that a massive planet can assemble 
wholesale, when a dense clump of gas within the protoplanetary disk suddenly 
collapses.

 This theory, says Marcy, could lead to awareness of a wider diversity of giant 
planets. For instance, because a planet that arises from a clump of gas does 
not have a solid core, the protoplanetary disk need not have an abundance of 
heavy elements, such as silica and iron, to form a core. In addition, as long 
as the clump is sufficiently massive, a planet formed in this way could easily 
become heavier than Jupiter.

"Our prospective conclusion is that while brown dwarfs are clearly rare, the 
diversity of 'planets' may span a wide range of parameters in both their 
formation and subsequent properties," says Marcy. "As we learn more about 
extrasolar planets, the new taxonomy will have to reflect that diversity."

 In other words, Epicurus' idea of unlimited, varying worlds may be right.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 6, August 8, 1998, p. 88 Copyright C 1998 by 
Science Service.


