Science News Online (8/1/98): Glow-in-the-dark shark has killer smudge

 August 1, 1998 

 Glow-in-the-dark shark has killer smudge

 By S. Milius

 A dark band below the jaw of a luminescent dwarf shark reveals a new kind of 
underwater dirty trick.

 Viewed from beneath, the soft glow from the shark's many light-emitting cells 
blends in with dim light filtering from the sky and disguises the predator's 
outline. Against the glow, the dark chin patch looks like just the sort of 
little fish a predator such as a tuna is hunting, suggests Edith A. Widder from 
Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution in Fort Pierce, Fla. The big fish darts 
up for the kill-only to be bitten itself by the smaller predator called a 
cookie-cutter shark.

 This shark does what its name suggests: It gouges round, or cookie-shaped, 
plugs of flesh out of bigger animals. If a tuna is swooshing upward in an 
attempted attack, so much the better for the shark, Widder notes. The tuna's 
motion helps the shark's teeth sink in and slide around in a curving scoop, 
like the action of a melon baller.

 If the tuna has the misfortune to attack what looks like a school of little 
fish but is actually a school of cookie-cutters, "the damage these sharks 
inflict would make their company as appealing as a swarm of wasps," Widder 
observes. The wounds are not fatal. Widder's discussion of the cookie-cutter 
shark's dark patch is scheduled to appear in an upcoming issue of Environmental 
Biology of Fishes.

 For more than 100 years, scientists have recognized that the shark's underside 
glows in the dark. Perhaps the majority of fish and squid in the dimly lit 
water 200 to 1,000 meters below the surface use similar luminescence to 
disguise their shapes, Widder explains.

 The cookie-cutter shark has carried this phenomenon, called 
counterillumination, to an unusual degree of refinement, she says. Other 
counterilluminators may rely on a few crude glowing spots, which make a blur 
resembling sunlit or moonlit water only when they are viewed from a distance. 
Yet the cookie-cutter's underside sparkles with so many light cells that its 
luminescence looks uniform even when viewed up close.

 The density of the light cells make the blank patch all the more puzzling, 
Widder points out. "You've got this absolutely perfect counterillumination 
pattern, and you screw it up-why?"

 The possibility that the dark patch works as a lure struck her as she was 
writing a review article on bioluminescence. Part of the beauty of the lure 
idea, she says, is that it explains how a fish as small and slow-moving as the 
cookie-cutter keeps nailing big, fast animals like tunas, swordfish, and 
porpoises.

 The cookie-cutter shark stretches only 30 to 45 centimeters long. Widder ranks 
its fins as small and its muscles as "flabby." But if the power swimmers of the 
depths will rush toward a dark smudge, who needs speed? All the shark has to do 
is sit, wait, and glow.

 Other deep-sea creatures, such as anglerfish, waggle luminescent tissue as 
lures, but Widder can't think of another example of the absence of luminescence 
working as an attractant.

 The oceans glow with novel strategies of bioluminescence, says Margo G. 
Haygood, who studies flashlight fish at Scripps Institution of Oceanography in 
La Jolla, Calif. In what may be a mating display, sea worms off Bermuda swim in 
swirls forming "fire wheels." Some squid, when alarmed, shoot out smoke screens 
of luminescent ink instead of the usual black. And tiny crustaceans called 
ostracods emit little luminescent puffs that hang in the water with clumps and 
spaces characteristic of their species. "It looks like a little set of Indian 
smoke signals," Haygood says. The shark strategy, however, is "a new twist," 
she notes.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 5, August 1, 1998, p. 70. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.


