Science News Online (8/22/98): Rhythm of the ice age: North versus south

 August 22, 1998 

 Rhythm of the ice age: North versus south

 By R. Monastersky

 Linked together like Siamese twins, Earth's northern and southern hemispheres 
should dance in tandem to the beat of climatic cycles. Indeed, every 100,000 
years for the last million years, both halves of the globe have jointly entered 
into prolonged ice ages.

 A close look at events within the last ice age, however, reveals that the two 
hemispheres often fall out of step with each other, sometimes even moving in 
opposite climatic directions, according to a team of European scientists. Their 
analysis of ancient ice from Greenland and Antarctica raises questions about 
what drove the ice-age temperature changes and whether similar factors are 
operating today.

"If we want to understand the climate today, we have to understand the climate 
of the past," says Thomas Blunier of the University of Bern in Switzerland.

 Blunier and his colleagues studied ice cores pulled from a deep drill hole in 
central Greenland and from two drill holes in Antarctica. The ice in these 
places has piled up, layer by layer, over hundreds of thousands of years, 
preserving chemical clues to the climate of ancient times. By pulling up cores 
of this hoary ice, scientists can trace how conditions have changed.

 During the last ice age, the climate in both hemispheres see-sawed from 
extremely cold to mild about every 3,000 years-a relatively quick swing by 
geological standards. Researchers have long wondered whether the warmings, 
called interstadials, happened simultaneously in the north and the south. They 
have had trouble, however, comparing the timing of the events in the records 
from the two hemispheres.

 In the August 20 Nature, Blunier and his coworkers describe a technique for 
matching up evidence of interstadials in the different ice cores. They focus on 
methane gas trapped in tiny bubbles of air from tens of thousands of years ago. 
Because worldwide concentrations of methane rose and fell markedly throughout 
the ice age, the researchers could use spikes in the ice's methane as 
benchmarks for lining up the three ice cores.

 The new analyses of the matched cores showed that the short-term warmings 
during the ice age occurred at different times in Antarctica and Greenland. 
Temperatures in the south often rose a thousand years or more ahead of those in 
the north.

 The work won praise from researchers studying other ice cores from Greenland 
and Antarctica. "They've taken timing to a new level," says James W.C. White, 
an ice-core researcher at the University of Colorado in Boulder.

 Climate scientists have previously discovered hints that the northern and 
southern hemispheres did not always dance together as the last ice age ended. 
Wallace S. Broecker of Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory 
in Palisades, N.Y., suggests that deep ocean currents in the far north and 
south may alternate in strength, cooling off one hemisphere while bringing 
warmth to the other-a pattern that agrees with the new discovery, he says.

 One complicating factor has emerged from West Antarctica, however. Studies of 
a new ice core drilled there show climate fluctuations at the same time as 
those in Greenland, and therefore out of synch with the other Antarctic drill 
sites, says White. That leaves researchers with a cool conundrum to ponder.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 8, August 22, 1998, p. 119. Copyright O 1998 
by Science Service.


