Science News Online (8/22/98): Stroke Rescue Can cells injected into the brain 
reverse paralysis?

 August 22, 1998 

 Stroke Rescue 

 Can cells injected into the brain reverse paralysis?

 By KATHLEEN FACKELMANN

 In September 1997, Alma Cerasini suffered a stroke that left much of her right 
arm and leg paralyzed. In most cases, there is no cure for such disability. But 
the 62-year-old nurse wasn't willing to accept that dismal outlook. She and her 
husband decided to look for an experimental treatment of stroke.

 Cerasini found her way to the office of University of Pittsburgh surgeon 
Douglas Kondziolka. As it happened, he and his colleagues had been searching 
for the perfect candidate to try out a bold new stroke therapy. Cerasini fit 
the bill.

 On June 23, Kondziolka and his team drilled a hole into Cerasini's skull and 
injected 2 million laboratory-grown, immature nerve cells into the 
stroke-damaged region. They hope that those cells will survive, make new 
connections, and restore the brain power that has been lost.

 Only time will tell whether the unproven therapy will benefit Cerasini or 11 
other stroke victims who will follow her lead by the end of this year.

 Annually in the United States, about 700,000 people experience a stroke, and 
nearly 160,000 people die from it. Many of those who survive suffer from 
paralysis and difficulties with speaking or thinking.

 Typically, a blood clot clogs an artery leading to the brain. The resulting 
stoppage of blood flow can kill brain cells-neurons-in a localized region.

 In most cases, doctors can limit or even prevent brain damage if they give the 
patient a clot-dissolving drug within 3 hours of the onset of a stroke. Once 
the injury to the brain is sustained, however, there has been no way to reverse 
it.

 For Cerasini and the others, the experimental surgery remains a gamble.

"It's probably a reasonably safe procedure," says cell transplant researcher 
Barry Hoffer, who is the scientific director of the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse (NIDA) in Baltimore. "But we simply don't know what will happen to these 
cells when they're in the human brain."

 The Pittsburgh team isn't the first to inject cells into a human brain. For 
example, Paul R. Sanberg, a neuroscientist at the University of South Florida 
College of Medicine in Tampa, has long been using injections of human fetal 
nerve cells in attempts to rescue brains from the devastation caused by 
Parkinson's disease. This progressive neurological disorder causes muscle 
tremors and a shuffling gait. Cell transplants for this disease and for 
Huntington's disease have shown some success (SN: 12/21& 28/96, p. 399; 
4/29/95, p. 262).

 Sanberg began to wonder about the possibility of using fetal cells to treat 
victims of stroke. He knew that human fetal cells are difficult to obtain and 
hard to handle. Then, at a scientific meeting in 1995, Sanberg met Gary E. 
Snable, the president of Layton BioScience in Atherton, Calif. Snable's company 
had been developing a more readily available substitute for fetal cells.

 The company calls the cells LBS-Neurons. They are immature neurons that have 
been grown from human cancer cells. The two scientists wondered if such cells, 
injected into a stroke-damaged brain, could take on the properties of nearby, 
mature neurons.

 Sanberg set out to test that hypothesis. He and his colleagues began with a 
procedure that mimics stroke in rats. They carefully inserted tiny blood clots 
into a neck artery from each of several anesthetized rats. The clots blocked 
the blood flowing to the animals' brains.

 The researchers then tested the rats for signs of brain damage. To test motor 
function, they lifted each rat by the tail. Healthy rats swing from side to 
side when picked up this way. The treated rats swung to just one side, 
indicating damage to the part of the brain controlling the rats' ability to 
move, Sanberg says.

 The researchers also assessed the animals' cognitive function. In this test, a 
rat receives an electric shock when it steps off a platform. Control rats 
quickly learned to avoid the danger area. In contrast, rats with induced 
strokes took longer to learn the task and the next day failed to remember their 
painful lesson.

 Now, the team was ready to find out if the cells from Snable's company could 
rescue the rats.

 One month after the experimental stroke procedure, the researchers 
anesthetized the rats again. They attached a tiny metal frame to each animal's 
head and drilled a small hole in the skull.

 The team thawed a vial of frozen cells that had been shipped from Layton 
BioScience and diluted them in a solution. Then they injected 40,000 live cells 
into each rats' striatum, the brain region damaged by the stroke.

 The rats also received a drug that suppressed their immune systems. Without 
such a drug, the rat immune cells might have attacked the human cells.

 The treatment reversed brain damage within a month. Rats that had failed the 
swing test now moved from side to side. In addition, rats that had had trouble 
with the platform-shock trial now learned this task as quickly, and retained it 
as well, as the control rats.

 Sanberg and his colleagues published their findings in the February 
Experimental Neurology. "We've found that these cells produce very good 
recovery in stroke animals," says coauthor Cesario V. Borlongan, formerly at 
the University of South Florida in Tampa and now at NIDA.

 In further experiments, the researchers varied the number of live cells 
injected into damaged brains and found that rats given the largest doses 
improved the most and did not regress.

 In contrast, rats that had received injections with low numbers of live cells 
showed either no recovery or a partially corrected swing one month following 
treatment. By the second month, that swing had deteriorated once again.

"The number of live cells that you transplant in the brain correlates with the 
functional recovery," Borlongan says. "It is a very good indication that the 
cells are producing the behavioral recovery." These additional findings appear 
in the August NeuroReport.

 Neither study yet explains how the injected cells produce the desired outcome. 
Borlongan has evidence that the injected cells take on the appearance of mature 
cells in the surrounding area. He is planning new studies to find out whether 
the transplanted neurons send out fiberlike extensions, or axons, that connect 
with healthy neurons and regulate motor function. Establishing such connections 
is key to the normal development of a young brain.

"What we're hoping is that they will bridge the damaged area-connect the tissue 
on both sides-and act as a conduit for information," Snable says.

 Researchers participating in the animal and clinical studies expect such 
treatments to provide renewed optimism not just for victims of stroke but also 
for people suffering from a variety of other conditions.

 Sanberg suggests that injections of the cells from Layton BioScience might 
help people with Parkinson's disease, which robs the brain of neurons in a 
region called the substantia nigra. People with Huntington's disease also might 
benefit from the technique. This disorder, which causes abnormal muscle 
movements and dementia, destroys neurons in the striatum. Snable says that 
Layton BioScience plans to launch a clinical test soon to see if brain 
injections of its cells relieve such symptoms.

 Spinal cord injury might also be treated with such cells. Injected soon after 
damage to the spinal cord, the cells might mature and reconnect the severed 
spinal cord nerves. Snable speculates that the treatment could prevent or 
reverse paralysis in people who would ordinarily be confined to a wheelchair.

 Optimism about the future use of such cells must be tempered with a heavy dose 
of caution, however. The researchers have been criticized for going directly 
from rat studies to the trial of human stroke patients. Snable says the human 
test was launched because of the urgent need to reverse the disabling damage 
caused by strokes.

 Borlongan, however, wonders if that was the best course. "My feeling is that 
we still could have gone through the monkey studies," he says.

 Other scientists echo that concern.

"The question is, why jump ahead?" says Don M. Gash, a neurobiologist at the 
University of Kentucky in Lexington who focuses on neurological disorders such 
as Parkinson's disease.

 Bypassing the less glamorous monkey studies for a clinical trial may limit the 
research. If something doesn't pan out in the early trials, it will be 
difficult to go back and start all over again, Gash says. A negative result in 
such a highly publicized clinical trial might lead researchers to abandon their 
approach. In contrast, researchers who refine the details of a treatment in 
animal studies can move to clinical trials with more chance of success.

 Moreover, there are questions about the safety of injecting these cells, which 
are derived from a human cancer (see sidebar, p. 121). "The first rule of 
medicine is to do no harm," Gash says.

 Although the preparation of these cells renders them noncancerous, no one 
really knows if they can later revert to their malignant state, Hoffer says. 
Sanberg's team, however, has never identified a cancer growing in a rat treated 
with the Layton BioScience cells.

 The main purpose of the clinical tests now being undertaken at the University 
of Pittsburgh is to assess the safety of the injections, although Snable hopes 
the trial will also hint whether the procedure will work to reverse stroke 
symptoms.

"Drilling a hole in someone's head-even though it is small-and then putting a 
needle into someone's brain is not trivial," Snable says. "You wouldn't do it 
unless you felt there was some opportunity for efficacy."

 Snable, Sanberg, and others point out that because there is currently no way 
to reverse the devastation caused by a stroke, the potential for benefit 
outweighs the safety concerns.

 For people who have survived a stroke, the decision to participate in such a 
trial must be made with care. "If someone in my family asked me [about 
receiving brain cell transplants], I guess I would counsel caution," Gash says.

 So far, for Cerasini, the gamble has produced neither loss nor gain. She came 
through the operation with no bleeding or inflammation in the brain, potential 
side effects of the procedure. She is now waiting anxiously for a sign that the 
treatment will restore some of the movement she has lost. The scientific 
community-and hundreds of thousands of people who have had strokes-wait with 
her.

  

  

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 8, August 22, 1998, p. 120. Copyright 1998 by 
Science Service.


