Science News Online (8/29/98): Smoking moms pass carcinogen to infants

 August 29, 1998 

 Smoking moms pass carcinogen to infants

 By C. Wu

 Cigarettes are one craving that doctors have long said pregnant women 
shouldn't indulge. Now, expectant mothers have yet another reason to heed that 
advice. According to a new study, pregnant women who smoke transmit a potent 
cancer-causing substance to their babies.

 In urine samples collected from newborn infants of mothers who smoked during 
pregnancy, researchers at the University of Minnesota Cancer Center in 
Minneapolis detected compounds that the body produces in breaking down 
nicotine-derived nitrosaminoketone (NNK). That chemical, found only in tobacco, 
induces a variety of cancers in rodents.

 Chemist Stephen S. Hecht presented the findings this week at a Boston meeting 
of the American Chemical Society.

 According to a study in the May 1990 American Journal of Public Health, 61 
percent of women who smoke continue to do so during pregnancy. Epidemiological 
studies have linked smoking to low birth weight and developmental problems, 
Hecht says. What health effects NNK might have on a developing fetus have yet 
to be determined. Nevertheless, he says, "we feel this presents an unacceptable 
risk to the fetus. It's another reason for expectant mothers to quit smoking."

 Urine samples from 48 infants were collected by doctors in Dusseldorf, 
Germany, and sent to the Minnesota researchers. Of the 31 infants whose mothers 
smoked during pregnancy, 22 had NNK metabolites called NNAL and NNAL-Gluc in 
their urine. In contrast, none of the 17 infants whose mothers were nonsmokers 
produced these substances.

 The urine of the smokers' newborn also contained nicotine and one of its 
breakdown products. Nicotine is addictive but is not known to be carcinogenic.

 The nine smokers in the study whose infants did not appear to produce the NNK 
metabolites smoked less than the other study participants, Hecht says. The 
results signal that "if [pregnant women] can't quit, they ought to smoke less."

 The new findings "provide the first direct evidence that a tobacco-specific 
carcinogen from maternal smoking passes the placenta into the human fetus-and 
in a considerable amount," says Lucy M. Anderson of the National Cancer 
Institute in Frederick, Md.

 Previous studies showed that NNK metabolites themselves don't readily cross to 
a fetus. While their concentration in the babies' urine was only about 
one-tenth that in their mothers', their presence indicates "the human fetus has 
a well-developed capacity to metabolize a tobacco-specific carcinogen," 
Anderson says.

 Last year, Hecht and his colleagues reported that people exposed to 
environmental, or secondhand, smoke also absorb and process NNK (SN: 9/20/97, 
p. 188). The infants in the current research produced a urine concentration of 
NNK metabolites that is about three times that measured in urine of people 
breathing secondhand smoke.

 Scientists' awareness of NNK's carcinogenic effects on fetuses comes from 
animal studies. The offspring of female hamsters exposed to NNK develop tumors 
readily. In mice, however, NNK seems less potent. "We have no idea where the 
human falls in this [range]," Anderson says.

 Hecht worries that exposure to NNK in the womb might predispose infants to 
cancer later in life. The substance induces cancers by causing mutations in 
DNA. Because the cells of a fetus are rapidly dividing, DNA changes that occur 
early might propagate widely. Then again, Hecht notes, the enzymes required to 
induce cancer in adults may not yet be present in a developing fetus.

 The method used in the Minnesota study offers a new way to explore the effects 
of smoking and other behaviors during pregnancy, says Anderson. "Simple, 
old-fashioned epidemiological studies have not shown a strong correlation 
between childhood cancers and maternal smoking. We have to look at it in a more 
sophisticated way."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 9, August 29, 1998, p. 133. Copyright C 1998 
by Science Service.


