Science News Online (9/19/98): Getting a Feel for Emotions

 September 19, 1998 

 Getting a Feel for Emotions

 Emotional development attracts cross-cultural explorations

 By BRUCE BOWER

 Who says scientists are a dispassionate, sober lot? When they start talking 
about emotions, the fur and the fervent opinions start to fly.

 The most bruising clashes have revolved around the relative strengths of 
biology and culture in producing the rich palette of feelings that color daily 
life. During much of the first half of the 20th century, the dominant 
view-prominently espoused by anthropologist Margaret Mead -held that each 
culture shapes its members' emotional experiences in unique ways. In the past 
few decades, however, biological and evolutionary forces that transcend any 
particular culture have received growing attention as orchestrators of a 
universal set of emotions.

 One current theory, for example, posits that evolution has endowed the human 
brain with a set of basic emotions, each of which produces a distinctive facial 
expression-at least when people aren't trying to hide their feelings. A 
contrasting view holds that emotions and facial displays are social 
communication tools, which take shape from cultural forces rather than 
hard-wired brain networks.

 Everyone agrees, though, that the terrain of emotional development contains 
many uncharted areas. For instance, researchers have yet to decipher how 
children attain a sense of when to be angry, how to express anger, or what to 
do in situations perceived as scary.

 Three studies published in the July Developmental Psychology attempt to 
untangle a few cross-cultural similarities and differences in emotional 
development. The first project documents the emotional responses of Canadian 
and Chinese infants to the expressionless face of a parent or stranger. The 
second investigation tracks the emotional expressions of infants in the United 
States, Japan, and China during experimental sessions designed to elicit either 
frustration or fear. The third report delves into the ways Nepalese children 
raised in either Hindu or Buddhist ethnic groups respond emotionally to 
challenging social situations.

 Explorations such as these move toward the ultimate goal of teasing out 
universal features of emotion from realms of feeling that are unique to 
specific belief systems, says psychologist Carolyn Saarni of Sonoma State 
University in Rohnert Park, Calif.

"To study the rich variability of emotional experience in individuals and 
across societies, we will need to add considerable flexibility to our 
conceptual categories [for describing emotional development]," Saarni contends.

 The three new studies stretch ideas about emotional development in different 
directions. Psychologist Barbara S. Kisilevsky of Queen's University at 
Kingston, Ontario, directed the exploration of how babies interact emotionally 
with their mothers. In North America, other investigations have found that if a 
mother talks and coos with her baby as usual, employing typical facial 
expressions, vocal tones, and touch, and then presents a neutral "still face" 
without talking or touching the infant for 1 to 2 minutes, the child largely 
stops gazing and smiling at the mother.

 Researchers suspect that the baby withdraws from social give-and-take when a 
mother violates her child's expectations. This effect, noted in infants ages 2 
to 11 months, also emerges in experimental interactions with strangers and 
televised images of the mother.

 Kisilevsky's group conducted still-face experiments in southeastern China with 
13 male and 27 female infants, ages 3 to 6 months. In sessions with mothers, 
fathers, and strangers, the youngsters exhibited still-face responses much like 
those of white Canadian peers in previous studies.

 There were, however, some behavioral differences. Chinese infants moved about 
much less than Canadian children in response to still faces, perhaps because 
Chinese babies are held continually for at least the first 6 months of life and 
may be discouraged by their mothers from squirming.

 Nonetheless, Kisilevsky and her colleagues assert, "the universality of the 
still-face effect is perhaps an innate withdrawal response [of infants] to a 
lack of communication."

 In contrast, emotional facial expressions associated with frustration and fear 
look considerably different in Chinese and U.S. infants, according to 
psychologist Linda A. Camras of DePaul University in Chicago and her 
colleagues. Japanese and U.S. infants, intriguingly, display much the same 
expressions for these emotions.

 Camras' team studied 24 white infants in Berkeley, Calif., 24 Japanese infants 
in the city of Fukushima, and 24 Chinese infants in Beijing. The boys and girls 
in the investigation were all 11 months old.

 In an anger- and frustration-inducing procedure, infants sat in high 
chairs-with their mothers seated next to them-as a female experimenter gently 
interacted with them for 10 minutes. The experimenter then grasped each 
infant's wrists and held them immobile on the high chair tray for up to 3 
minutes. The session ended early if a child cried continuously for 7 seconds.

 To elicit fear, the experimenter placed a toy gorilla head on a table near 
each infant. The remotely activated toy emitted loud growls for 15 seconds 
while its eyes lit up and its lips moved. Several times, the experimenter moved 
the toy head slightly closer to the child and repeated the performance, unless 
the child cried for 7 seconds straight.

 Videotapes of babies' facial expressions were analyzed for muscle movements 
previously linked to a number of emotions.

 U.S. and Japanese infants expressed both positive and negative feelings with 
similar intensity, and they markedly exceeded the expressiveness of Chinese 
infants. "Smile mouths" accompanied by raised cheeks, considered a signal of 
happiness, occurred much more often during initial contact with an experimenter 
for the U.S. and Japanese groups than the Chinese. Upon being restrained or 
seeing the gorilla head, U.S. and Japanese babies cried sooner and exhibited 
more "cry mouths" than their Chinese peers.

 U.S. infants produced the most instances of lowered eyebrows, perhaps related 
to a greater degree of distress and crying, the researchers say. Japanese 
infants were most likely to make midfacial movements, such as raising the upper 
lip, that are elements of cry faces or distaste expressions. Chinese children 
exhibited no striking patterns of facial movement, possibly because they had 
already begun to learn how to mask negative feelings, Camras' team suggests.

 No one set of muscle movements was associated with all the infant reactions to 
procedures intended to elicit either anger and frustration or fear, the 
researchers assert. Infants may incorporate various facial movements into 
general expressions of positive and negative emotion, depending on the 
situation and culture, the psychologists theorize.

 Cross-cultural findings based on the still-face procedure and on anger- and 
fear-provoking situations prove intriguing but difficult to interpret, comments 
Saarni. These techniques, developed in North American laboratories, may yield 
behaviors in Japanese and Chinese infants that look familiar to Western 
researchers but nonetheless have different meanings and functions in the 
infants' respective cultures, she notes.

 The third newly published investigation, in which interviewers probed beliefs 
about appropriate emotional behavior among Nepalese children and their mothers, 
comes closer to illuminating how different cultures-even within the same 
nation-may promote divergent assumptions about feelings, Saarni contends.

 Pamela M. Cole of Pennsylvania State University in State College and Babu Lal 
Tamang of Sanman Prabhi School in Tekanpur, Nepal, directed that project.

 The researchers recruited one group of 27 children, ranging in age from 6 to 
9, from Nepal's majority ethnic population, known as the Tamang. As Tibetan 
Buddhists, the Tamang cherish social equality and harmony. Differences between 
villagers are played down. For example, families share goods that they 
accumulate to avoid the appearance of an imbalance of community wealth. 
Consistent with Buddhist principles, the Tamang strive to avoid any strong 
emotions, particularly anger.

 A second group of 23 youngsters in the same age range belonged to a Nepalese 
Hindu population, the Chhetri-Brahmin, which adheres to a social-caste system. 
Their daily behavior hinges on disciplined self-control according to 
religiously inspired rules for avoiding spiritual pollution. For instance, 
lower-caste people cannot touch the food or bodies of higher-caste individuals, 
and women cannot taste the food they cook until other family members have 
eaten. In this society, intense emotions are accepted as occurring from time to 
time, but people learn to dilute facial expressions and other signs of 
heightened feeling.

 Children were asked in their native tongue to imagine how they would feel in a 
series of social situations described in stories, each illustrated with a 
picture. Story themes involved seeing a friend act aggressively, being 
separated for a few days from one's parents, receiving directions from one's 
mother to stop playing and go to bed, being picked on by peers, observing a 
parental argument, and joining a desirable peer group.

 Significant cultural differences emerged, report Cole and Tamang. The Tamang 
children usually indicated that they would feel "just OK," both in negative and 
positive scenarios. Chhetri-Brahmin children more often reported feeling 
negative emotions, such as anger and sadness, but said that they would try to 
hide them.

 The two groups of Nepalese children, however, expressed comparable reluctance 
to act on negative emotions, consistent with the values of respect for 
authority and social harmony evident in their farming villages, the 
investigators assert.

 Chhetri-Brahmin mothers reported teaching their children about both how to 
behave and how to express feelings. Tamang mothers said that children learned 
proper conduct automatically; their main parental intervention was to cajole 
youngsters into feeling good and achieving a calm state instead of displaying 
negative emotions.

 For Tamang children, feeling OK when being subjected to teasing or observing a 
parental argument may stem from their history of being eased into a pleasant 
state whenever harsh emotions surface.

 The internal experience and meaning of emotion for members of foreign cultures 
is difficult to pin down, Cole says. Consider the results of a 1993 study 
directed by Michael Lewis of the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School-University 
of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in New Brunswick. Japanese infants 
gazed impassively but exhibited steep rises in the stress hormone cortisol as 
they got inoculation shots; in contrast, U.S. infants cried and looked upset 
but displayed only modest cortisol increases.

 The biological roots of emotion are equally slippery. Research in this area 
got an early shot in the arm from Charles Darwin's 1872 book, The Expression of 
the Emotions in Man and Animals. The British scientist argued that, as a result 
of natural selection, all people as well as some nonhuman primates display 
common facial expressions for certain emotions, including happiness, anger, and 
fear. Social influences helped to shape this emotional legacy of human 
ancestors, Darwin contended.

 About 40 years ago, psychologist Paul Ekman of the University of California, 
San Francisco launched a new wave of studies inspired by Darwin's emphasis on 
innate facial expressions for emotions. Ekman provides commentaries to a new 
edition of Darwin's book (1998, Oxford University Press).

 To people around the world, including members of an isolated foraging group in 
New Guinea, Ekman and others have shown posed pictures of various facial 
expressions. They conclude that people everywhere recognize the same 
expressions for a handful of emotions: anger, disgust, sadness, enjoyment, and 
fear or surprise. Clear distinctions between fear and surprise expressions have 
appeared only among members of literate cultures, Ekman says.

 In studies aligned with Ekman's model, scientists now are beginning to use 
brain-imaging technology to search for neural systems linked to these allegedly 
universal emotions (SN: 6/13/98, p. 383).

 Critics of the Ekman-led approach consider emotions and facial expressions to 
be ways of communicating with others and regulating social interactions. In 
their opinion, the brain does not have innately specified emotion circuits. 
Instead, basic tendencies toward positive or negative emotion are incorporated 
by a child into a learned repertoire of strategies for navigating the social 
world.

 Plenty of variability has emerged in cross-cultural ratings of facial 
expressions, notes Alan J. Fridlund of the University of California, Santa 
Barbara. Smiles, eyebrow movements, and other facial gyrations serve many 
intentions in different social situations and sometimes occur without any inner 
experience of emotion, he asserts.

 For instance, smiles viewed by Ekman as intentionally false (in which the 
mouth turns up but muscles encircling the eyes fail to contract as in "genuine" 
smiles) often honestly express intentions of appeasing another person or giving 
in to another's authority, Fridlund maintains.

 Emotions are commonsense concepts that people use to organize and describe 
intense social experiences, contends neuroscientist Leslie Brothers of the 
University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles. Certain brain regions 
spark bodily responses to sensations, such as a welling of tears when seeing a 
loved one about to depart. These responses nudge a person toward socially 
preferred reactions, such as crying or experiencing a sense of despair.

 People apply the term "emotions" to these deeply resonating feelings, but that 
naming does not mean that emotions exist as entities inscribed in the brain's 
furrows and ridges, Brothers says in Friday's Footprint: How Society Shapes The 
Human Mind (1997, Oxford University Press).

 Scientists who wade into the hubbub of people's daily lives find emotions are 
certainly real but about as easy to grasp as a handful of water. "How do you 
distinguish between the occurrence of a genuine emotion and someone's 
regulation of their emotional display? Is the experience of shame and other 
emotions the same in Nepal as in the United States?" Cole answers her own 
questions succinctly, "We don't know yet."

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 12, September 19, 1998, p. 190. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


