Science News Online (9/12/98): Tamoxifen clears hurdle to preventive use

 September 12, 1998 

 Tamoxifen clears hurdle to preventive use

 By J. Raloff 

 Healthy women at high risk of developing breast cancer should be allowed to 
take the drug tamoxifen as a means to cut the short-term risk that they will 
develop the malignancy. That was the recommendation last week of an 11-member 
expert panel convened by the Food and Drug Administration. 

 Some European researchers view the approval as premature, however, and worry 
that it might jeopardize evaluations of long-term risks of the treatment.

 Currently, the only approved use for tamoxifen is to prevent tumor recurrence 
following breast-cancer surgery. However, tamoxifen's manufacturer-Zeneca 
Pharmaceuticals of Wilmington, Del.-recently petitioned FDA for approval to 
label and market the 25-year-old synthetic hormone for a new use, citing a 
recent 4-year, $50 million National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer prevention 
trial.

 Some 6,600 women took the drug. Though all were healthy, each faced a high 
risk of breast cancer because of age, family history, or premalignant breast 
changes. Compared with an equal number of at-risk women who got a placebo, 
women in the treatment group developed 45 percent fewer breast cancers (SN: 
4/11/98, p. 228). FDA's Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee (ODAC) reviewed 
these data before advising FDA to approve tamoxifen for prophylactic use.

 Panel member Kathy S. Albain, a medical oncologist from Loyola University 
Medical Center in Maywood, Ill., says ODAC's acceptance of prophylactic use of 
tamoxifen "was a landmark vote," clearing the major hurdle to FDA approval. 
"There are sufficient numbers [of women] at increased risk that we wanted to 
make sure that [the drug] was available for them."

 However, she adds emphatically, her panel's endorsement comes with major 
qualifications. The panel found insufficient data to demonstrate that tamoxifen 
can prevent breast cancer-despite claims to the contrary earlier this year. The 
drug may only delay a nascent tumor's growth.

 Also, the panel couldn't define which women stood to benefit from the drug. 
Nor could it assess whether treating cancerfree women offers "a favorable 
benefit-risk ratio." There has not been long enough follow-up of the treated 
women to resolve this, Albain says.

 Several researchers argue that in the absence of longer follow-up, it is 
premature to prescribe tamoxifen for healthy women.

 Many studies have shown that tamoxifen, which has been used against breast 
cancer in a variety of prophylactic and therapeutic trials, spawns increased 
rates of endometrial cancer (SN: 2/26/94, p. 133). Among women who take 
tamoxifen before menopause, these cancers often appear long after treatment is 
over-as much as 8 years later, according to a new 14-center study led by 
surgeon Herve Mignotte of Centre Leon Berard in Lyon, France. These women had 
"lower survival rates" because their endometrial cancers were "more advanced" 
than those in women treated with other therapies, according to a report in the 
July Journal of Clinical Oncology.

 Previously, two U.S. research groups had also found hints that the drug causes 
unusually aggressive endometrial cancers (SN: 9/25/93, p. 207).

 Mignotte expects French demand for tamoxifen by healthy women to grow if FDA 
approves the new use-despite a recommendation by two French cancer-research 
societies that doctors should resist prescribing the drug prophylactically.

 Moreover, notes Trevor J. Powles at the Royal Marsden NHS Trust hospital in 
Surrey, England, the excess breast cancers in the nontamoxifen group in the NCI 
trial tended to be treatable-"and curable." In that case, he asks, does it pay 
to expose large numbers of women to the drug treatment's side effects-which 
include blood clots, loss of bone density, and eye and memory problems-so that 
a few are spared a treatable cancer?

 His research suggests that women who face the highest genetic risk of breast 
cancer, owing to BRCA-gene mutations (SN: 6/21/97, p. 386), may be helped least 
by the drug.

 Without long-term follow-up, which the NCI study was not designed to offer, 
there will be no assurance that a short-term reduction in cancer incidence 
doesn't revert to "unacceptable" treatment-related mortality down the road, 
says Powles. He also worries that European funding for his ongoing, long-term 
study (SN: 7/18/98, p. 37) may dry up if FDA is already satisfied that the drug 
is safe enough for healthy women.

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 11, September 12, 1998, p. 166. Copyright C 
1998 by Science Service.


