Parathyroid surgery proves its worth, Science News Online (10/23/99)

 Parathyroid surgery proves its worth 

 By N. Seppa

 Tiny glands that go into a frenzy of hormone production can cause kidney 
disease and bone damage. Because these overactive parathyroid glands often 
produce no overt symptoms, however, doctors are frequently unsure whether to 
remove them surgically. A new study indicates that this operation can provide 
long-term benefits even for patients with no apparent problems.

 As small as peppercorns, the four parathyroid glands in the neck nevertheless 
pack a big punch. The hormone they make regulates blood concentrations of 
calcium, which is crucial to basic metabolic functions.

 In 15 to 25 people per 100,000, at least one of the glands is hyperactive, 
usually due to a benign tumor. The flood of hormones that results can silently 
drain calcium from bones, inflate its concentration in the blood, and dump it 
into the urine.

 In the new study, doctors at Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons in New York identified 121 people with elevated blood-calcium 
concentrations, indicating hyperactive parathyroids. Of these, 61 had opted for 
surgery to remove their parathyroids while 60 had not. Several people in each 
group had obvious symptoms, usually a history of kidney stones, but most showed 
no outward signs of disease.

 After tracking all the patients for a decade, the scientists report that 
surgery provided relief from several problems. For example, 12 patients had had 
kidney stones before surgery, but none of them did during the 10 years 
afterward, the scientists report in the Oct. 21 New England Journal of Medicine 
(NEJM). Among the nonsurgery group, 8 had had kidney stones before the study 
began, and 6 of these people experienced a recurrence during the study.

 In the decade after their surgery, patients averaged bone density gains of 12 
percent in vertebrae and 14 percent in hip bones, says study coauthor Shonni J. 
Silverberg, an endocrinologist at Columbia. Average bone density in those who 
avoided surgery stayed about the same.

 Among these nonsurgical participants, however, 11 did lose bone mass. Five of 
these were women who entered menopause during the study. Fourteen of the 60 
people not getting surgery showed other signs of worsening hyperparathyroidism.

 In 1990, the National Institutes of Health set guidelines for surgery in 
patients with this parathyroid condition. One criterion is moderately high 
calcium concentrations in the blood. However, many people refuse an operation 
if they have no overt symptoms, and doctors often hesitate to recommend it.

"The basic philosophy was, if we didn't know a patient would be significantly 
helped, we didn't call for [surgery]," says Michael A. Levine, an 
endocrinologist at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.

 That may now change, he says, since the study indicates clearly that many 
people add bone mass after surgery. "This is an important study," Levine says, 
predicting that NIH will revise its guidelines.

 Meanwhile, nuclear imaging has helped doctors pinpoint which parathyroid gland 
is diseased, reducing the need for exploratory surgery. As a result, patients 
undergoing such operations need only a minimal hospital stay, Levine says.

 Also, doctors can now monitor parathyroid hormone concentration in the blood 
during surgery. A prompt fall-off of hormone signifies that the gland removed 
was the culprit.

 Such advances "make surgical treatment simpler and faster than in the past," 
says NEJM endocrinologist Robert D. Utiger in an editorial in the same journal 
issue. Those gains and the new findings indicate that surgery "should now be 
recommended for nearly all patients," he says.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 17, October 23, 1999, p. 262. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
