Science News Online (9/5/98): New strain of HIV appears in Cameroon

 September 5, 1998 

 New strain of HIV appears in Cameroon

 By N. Seppa

 Cameroon, which has been a crucible for rare strains of HIV in the past, has 
earned that dubious distinction again.

 French researchers report finding a novel strain of HIV, the virus that causes 
AIDS, in blood collected 3 years ago from a woman in this central African 
country. The new strain apparently evolved from either a more common HIV or its 
simian counterpart, SIV. The report, in the September Nature Medicine, raises 
concerns that this subtype of HIV may be spreading gradually in Africa but not 
showing up on currently used diagnostic tests.

"It very likely will not have public health consequences," says Anthony S. 
Fauci of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, 
Md. Although the rare viral strain may not be picked up by initial screening, 
the national blood supply will continue to be protected by the many layers of 
controls currently in place, he says.

 HIV-1 and HIV-2, the two known types of the AIDS virus, arose in East and West 
Africa, respectively. HIV-1, which more frequently causes a lethal disease, 
includes two broad strains, dubbed group M (for major) and group O (for 
outlier). Group M encompasses several subtypes, which together account for most 
HIV infections worldwide. Group O contains only a few uncommon but deadly 
viruses, appearing mainly in Cameroonians.

 The newfound strain requires a new group. "This group is genetically distinct 
from group M and group O," says Francine E. McCutchan, a molecular biologist at 
the Henry M. Jackson Foundation in Rockville, Md. Scientists have named the 
puzzling strain HIV-1 group N, although it shows some genetic characteristics 
of SIV.

 Researchers discovered the new virus in a frozen sample of the woman's blood 
taken in 1995. After characterizing the strain's DNA, they checked for its 
presence in 700 frozen blood samples taken from HIV-1-positive Cameroonians 
between 1988 and 1997. Most were infected with group M viral strains, and 65 
showed group O. Among 16 samples that matched neither group, 3 had viruses 
strongly resembling the group N strain.

 The new strain is as different from SIV as it is from known HIV-1 strains. 
"[It] can thus be considered as the prototype strain of a new human 
immunodeficiency virus group," say study coauthor Francois Simon of the Bichat 
Hospital in Paris and his colleagues.

 Although the virus isn't widespread, it can be lethal. The woman who gave the 
original blood sample in 1995 died of AIDS later that year at the age of 40.

 While it remains unclear whether the new strain evolved from HIV or SIV, 
scientists have clues as to why it arose in Cameroon. In the rain forest, 
people encounter many primate species, facilitating the spread of primate 
viruses into the human population, McCutchan suggests. In the same issue of 
Nature Medicine, Simon Wain-Hobson of the Pasteur Institute in Paris suggests 
that the new strain, though rare, may "spread just enough to make life 
difficult for viral diagnostics." Tests may eventually have to screen for this 
new HIV strain, McCutchan says.   

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 10, September 5, 1998, p. 148. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


