Designer Estrogens, Science News Online (10/16/99)

 Designer Estrogens Getting all the benefits, few of the risks

 By Damaris Christensen

 The complex (left) of the receptor and an estrogen blocker fails to alter gene 
expression in any cell; the receptor complex (right) including an estrogen 
mimic causes all the changes associated with estrogen. Designer estrogens push 
the receptor into intermediate forms (center shapes), which are active in some 
cells but not in others. (Adapted from: McDonnell)

 It's the dream of every doctor and patient: a potent treatment with no 
unwanted side effects. Such selectivity is easier to imagine than to develop, 
especially for compounds that have multiple effects in the body.

 It's not an impossible dream, however. Scientists in 1992 made a surprising 
finding about a substance developed to treat breast cancer by blocking the 
effects of the female sex hormone estrogen. The drug turned out to counter 
estrogen's action in some tissues, but it acted like estrogen in others. This 
synthetic hormone may lead the way to other compounds, in the group known as 
designer estrogens, that will be even more selective.

"The ultimate goal is to have all the beneficial effects of estrogen but not 
the adverse effects," says JoAnn E. Manson of Harvard Medical School in Boston.

 Such a drug might be able to induce the advantages of estrogen treatment in 
women after menopause: boosts in bone density, improvements in heart function, 
and perhaps delays in the onset of Alzheimer's disease. It would, at the same 
time, block estrogen's undesirable effects. Taking hormone-replacement therapy 
for more than 5 years raises a woman's risk of developing breast cancer, 
endometrial cancer, potentially life-threatening blood clots, and cataracts.

 No novel drug is yet able to improve upon postmenopausal estrogen-replacement 
therapy. Two designer estrogens are currently on the market, however, one to 
treat breast cancer and one to prevent bone loss that can lead to the 
brittle-bone disease osteoporosis. The first works by blocking estrogen's 
effect in the breast; the second, by mimicking it in bone. Several other 
designer estrogens are being developed in the lab, and a few are in early human 
trials.

"This is an enormously exciting class of compounds," says Felicia Cosman of the 
Helen Hayes Hospital in West Haverstraw, N.Y.

"Although not everyone buys into the concept of using pharmacologic agents to 
prevent disease, for those who do, these drugs will be used to help prevent 
diseases related to aging and estrogen deficiency," she predicts.

 The excitement over designer estrogens began with what is known as the 
tamoxifen paradox. Scientists at Zeneca Pharmaceuticals of Wilmington, Del., 
had synthesized tamoxifen, a variation on the estrogen molecule, in hopes of 
creating a compound that would prevent natural estrogen from stimulating breast 
cancer.

 The drug was effective and, since its introduction almost 20 years ago, has 
become one of the most widely prescribed breast-cancer treatments. But 
physicians were concerned that tamoxifen would also prevent natural estrogen 
from blocking bone loss-meaning that women who survived breast cancer would be 
especially susceptible to osteoporosis.

 This, however, was not the case. A nationwide, 2-year study reported in the 
March 26, 1992 New England Journal of Medicine showed that women on tamoxifen 
had higher bone-mineral density than women not taking the anticancer drug. The 
unexpected finding sent researchers scurrying to the lab and the clinic.

 Part of the research effort focused on the basic science of estrogen and the 
molecules known as estrogen receptors. When estrogen molecules bind to their 
receptors inside a cell, some genes turn on and others turn off.

 Scientists have developed variations on the estrogen molecule that still bind 
to the estrogen receptor. If the cell could not distinguish the variant from 
natural estrogen, the compound would mimic the hormone in all its effects. 
Other variants would be so different from estrogen that they would not trigger 
further effects, and by occupying the receptor, they would prevent estrogen 
from playing its normal role. Researchers had not expected any variations on 
estrogen to block some of estrogen's effects but not all of them.

 While some scientists were examining the molecular actions of designer 
estrogens, others were exploring the effects of these drugs on patients. 
According to a study of 6,600 women sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, 
tamoxifen can not only treat breast cancer but also prevent its development 
among high-risk, yet healthy women (SN: 4/11/98, p. 228).

 Unfortunately, tamoxifen, like estrogen, also raises the risk of endometrial 
cancer, blood clots, and cataracts. Because of these serious, well-established 
side effects, tamoxifen is unlikely to be prescribed for routine postmenopausal 
treatment.

 Once tamoxifen's promising effect on bone loss had been demonstrated, 
scientists at Eli Lilly and Co. in Indianapolis took a new look at an estrogen 
variant that had proved a disappointing alternative to tamoxifen for treating 
breast cancer in earlier tests. They discovered that this drug, like tamoxifen, 
prevents bone loss. In 1997, the Food and Drug Administration approved the 
drug, now called raloxifene, to prevent osteoporosis.

 Raloxifene shares some but not all of tamoxifen's drawbacks. It increases the 
risk of blood clots but not of endometrial cancer. It may also share some of 
tamoxifen's benefits.

 A 3-year follow-up to the major study proving that raloxifene blocks bone loss 
provided encouraging evidence that, like tamoxifen, it can prevent breast 
cancer. Among more than 7,700 postmenopausal women with low bone density, those 
taking raloxifene were only one-fourth as likely to develop breast cancer 
within 3 years as those taking a placebo (SN: 6/19/99, p. 388).

 The benefits and side effects of these drugs and newer variations on estrogen 
are still being described. Two large studies that may answer important 
questions within 5 years are now under way. In one, which will include about 
22,000 women, researchers are testing raloxifene and tamoxifen head-to-head to 
see which one prevents breast cancer more effectively and with fewer side 
effects. The second study is looking at 10,000 women to determine whether 
raloxifene benefits the cardiovascular system.

 Definitions of the perfect designer estrogen may vary depending on the 
patient. None of the estrogen variants now available treats hot flashes and 
other symptoms of menopause, Manson says. Raloxifene, in fact, worsens hot 
flashes.

 Furthermore, basic research doesn't always predict clinical effects. "Some of 
these designer estrogens will have effects on tissues that were not 
anticipated," predicts Manson. Large-scale clinical trials of a designer 
estrogen known as idoxifene were recently canceled after several years because, 
like estrogen and tamoxifen, the compound seemed to boost a woman's chance of 
developing endometrial cancer.

 Nonetheless, doctors who treat breast cancer and osteoporosis are excited by 
current progress, says Adele L. Franks of the Prudential Center for Health Care 
Research in Atlanta. Raloxifene's apparent ability to prevent breast cancer 
provides "solid encouragement" that the first designer estrogens will live up 
to their promise, Franks says.

 Tamoxifen and raloxifene were both originally developed to treat cancer, not 
to selectively block or mimic estrogen's effects. A growing knowledge of how 
designer estrogens work "intensifies the anticipation of finding something even 
better than raloxifene," Franks says. "We bumble upon something 
interesting-like the tamoxifen paradox-and very profound things happen in the 
process of trying to figure it out."

 When the tamoxifen paradox first came to light, researchers knew of only one 
cellular receptor for estrogen. For tamoxifen or other designer estrogens to 
have differing effects in various organs, several kinds of estrogen receptors 
might be involved, scientists speculated. Each type of tissue might have a 
different combination of receptors.

 Evidence for this scenario appeared in 1996, when researchers discovered a 
second estrogen receptor in rat prostate glands and ovaries. Others soon found 
that the original estrogen receptor, now dubbed ER-alpha, and the new find, 
ER-beta, are unevenly distributed in the body. Cells of the pituitary gland, 
uterus, testis, kidney, and adrenal glands harbor only ER-alpha receptors. 
Cells in the ovary, testis, prostate, and thymus have only ER-beta receptors. 
Both estrogen receptors are present in bone, breast, and brain.

"The biological impact of ER-beta remains under analysis," says Benita S. 
Katzenellenbogen of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. She 
suspects that the discovery of the second receptor may explain some of the 
tissue selectivity of the designer estrogens. Her group has developed new 
variants of estrogen that selectively bind to one or the other of these 
receptors, she reported in the February Endocrinology.

 Other scientists are less willing to give ER-beta a role in the actions of 
designer estrogens, which are also called selective estrogen receptor 
modulators, or SERMS. So far, there is no evidence that tamoxifen, raloxifene, 
and idoxifene consistently distinguish between the two receptors, says Donald 
P. McDonnell of Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C.

 Even two receptors are not enough to explain the tissue-selective effects of 
tamoxifen, raloxifene, and other designer estrogens under development, he says. 
He suggests that the crucial difference resides in the shape that the estrogen 
receptor assumes once estrogen or a variant has bound to it, a combination 
known as an estrogen-receptor complex. In the March 30 Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, McDonnell and his group reported that each of the 
10 designer estrogens that they tested forced the activated estrogen receptor 
into a different shape.

"In addition to the 'on' and 'off' conformations proposed in classical models 
of estrogen receptor action, it is now apparent that intermediate conformations 
are possible, each of which seems to be associated with a different spectrum . 
. . of activities," says McDonnell.

 In the July 30 Science, his team reported that a small compound that blocks 
estrogen's activity doesn't block tamoxifen's estrogenlike activity. This is 
further confirmation that the shape of the estrogen receptor changes when it is 
bound to different compounds, and for the first time confirms that the shape of 
the estrogen receptor affects its activity, he says. "We've been able to really 
prove the link between shape and biologic activity," says McDonnell.

 Bert W. O'Malley of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston adds to 
McDonnell's model. Some cells, he proposes, are more likely than others to 
respond to particular shapes of the activated estrogen receptor and turn genes 
on or off.

 O'Malley also suspects that in cells, proteins called regulatory molecules 
enhance or suppress the effectiveness of receptors bound to various estrogens. 
Studies have identified about 30 different estrogen-receptor-enhancing, or 
coactivator, proteins, and a few receptor-suppressing, or corepressor, 
proteins. In 1997, O'Malley and his colleagues at Baylor showed that the 
relative levels of coactivators and corepressors could reduce or strengthen the 
effects of tamoxifen in different cells.

 Researchers are finding these regulatory proteins in different amounts in 
various tissues. This uneven distribution could explain the tissue-specific 
effects of designer estrogens, O'Malley says.

"Different shapes [of the receptor-estrogen complex] attract different 
regulatory molecules" that themselves activate different genes, he says. "This 
may also help explain why the same hormone affects different people 
differently. People have slightly different proportions of coactivators and 
corepressors."

 One question that has perplexed researchers is, Why are estrogen receptors so 
flexible about the compounds they bind? The observation that estrogen does not 
exist in just one natural form, but several, may provide an answer. Scientists 
have long known about the natural variants but believed that they all have the 
same effect. New research suggests that each of these naturally occurring 
estrogens has a subtly different effect.

 In a study of 30 postmenopausal women, one natural variant of estrogen, called 
dehydroestrone sulfate, was effective in preventing hot flashes. It did not, 
however, seem to lower the amounts of fatty acids in the women's blood, 
suggesting that this estrogen doesn't benefit the heart.

 These findings indicate that naturally occurring estrogens work selectively, 
says Andres Negro-Vilar of Ligand Pharmaceuticals in San Diego. He and his 
colleagues reported their results in the June Journal of Clinical Endocrinology 
and Metabolism.

"These data suggest that there are naturally occurring estrogens which can act 
as bona fide SERMs," says McDonnell. However, it will take a great deal of 
research to tease out their different activities, he says.

 The more that basic research illuminates the natural function of the estrogen 
receptor, the better insight drug developers will have for creating new 
designer estrogens, he says.

 Despite the progress scientists have made in understanding actions of designer 
estrogens, their long-term use is fraught with complications. "We're very 
excited about the potential of SERMs, but there is still a lot of work to do, 
especially on the long-term safety," cautions Franks. "To give a drug to a 
basically healthy person with the intention of preventing disease, you need to 
be very sure the benefits outweigh the risks."

 Even the well-accepted benefits can be hard to weigh precisely. Despite many 
reports that estrogen therapy reduces heart disease, a U.S. study of almost 
3,000 postmenopausal women who had already had a heart attack found that those 
given hormone-replacement therapy were just as likely to die of heart disease 
as were women given a placebo, Stephen B. Hulley of the University of 
California, San Francisco and his colleagues reported in 1998.

"Overall, we don't know for sure whether raloxifene-or even estrogen-reduces 
heart disease, " says Manson, although she suspects that both do. "It's going 
to be decades until we have a clear picture of all the benefits and risks of 
different SERMs."

 One could make the case that until long-term trials are completed, physicians 
shouldn't prescribe any designer estrogen for extended use, she says. However, 
Manson also points out that few of the current drugs for preventing heart 
disease and osteoporosis have undergone long-term trials.

 As the baby boomers reach retirement age, the need to judge the costs and 
benefits of hormone-replacement therapy presses on more women than ever before. 
If the promise of designer estrogens comes true, a woman's decision about 
whether to take a drug to combat postmenopausal health problems could become 
much simpler. Researchers agree, however, that there is no perfect designer 
estrogen-yet.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 16, October 16, 1999, p. 252. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
