Snouts: A star is born in a very odd way, Science News Online (10/23/99)

 Snouts: A star is born in a very odd way 

 By S. Milius

 During fetal development in star-nosed moles, little cylinders form on the 
sides of the face surrounding the two nostrils. (Catania) The 22 pink rays that 
sprout from the snout of the star-nosed mole develop in a way unlike any other 
animal appendage, a Tennessee-based research team says.

 The wiggling, touch-sensitive nose rays don't bud straight out from the body 
wall-the basic strategy for human limbs, insect legs, fish fins, sea urchin 
spines, and a huge range of other animal equipment, reports Kenneth C. Catania 
of Vanderbilt University in Nashville.

 Instead, the sides of the mole's face swell into ridges that round into fat 
little cylinders embedded in the skin. After the moles are born, the cylinders 
come loose at the back end and spring forward to form the species' distinctive 
nose fringe.

 In a sense, the rays end up backwards. Adult tissue that once lay toward the 
rear of the face turns into the ray tip, and what had been at the front becomes 
the ray's base. Catania and his colleagues document the process, with images of 
fetal and newborn moles, in the Sept. 30 Journal of Experimental Biology.

"Why would you peel up an appendage from the side of your face instead of 
growing it out, the way everybody else in the universe does it?" asks Catania.

 This novelty offers a great opportunity for molecular investigation, he 
argues. The outgrowths in all other creatures so far studied rely on the same 
genetic tool kit, even in organisms as different as fruit flies and people. 
Does the mole nose's oddball development come from some novel function of these 
same genes? Or does the peculiarity signal a different suite of genes for limb 
formation?

"It's going to be interesting either way," comments Grace Panganiban of the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, who studies the genetics of development. Like 
the Tennessee researchers, she can't think of a similar developmental 
trajectory. Catania's description was "fascinating," she says, and she, too, 
wants to know the molecular mechanisms.

 A mature mole's nose (to right) checks out the world with 100,000 nerve 
fibers, outdoing the 17,000 or so in a human hand. (Catania)

 The reversed orientation of the nose rays intrigues Catania. "If you were an 
engineer drawing on a chalkboard, you would never think of developing limbs 
that way," he says. "When you can point to something that's done in a stupid 
way," it may signal how the process evolved, retaining bits of previous 
systems. Catania suspects that he's found a trace of history in a different 
mole species. It develops sensory strips on its snout, but they don't burst 
into stars.

 Exotic as a star-nosed mole looks, the species burrows through most wetlands 
in the northeastern United States and ranges into Canada. The nose, with 
abundant nerves and skin only one-twentieth as thick as a person's, gives these 
moles what Catania ranks as "the most developed sense of touch of any mammal on 
the planet."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 17, October 23, 1999, p. 261. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
