The Strangest Home on Earth, Science News Online (10/2/99)

 The Strangest Home on Earth Looking for frosty life in a lake under Antarctica

 By Richard Monastersky

 The drilling project at Vostok Station penetrated the thick ice sheet but 
stopped short of the lake below. The ice in this part of Antarctica flows 
slowly across the narrow end of the lake. The melting and freezing of the ice's 
bottom layer may generate currents in the water. (National Science Foundation)

 A flight over the eastern portion of Antarctica crosses territory so 
monotonous it could lull an insomniac into unshakable slumber. For thousands of 
kilometers in all directions, a thick sheet of ice coats every bit of real 
estate, even the tips of the tallest peaks. Hour after hour, varying shades of 
white pass beneath the plane, with no hint of any other hue.

 Beneath the boring white blanket lies half a continent of virtually uncharted 
territory-a terra nova so completely hidden that scientists have little clue 
what riches await discovery. Only 3 years ago, Russian and British 
glaciologists identified an immense lake-one of Earth's largest and 
deepest-buried beneath 4,000 meters of ice immediately below Russia's Vostok 
Station (SN: 6/29/96, p. 407).

 When the team announced the find, many other researchers sniffed that the lake 
was little more than a curiosity, says glaciologist Martin Siegert of the 
University of Bristol in England, one of the lake's discoverers. As more 
details have emerged, however, a growing number of scientists have picked up 
the scent, with dozens of investigators now panting to explore the feature, 
known as Lake Vostok.

"This is a very exciting opportunity to learn about our planet, the history of 
our planet, perhaps even analogues to life on other planets," says David Karl, 
a microbiologist at the University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu who cochaired 
a conference last fall on Lake Vostok. "It was pretty amazing how uniform the 
interest is," he says.

 Cut off from the rest of Earth for a million years or more, Lake Vostok may 
harbor ancient species of microbes, unknown to science, that are able to 
withstand conditions at the edge of survivability. Moreover, a thick layer of 
sediment at the bottom of the lake could hold novel clues to the planet's 
climate going back tens of millions of years.

 The mysterious body of water inspires even otherworldly interest: NASA hopes 
to use the lake to test methods for detecting life on other planets.

 In August, the National Science Foundation-which runs U.S. operations in 
Antarctica-decided that it would fund an airborne survey of the lake, a first 
step toward eventually drilling into the water. This week, some 60 scientists 
gathered in Cambridge, England, to start planning an international expedition 
to explore the lake and capture samples of its residents, if any exist.

 Along with the potential rewards come a host of challenges. Researchers must 
find a way to penetrate the icy covering without introducing any microorganisms 
or pollutants into the sealed-off water.

"We know absolutely nothing about subglacial lakes. If we're going to work on 
them, we must assume that we are going to take extreme measures to avoid any 
sort of contamination," says Cynan Ellis-Evans of the British Antarctic Survey 
in Cambridge, who led this week's meeting.

 Vostok Station holds the uncomfortable distinction of having recorded the 
coldest temperature on Earth. Thermometers there measured -89.6@C in July 1983, 
and the average temperature hovers down around -55@C.

 It's the thick ice, strangely, that enables a lake to survive in such a frozen 
environment. "The 3 kilometers or so of ice acts effectively as an insulating 
blanket that protects the bedrock underneath the ice from the cold temperatures 
above," says Siegert. Geothermal heat coming from the planet's interior keeps 
the lake from freezing and warms the lowest layers of ice.

 The tremendous weight of the ice sheet also plays a role in maintaining the 
lake. Beneath 4 km of glacier, the pressure is intense enough to melt ice at a 
temperature of -4@C.

 These factors have helped lakes develop across much of the thickly blanketed 
East Antarctica. To date, Siegert and his colleagues have detected more than 70 
hidden lakes in the small portion of the continent they've examined so far.

 Lake Vostok is the largest of these, stretching 280 km from south to north and 
some 60 km from east to west, roughly the size of Lake Ontario but twice as 
deep. At the station, which sits at the southern end of the lake, the water 
depth appears to be 500 m, according to seismic experiments carried out by 
Russian researchers.

 The first clues to Lake Vostok's existence came in the 1970s, when British, 
U.S., and Danish researchers collected radar observations by flying over this 
region. The radar penetrates the ice and bounces off whatever sits below. When 
researchers found a surface as flat as a mirror, they surmised that a lake must 
exist underneath the ice. Gordon de Q. Robin of the University of Cambridge 
reported the subglacial water, but the data didn't reveal whether there was a 
single giant lake or several separate ones.

 It took a view from space to define the lake better. Using radar data 
collected by ERS-1 satellite measurements, J.K. Ridley of University College 
London found that ice was much smoother and flatter above the lake than it was 
above the surrounding mountainous regions. In 1993, he charted the northern end 
of the lake, but the available data did not resolve the southern portion near 
Vostok Station.

 Three years later, Siegert analyzed an improved set of satellite radar data 
without ever setting foot on the Antarctic continent. Along with Robin, Ridley, 
and other researchers, Siegert fully mapped out the dimensions of the lake 
using the satellite, radar, and seismic measurements.

 Only then-some 20 years after it was first suspected-did the lake start to 
garner attention outside the narrow field of glaciology. When Nature splashed 
the news of Vostok on its cover in 1996, biologists started wondering whether 
the buried lake could harbor exotic new species.

 At the time that people first found hints of Lake Vostok, there was little 
reason to suspect it might harbor any life. "The most exciting advance since 
the 1970s is the understanding that life on this planet can occur, and indeed 
thrive, in extremely difficult environments," Siegert says.

 If microbes do populate the lake, they may be some of the hungriest organisms 
ever discovered. "Lake Vostok has the potential to be one of the most 
energy-limited, or oligotropic, environments on the planet," says 
microbiologist Edward F. DeLong of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute 
in Moss Landing, Calif.

 For the lake's residents, the only hope for a sizable meal would come from 
below. Russian investigators have speculated that the lake floor has hot 
springs spewing out hydrothermal fluids stocked with reduced metals and other 
sorts of chemical nutrients.

 They base their argument on the shape of the lake. Its elongated outline and 
substantial depth resemble Lake Baikal in Siberia, which sits in a geologically 
active rift zone. At this site, Earth's outer shell is pulling apart, allowing 
molten rock to rise close to the surface and feed hydrothermal springs.

 Geologists, however, have always painted the exact opposite picture of East 
Antarctica. The scant geological evidence available for this region indicates 
that the crust is old and dead.

 Without a stream of nutrients seeping up from the deep Earth, the only 
potential source of energy lies above the lake. The ice sheet above the water 
is creeping from west to east at a rate of roughly 4 m per year. The lowermost 
layers of ice melt when they come in contact with the lake, liberating trapped 
gases and bits of crushed-up rock.

 Indirect evidence for this glacially slow delivery system comes from drilling 
operations at Vostok Station, where Russian and French researchers have pulled 
up cylindrical ice samples-about as wide as a coffee can-of ice down to within 
120 m of the lake surface. In January 1998, the team ceased its work to prevent 
contaminating the lake with the diesel fuel used to lubricate the drill.

 In the lowest part of the hole, the scientists found a 200-m-thick layer of 
ice containing giant crystals. This and other properties indicate that the ice 
formed as the lake water froze to the bottom of the glacier. Researchers 
suspect that the bottommost ice melts as it passes over the western edge of the 
lake and then water freezes onto the ice sheet as it moves over the eastern 
portion of the lake underlying Vostok Station.

 What comes out of the melting ice is guesswork at the moment because 
geologists know so little about East Antarctica. If the glacier recently passed 
over sedimentary rock before reaching the lake, it could be supplying organic 
compounds useful to microorganisms.

 It also could be seeding the lake with a continuous source of new residents. 
S.S. Abyzov of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow has found bacteria, 
yeasts, fungi, algae, and even pollen grains in the Vostok ice core down to 
depths of 2,750 m-three-quarters of the way to the bottom. At least some of 
these organisms are alive and capable of growing, he reported last year.

 Karl is currently examining ice from the 3,600-meter depth for signs of viable 
microbes. Because ice from that depth formed from frozen lake water, it 
contains a sample of whatever was floating at the surface of the lake. The 
results from this analysis may indirectly indicate whether anything survives in 
the lightless body of water.

 If denizens of Lake Vostok don't succumb for lack of food, they could easily 
suffocate. Because of the intense weight bearing down from the ice sheet 
above-340 times atmospheric pressure-the water contains almost no dissolved 
oxygen, carbon dioxide, methane, or other gases.

 According to calculations, gas molecules should reside in crystal cages of 
ice, forming a structure called a clathrate. Some of these may create a slushy 
zone floating at the top of the lake, while others could sink to the floor.

 Despite the apparent odds against life, biologists place their bets on the 
bacteria. "I would be surprised if there were no microbes in Vostok rather than 
the other way around," says Karl.

 What excites researchers is the idea that resources in the lake are not evenly 
distributed. Microorganisms, just like any business, tend to exploit 
inequalities in supply and demand. By living on the border between two 
environments, cells can extract energy as materials move from regions of plenty 
to paucity. For instance, bacteria may well thrive on the surface of the 
clathrates, taking advantage of a gradient in methane concentrations.

 Clathrates have also captured the attention of climate scientists because they 
may contain ancient samples of oxygen and other gases, says glaciologist Todd 
A. Sowers of Pennsylvania State University in State College. The frozen cages 
of gas could have built up on the lake bottom, layer by layer, over a million 
years or more. By looking at the ratio of different oxygen isotopes in these 
clathrates, scientists should be able to trace how Earth's temperature has 
changed since the time that some of the earliest humans were spreading across 
the world.

 Below the clathrate layers, Lake Vostok apparently holds vast sedimentary 
deposits chronicling tens of millions of years of Antarctic geology. The 
Russian seismic experiments indicate that sedimentary layers extend hundreds of 
meters below the lake floor.

 In many ways, however, the bottom of Lake Vostok is even more remote than the 
surface of Mars.

 To study the lake's sediments, scientists need to drill through the ice, 
sterilize the probe before entering the lake, pass the instrument through 
hundreds of meters of lake water, bore into the sediments below, then pull the 
samples back up through the ice. All this at crushing pressures.

 The constraints steer engineers in opposite directions, says Joan Horvath, a 
project manager at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, who's 
developing plans for Lake Vostok. "To get anything through the ice, you want it 
to be small," she says. "However, once you get a submersible down there, it's 
very difficult to get something small that will operate at high pressure. In 
that environment, you like things to have thick walls. So, there is an inherent 
engineering mismatch between the two things you're trying to do."

 Most concepts for a first Vostok mission don't involve collecting samples. A 
simpler plan calls for melting a hole through the ice and then sending a 
robotic submersible into the lake to analyze the water and search for 
hydrothermal vents. The hole would refreeze almost instantly, so the trapped 
instrument would send back information via a cable running up through the ice.

 NASA has expressed interest in Lake Vostok because of its similarity to 
Europa. This moon of Jupiter appears to have a water ocean covered by a thick 
ice sheet, measuring perhaps tens of kilometers in depth. If hydrothermal vents 
roil away beneath the ice, chemical reactions on Europa could have created the 
molecular building blocks for life, if not life itself (see p. 219 and SN: 
11/7/98, p. 296).

 Vostok would be an ideal testing ground for technology that would eventually 
fly to Europa or places even more distant, say many scientists. "If we want to 
be able to search for life on other planets, this [Vostok mission] would be a 
drop in the bucket," says Sowers.

 Though cheap compared with a Europan mission, any expedition to Vostok would 
represent a significant investment. Participants at the meeting this week in 
Cambridge discussed ways to harness support from many nations for a mission.

 Researchers also debated whether it makes sense to focus on Lake Vostok to the 
exclusion of other ice-covered Antarctic lakes. "I'm not convinced at all that 
Vostok is the best place to drill," says Siegert.

 Part of the problem is Vostok Station. U.S. officials are reluctant to use the 
aging outpost because of environmental and safety hazards there, so any 
expedition would have to set up a camp elsewhere on the lake. According to 
Siegert, "it may be sensible to drill down into a subglacial lake [that] is 
located quite close to a serviceable station. And also one that's relatively 
small so that if it's spoiled in some way, it won't be the best example of a 
subglacial lake."

 Siegert and others have pointed out that a lake lies almost directly beneath 
the station run by the United States at the South Pole. Because of the 
facilities already there, a drilling operation near the South Pole would cost 
less than at the remote Vostok site.

 Yet the size of Lake Vostok gives it some unique advantages. Shallower lakes 
may have frozen in the past few hundred thousand years, during spells when the 
ice sheet was thinner, says Robin Bell, a geophysicist at Columbia University's 
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in Palisades, N.Y.

"Since Vostok is so deep, it's very unlikely that it has frozen solid since the 
ice sheet was built," says Bell, who cochaired last November's Vostok workshop 
at the National Science Foundation.

 The agency recently decided to fund Bell's proposal to complete an airborne 
survey of Lake Vostok, which will help answer whether Earth's crust is 
currently tearing apart there. Bell views the agency's action as a symbol of 
its growing interest in sampling the lake. She says, "This isn't going to 
guarantee that they're going to go the whole way, but without this they weren't 
going to do anything."

 Future missions depend in part on what Bell finds in the next 2 years while 
flying a gridlike pattern of traverses over the endless white expanse near 
Vostok Station. Despite the blankness of the surface ice, though, the 
geophysicist will have little trouble staying awake as her instruments plumb 
the depths of the alien lake below.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 14, October 2, 1999, p. 216. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
