Science News Online (9/5/98): Common pesticide clobbers amphibians

 September 5, 1998 

 Common pesticide clobbers amphibians

 By J. Raloff 

 Over the past decade, biologists have been chronicling a dramatic worldwide 
disappearance of frogs and toads. A new Canadian study lends strong support to 
the suspicion that agricultural chemicals are contributing to this mysterious 
amphibian decline.

 Michael Berrill of Trent University in Peterborough, Ontario, and his 
colleagues collected newly laid eggs of the wood frog, green frog, and American 
toad from the wild. Some of the eggs were incubated in water containing 
endosulfan, an organochlorine pesticide, while others were allowed to hatch and 
the tad-poles received a 4-day exposure to the compound.

 The study simulated conditions that the animals might face as they breed in 
drainage ditches, ponds, and other wet spots around orchards and farms, says 
coauthor Bruce Pauli, a biologist with Environment Canada in Hull, Quebec. 
Because of endosulfan's toxicity to fish, regulations discourage farmers from 
using endosulfan near open water. However, aerial drifting of the pesticide can 
leave concentrations of 0.4 milligrams per liter or more at 3 meters beyond the 
perimeter of sprayed agricultural fields.

 In the amphibian tests, concentrations of endosulfan were low -- 0.03 to 0.4 
milligrams per liter of water.

 Though eggs exposed to endosulfan hatched normally, Berrill's team reports in 
the September Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, the highest pesticide 
concentrations caused the resulting tadpoles to temporarily exhibit a depressed 
"avoidance behavior." This would have rendered them vulnerable to predation, 
the researchers say.

 Tadpoles exposed to the pesticide after hatching, however, fared worse. All 
three species tested experienced high death rates -- especially at the higher 
exposures. Timing of the exposure made a surprising difference. Up to 30 
percent of those dosed immediately after hatching died, while groups exposed as 
2-week-old tadpoles sometimes suffered 100 percent mortality.

 All three species of tadpoles also incurred significant sublethal toxicity --  
 even in the lowest exposure groups, except for toads exposed immediately after 
hatching. Typically, affected tadpoles exhibited hyperactivity, characterized 
by "whiplike convulsions," followed by temporary paralysis. The survivors of 
the highest exposures also grew unusually slowly.

 In the future, Pauli says, his group hopes to follow amphibians through 
metamorphosis to assess whether early, low-dose exposures to such pesticides 
may be responsible for some of the deformities plaguing North American frogs 
(SN: 10/11/97, p. 230).

 Currently, endosulfan is commonly used to fight insects, aphids, and mites on 
a broad range of fruits, vegetables, ornamental plants and oilseed and cotton. 
Berrill's team concludes that the hazard it presents to frogs and toads "is 
sufficiently great to warrant its replacement by less toxic alternatives 
wherever possible."

 Don Sparling, a contaminant ecologist with the U.S. Geological Survey's 
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center in Laurel, Md., agrees that "this study gives 
us cause for concern." Indeed, he notes, "we know so little about the effects 
of pesticides on amphibians that almost anything we find in these studies is 
going to be new."

 In May, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt convened a cabinet-level briefing on 
amphibian declines. It led to the creation of the Taskforce on Amphibian 
Declines and Deformities to coordinate federal monitoring and research. Its 
first meeting is slated for Sept. 21.   

 From Science News, Vol. 154, No. 10, September 5, 1998, p. 150. Copyright O 
1998 by Science Service.


