Fertilizer: Hiding a toxic pollutant?, Science News Online (10/16/99)

 Fertilizer: Hiding a toxic pollutant? 

 By J. Raloff

 Perchlorate is hardly a household name. Yet its notoriety is climbing as the 
presence of this toxic, thyroid-hormone-disrupting salt leads to the closure of 
drinking-water wells in the western United States.

 Until now, waterborne perchlorate (ClO4-) has been linked almost exclusively 
to aerospace activities, since the compound is a major ingredient in rocket 
fuels. An Environmental Protection Agency study now reports evidence of a far 
more prosaic and potentially widespread source: garden-variety fertilizers.

 Other researchers within EPA and in the fertilizer industry, however, are 
challenging the new data. More embarrassing, the authors of the new 
study-scientists at EPA's National Exposure Research Laboratory in Athens, 
Ga.-told Science News that they will have to retract some of their positive 
findings.

 Says Steve C. McCutcheon, who heads the Athens EPA team, "We definitely made a 
few mistakes" in the first analysis. However, he argues, "we do have 
irrefutable evidence" of perchlorate in all fertilizers tested.

 Chilean nitrate-historically a common ingredient in some fertilizers-has been 
a known natural source of perchlorate for more than a century. The chemical has 
even turned up in at least one deposit of potash, a common fertilizer 
ingredient. Finally, the aerospace industry, which is responsible for cleaning 
up some of the worst perchlorate water problems so far detected, has recently 
reported data from two studies finding perchlorate in fertilizer, McCutcheon 
notes.

 Against this backdrop, the Athens scientists stepped in to analyze nine 
fertilizers, most of them intended for lawns and gardens, using three 
independent techniques. They also assayed eight fertilizer ingredients using 
one or two of the techniques. In the just-published Oct. 1 Environmental 
Science & Technology (ES&T), the researchers report finding perchlorate in 
every sample tested.

 This universal contamination should have been the first clue that something 
might be wrong, argues chemist Edward T. Urbansky of EPA's lab in Cincinnati. 
He notes that some of the ingredients tested, such as urea, have no mineral 
sources-and therefore should contain no perchlorate.

 Having reviewed its disputed results, the Athens team will soon ask ES&T to 
"correct" the data for five of the eight fertilizer ingredients, acknowledging 
that it can no longer detect perchlorate in them. However, McCutcheon 
emphasizes, these retractions will not affect the results for the fertilizers, 
which were more fully analyzed.

 At EPA's National Center for Environmental Assessment in Research Triangle 
Park, N.C., "We have real concerns [about the Athens data] that are 
quantitative and qualitative," notes Annie M. Jarabek. The techniques used to 
measure perchlorate are still evolving and not yet unambiguous, says Jarabek, 
who is heading EPA's toxicological risk assessment on the compound. Moreover, 
she wonders why the Athens team assayed fertilizers that are used by homeowners 
instead of the brands that farmers use.

 Since learning of the Athens data earlier this year, Urbansky has analyzed 
some 45 fertilizers with what he says is a far more sensitive technique than 
has previously been used to perchlorate. So far, he finds "no detectable 
perchlorate" in anything except a few pure sodium nitrates. Presumably, he 
says, they contain the infamous Chilean nitrate.

 These data lead him to suspect "that the Athens group is almost completely 
wrong" about fertilizer as a major source of perchlorate. McCutcheon instead 
argues that perchlorate concentrations are inconsistent in the fertilizers-his 
lab now witnesses variations-and may trace to seasonal changes in sources of 
raw materials.

 Last month, EPA added perchlorate to its list of contaminants that water 
utilities must monitor. As the compound's toxicity is better understood, 
Jarabek says, it might come under federal regulation, perhaps as early as 2003.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 16, October 16, 1999, p. 245. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
