Found: Primordial Water, Science News Online (10/30/99)

 Found: Primordial Water A meteorite's salty tale

 By Ron Cowen

 Purple salt crystals in a sample of the Monahans 1998 meteorite. Crystals are 
about 3 millimeters long. (Bodnar) In the desert town of Monahans, Texas, a 
rainstorm is a major event. But, a visitor that brought in just a trace of 
water last year has made a much bigger splash.

 On a Sunday evening 19 months ago, 11-year-old Alvaro Lyles, his younger 
brother, and five friends were playing basketball

in the Lyles' backyard when they heard what sounded like three sonic booms. At 
first, the youngsters thought another boy on the sidelines, throwing rocks, had 
made the noise. Then, in a vacant lot some 30 yards away, they spotted an 
object they'd never seen before. The black rock was the size and shape of a 
squashed grapefruit. A few minutes later, when one of the boys placed the 
2.2-pound chunk in the hands of Eric's father, Orlando Lyles, it was still warm.

 Orlando Lyles recognized the rock for what it was: a meteorite that had just 
fallen to Earth. No one guessed, however, the precious cargo that the rock was 
carrying.

 Last August, a fragment of the meteorite, dubbed Monahans 1998, returned to 
the spotlight, this time garnering headlines worldwide. Researchers reported 
that the rock contains water from the birth of the solar system.

 Locked inside purple-tinged salt crystals that date from the solar system's 
formation 4.5 billion years ago, the water is presumed to be of the same 
vintage as the sodium chloride vessicles. The amount of fluid is minuscule, but 
it's the first time that scientists have detected water-an essential ingredient 
for life-of primordial origin.

 Michael E. Zolensky and Everett K. Gibson Jr. of NASA's Johnson Space Center 
in Houston, along with Robert J. Bodnar of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University in Blacksburg and their colleagues, describe their 
findings in the Aug. 27 Science.

"This [water] is the first real sample of the solar nebula gas, the gas from 
which all the planets formed," comments cosmochemist Robert N. Clayton of the 
University of Chicago.

 Monahans 1998 belongs to a class of meteorites known as ordinary chondrites, 
which astronomers have believed are fragments of asteroids that contain little 
or no water.

 One explanation for the water in this meteorite is that its parent asteroid 
acquired it after the rock formed. A water-rich, icy projectile, such as a 
comet, could have plowed into the newborn asteroid and spilled some of its 
water. Alternatively, if the water was incorporated into the asteroid as it 
coalesced, planetary scientists may have to revise their thinking about the 
lineage of ordinary chondrites, says Clayton.

 The findings have a far more intriguing implication. To carry a concentrated 
salt solution today, Monahans 1998 must have once been in contact with several 
times more water than now remains, the researchers note. Clayton agrees with 
the team's assessment. "There had to have been quite a lot of water passing 
through [the rock], even though only a tiny fraction of it has been trapped in 
the crystals," he says.

"I think it changes our whole perception of how the early solar system formed, 
what the conditions might have been like, and what the possibility of life was 
like this early," says Bodnar. "One of the big questions we're asking is, Is 
the Earth unique in terms of having life? If water was as common in the solar 
system [as implied] by these findings, then that would suggest that there were 
many environments in the solar system where the conditions were right for the 
development of life."

 Ancient water: Image shows liquid (L) inside a salt crystal in the Monahans 
1998 meteorite. A gas bubble, or vapor (V), resides inside the fluid. Bar 
indicates a scale of 15 micrometers. (Bodnar)

 Water in chondrites could explain water on Earth, says Alan P. Boss of the 
Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.). The origin of terrestrial water has 
perplexed scientists for decades.

 Astronomers have proposed that comets, the frozen, water-bearing emigres from 
the outer solar system, could have delivered much of Earth's water during the 
first few hundred million years of the planet's existence. During this epoch, 
known as the late heavy bombardment, comets pelted Earth and the other inner 
planets at a far higher rate than they do today.

 However, the ratio of deuterium to hydrogen in cometary water is much higher 
than in water on our planet. Researchers don't yet know the deuterium ratio of 
the water in Monahans 1998. If it is lower than that in comets, the finding 
could indicate that meteorites or their parent asteroids are just as important 
as comets in ferrying water to Earth. A mix of water from comets and asteroids 
could be the recipe required to create today's oceans.

 Although scientists have searched for primordial water in space rocks for 
decades, they hadn't come up with a drop. Bodnar and his colleagues note that 
if the water typically resides within salt crystals, the fragile evidence could 
easily have washed away or evaporated. The researchers succeeded in finding 
water this time, they assert, because a member of their team retrieved the rock 
in record time.

 As luck would have it, Monahans isn't very far from the Houston space center. 
As soon as news of the meteorite fall got out, Gibson hopped on a plane to west 
Texas and met with the Monahans City Council. A Texas native who grew up just 
70 miles from the town, Gibson gave the council his personal guarantee that if 
he could borrow the rock, he'd return it within 60 days.

 With the town's blessing, he packed up the meteorite in a plastic bag and 
within 46 hours of its landing had transported it to the NASA center. 
Researchers have never before studied a space rock so soon after its arrival on 
Earth, Gibson says. He later returned the meteorite, minus a tiny sample, to 
the city.

 In November 1998, after researchers at the space center had been studying the 
sample for several months, Bodnar happened to attend a conference there. 
Visiting his former classmate Zolensky, Bodnar peered at a salt crystal from 
the meteorite under the microscope. Along with fluid locked inside the crystal, 
he and Zolensky saw a moving bubble of gas. Among the materials that could be 
present in the meteorite, only water and carbon dioxide can exist as both a 
fluid and a vapor at room temperature.

 Bodnar suspected that the material was water because liquid carbon dioxide 
could only become trapped under extremely high pressure. It was doubtful that 
fragile salt crystals could have survived under that condition.

 At Virginia Tech, he confirmed his hunch. Chilling the salt sample, a mere 
millimeter in length, Bodnar found that the fluid it contained froze at 
-21.2@C, the temperature expected for salt water. After bringing the sample 
back to room temperature, he illuminated it with the green light of an argon 
laser. The light emitted by the fluid showed the characteristic fingerprint of 
water.

 Bodnar was excited but also cautious. Without doubt, Monahans 1998 contained 
water, but could the fluid have entered the rock after it landed?

 He and his colleagues were only too aware of scientists' jumping to the wrong 
conclusion. In the early 1980s, researchers reported that they had found 
primordial water in a meteorite that they had cut open with a diamond saw. 
Moisture from the lubricant they had used in the cutting process, however, had 
penetrated microscopic fractures within the rock. Gibson was a member of the 
chagrined team that had to retract its finding.

 In this case, Gibson and his colleagues had an essential clue that the water 
in Monahans 1998 hadn't come from Earth. The fluid resided within salt crystals 
that have a purplish hue. Newly formed salt is colorless, but it darkens when 
cosmic rays and radiation bombard it. Too little time had elapsed for the 
discoloration to have taken place on our planet, so the salt-and presumably its 
watery cargo-had to have been incorporated into the rock well before it landed.

"The fact that the salt was purple was evidence that [the water] was in it when 
the rock was in space," says Bodnar.

 Finally, radioactive dating revealed that the salt crystals were 4.6 billion 
years old. "Our conclusion that the water is that old is based on our 
interpretation that the salt is that old," Bodnar notes. "Some of the water 
clearly penetrated when the salt crystals formed."

 Monahans policeman Reggie Bailey holds a chunk of the meteorite. (Mark 
Sterkel, Odessa American)

 The researchers are now pursuing two lines of study. They hope to analyze the 
ratio of deuterium to hydrogen in the water. Because their sample is so small, 
they will have to crush the entire salt grain to squeeze out every last water 
drop. The team will practice this technique with equally small samples of salt 
water made in the laboratory, before preparing to ship the meteorite-derived 
fluid to a colleague in England. That colleague will measure the isotopes using 
a mass spectrometer.

"We can't afford not to do it right the first time," says Bodnar.

 In addition, Zolensky is scouring science museums and meteorite catalogues for 
rocks that landed in dry locales and were retrieved soon after they fell. Such 
rocks, he reasons, are more likely to still contain traces of any water they 
might have carried when they struck Earth. A telltale clue of ancient water, if 
Monahans 1998 is any example, is the purplish hue of salt crystals, he adds.

 The team may already have found another specimen. A meteorite called Zag, 
named for the arid Moroccan town in which it fell last year, contains purple 
salt crystals. It also contains water, and in his laboratory Bodnar is about to 
determine how old it is.

"We now think that [water] is much more common in ordinary chondrite meteorites 
than people have recognized," says Bodnar. The salt crystals may be so tiny in 
most rocks, he notes, that scientists have overlooked them.

"We're pushing the limits of technology here in terms of the amount of sample 
we have to work with. If you looked at the container with the Zag [salt 
crystal] in it, you'd think the bottle was empty."

 As with the water in Monahans 1998, Bodnar and his colleagues are anxious to 
measure the ratio of deuterium to hydrogen isotopes within the Zag sample. Even 
if the ratio in the two meteorites is a closer match to terrestrial water than 
to water in comets, the finding won't entirely explain where Earth's water came 
from, cautions theorist Tobias C. Owen of the University of Hawaii in Honolulu.

 Meteorites, he notes, contain 10 times as much xenon, relative to other noble 
gasses, than occurs in Earth's atmosphere. In addition, the relative abundance 
of xenon isotopes found in meteorites doesn't jibe with the pattern found on 
Earth. If meteorites did deliver most of the water to our planet, they also 
would have provided xenon, and our atmosphere would have to have a very 
different composition, Owen maintains.

 Back in the town of Monahans, the chunk of rock in which Zolensky and his 
colleagues found the water is no longer there. Last year, after Gibson returned 
the rock, the boys and their families sold it to a private collector for 
$23,000. So far, according to the researchers, the collector has not wanted to 
part with any of his heavenly treasure.

 The town, however, has another piece of the same meteorite, a fragment that 
happens not to contain water. Found by a deputy sheriff the day after the boys' 
discovery, this chunk had gouged a crater in a city street. The town proudly 
placed the fragment in a showcase in the lobby of city hall.

 Travelers in western Texas are now taking the business route off Interstate 
20, dropping by just to pay homage to the meteorite that promises to change the 
way we view our planet's past.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 18, October 30, 1999, p. 284. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
