Are young hyenas just misunderstood?, Science News Online (10/30/99)

 Are young hyenas just misunderstood? 

 By S. Milius

 The spotted hyena is one of the few carnivores born with functional teeth and 
the strength to use them in attacking a sibling. (University of Pennsylvania 
African Studies Web site) Two research teams are taking a new look-perhaps a 
kinder one-at some of the most vicious sibling rivals among mammals.

 Young spotted hyenas don't kill same-sex twins as a matter of routine, reports 
Kay E. Holekamp of Michigan State University in East Lansing. It's tough times 
that promote siblicide, she argues after monitoring hyenas in Kenya.

 Those tough times, when mothers must commute long distances to hunt, lead to 
extra aggression in young hyenas in Tanzania, confirm Waltraud Golla of the Max 
Planck Institute for Behavioral Physiology in Seewiesen, Germany, and her 
colleagues. Their report in the October Animal Behaviour follows one published 
there in September by Holekamp, Laura Smale of Michigan State, and Paula White 
of the University of California, Berkeley.

"There's no evidence for obligate siblicide," Holekamp maintains. "Suddenly, 
hyenas fit into the bigger picture: It just doesn't make sense to routinely 
kill your sibling."

 It does for some birds, like the masked booby, however. A mother booby 
routinely has an extra chick, which its sibling kills. Although newborn piglets 
sometimes kill their littermates, siblicide among mammals is rare.

 Holekamp traces much of the interest in hyena siblicide to studies in the 
early 1990s led by Laurence Frank of University of California, Berkeley. In the 
wild, researchers saw mixed-sex twins but few male, and no female, pairs. 
Observing violence between siblings, the researchers proposed that one newborn, 
same-sex twin starves the other by keeping it from nursing.

 The notion of hyena infants as programmed killers took on a life of its own, 
according to Holekamp. "People love to go, 'Gee, golly, whiz, what a weird 
animal it is,'" she grumbles.

 The team Holekamp worked with observed a split in a hyena clan. Afterward, 
each animal that remained had more food than before. "Within one reproductive 
cycle-boom-they started producing girls like mad," Holekamp says. That burst of 
female-female twin sets dashed the idea of automatic sister killers, the team 
argues.

 Golla monitored aggression between siblings, including same-sex sets, during 
the year or more that their mothers nurse them. She observed siblicide when the 
mothers commuted long distances to hunt scarce prey. In fat years, when most 
cubs grew fast, she saw less aggression than in lean years.

 Frank acknowledges that hyenas don't automatically kill same-sex siblings. He 
adds that he never used the term obligate to describe hyena siblicide. "That's 
setting up a straw man," he objects.

 However, a difference of opinion remains on the mechanism for gender-ratio 
shifts. Holekamp speculates that some aspect of the female reproductive tract 
could effect the switch.

"There's no evidence for a prenatal mechanism," Frank argues. It is at least as 
plausible, he says, that mothers control the sex ratio after birth by 
intervening in siblicidal battles.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 18, October 30, 1999, p. 278. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
