La Niña will whip up U.S. winter weather, Science News Online (10/30/99)

 La Nina will whip up U.S. winter weather 

 By R. Monastersky

 A typical La Nina reorients winter storms northward, drying the southern 
states. (NOAA) Like a rude guest who refuses to leave, La Nina will hang around 
the tropical Pacific for several more months, upsetting U.S. weather for the 
second winter in a row, government forecasters predicted this week.

 The climatologic opposite of El Nino, La Nina chills the waters of the 
equatorial Pacific Ocean and redirects the air currents carrying weather across 
North America. The current incarnation of La Nina developed in July 1998, 
following the strongest El Nino warming of this century.

"We have learned in recent years that local weather is determined by global 
climate," says D. James Baker, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA). "By looking at the global things that are happening, we 
can do a better job of forecasting what will happen locally."

 The Pacific cooling has dwindled in recent months, but computer models 
forecast that it should strengthen over the winter and stick around at least 
through March, says Ed O'Lenic of NOAA's Climate Prediction Center in Camp 
Springs, Md. Some other researchers, however, question whether this will be a 
La Nina-style winter.

 A typical La Nina winter blows cold air over the northwestern states and 
northern Great Plains while warming much of the rest of the country. O'Lenic 
and his colleagues modified this prediction to take account of a global heating 
trend that has been boosting U.S. temperatures over the past 25 years.

 The combination of both influences will keep most of the country warmer than 
usual this winter, with normal temperatures confined to the Northwest and 
northern Great Plains, predicts NOAA.

 Whenever a La Nina appears, it tends to shove atmospheric winds into a looping 
route north of a high-pressure ridge over the northeast Pacific. This polar jet 
stream will swoop down from Canada carrying storms into the Great Lakes region 
and the Ohio and Tennessee Valleys, predicts NOAA. Other storms will drench the 
Pacific Northwest. In contrast, the Southwest, Texas, and the Southeast will 
have a dry winter, says O'Lenic.

 La Nina typically has a fickle effect on U.S. winter weather, with conditions 
swinging from unseasonably cold to mild and back. Last year, though, the United 
States remained warm throughout winter. O'Lenic explains that the North Pacific 
had so much leftover warmth from the previous El Nino that La Nina's true 
personality could not shine through. This winter, all of that relatively tepid 
water has disappeared, so the weather should follow the expected erratic 
pattern.

 The continuing La Nina contrasts with conditions over the past 23 years, 
during which the Pacific has hosted an unusually large number of strong and 
long appearances of El Nino. Some researchers have identified this shift as a 
potential sign of greenhouse warming, although others see it as a natural 
fluctuation.

 The current Pacific chill does not wipe away the overall warmth of recent 
decades, says Kevin Trenberth of the National Center for Atmospheric Research 
in Boulder, Colo. In fact, the tropical Pacific water is only marginally colder 
than normal. The situation, he says, "doesn't qualify as a La Nina at the 
moment. It's a lot weaker than it was at this time last year, and for La Nina 
conditions to dominate this winter, it'll have to get colder again. And I'm not 
sure that winter will be strongly influenced by La Nina."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 18, October 30, 1999, p. 278. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
