Is Your Stomach Bugging You?, Science News Online (10/9/99)

 Is Your Stomach Bugging You? The rise and fall of the bacterium H. pylori

 By Damaris Christensen

 This picture, taken 8 days after researcher Barry Marshall drank a culture of 
H. pylori in 1982, helped prove that the bacterium causes stomach inflammation 
and potentially ulcers. It shows H. pylori (black) on inflamed tissue from 
Marshall's stomach. (Marshall)

 The chapter of medicine that describes the bacterium Helicobacter pylori is a 
tale of a few individuals taking a stand against the medical wisdom of their 
day. The once-improbable suggestion that a bacterial infection can cause ulcers 
is now dogma. Yet a maverick is now arguing that H. pylori may have some 
benefits as well, and so he warns that a wholesale campaign to eradicate the 
bacterium is premature.

 Proving that this bacterium is responsible for ulcers was no small task. Until 
the 1980s, most physicians believed that high acid concentration in the 
stomach, stress, and spicy foods were the agents behind ulcers. Nevertheless, 
Barry J. Marshall and Robin Warren, physicians in Perth, Australia, became 
convinced that bacteria underlie the problem. They isolated what they believed 
to be the culprit in 1982. Over the next decade, Marshall and a few colleagues 
convinced gastroenterologists around the world that H. pylori is the leading 
cause of stomach ulcers.

 At least a third to half of people worldwide are infected with H. pylori, 
although most infected people have no symptoms. The frequency of infection 
varies from country to country. In most developing nations, from 70 to 90 
percent of adults harbor the microbe, probably from early childhood. In 
developed countries, fewer than 10 percent of children become infected, but 
generally, about 50 percent of 60-year-olds carry the bacterium.

 For a small fraction of those who are infected, the consequences can be 
deadly. The microbe has been linked to stomach, or gastric, cancer, a leading 
killer worldwide. In their lives, 1 to 3 percent of people infected with H. 
pylori will develop stomach cancer-a risk up to six times that faced by 
uninfected people.

 The bacterium also seems to trigger a much less common malignancy, 
mucosa-associated lymphoid-tissue lymphoma. This is a cancer of white blood 
cells found near the stomach lining. In 1994, the World Health Organization 
classified the bacterium as a carcinogen.

 In the United States each year, some 7 million people suffer H. pylori-related 
disease, including ulcers, and thousands die, primarily from gastric cancer. 
Antibiotics can cure ulcers, and even some cases of the lymphoma.

 In 1995, the Digestive Health Initiative, organized by the American 
Gastroenterological Association and other organizations, launched a campaign to 
convince consumers and physicians that people having ulcer symptoms should be 
tested for H. pylori. Since then, according to the initiative, the proportion 
of physicians ready to treat H. pylori has risen dramatically.

 Just as gastroenterologists are beginning to smell success in their quest to 
eliminate the ulcer-causing microbe, however, an investigator who has studied 
H. pylori for many years is trying to convince researchers and physicians that 
the elimination of the microbe may not be such a good idea. Martin Blaser of 
Vanderbilt University in Nashville says that the bacterium's presumed long 
acquaintance with mankind may offer benefits.

 His preliminary evidence suggests that people who aren't infected with H. 
pylori are more likely to develop reflux-a painful disease in which acid from 
the stomach backs through a leaky valve and inflames the esophagus. The 
bacterium may also reduce the risk of the cancer of the esophagus, he says.

 In the long run, eliminating H. pylori may trade one cancer risk for another, 
Blaser contends. Still, other physicians point out that esophageal cancer is 
rare, whereas stomach cancer is the 14th-leading cause of cancer death 
worldwide.

 The debate about whether H. pylori is good or bad needs immediate attention 
because the bacterium is a "submerging"-rather than emerging-infection, Blaser 
says. Beyond the effects of physicians treating H. pylori with antibiotics, the 
microbe is losing ground as community water supplies become cleaner and as 
overall hygiene improves. H. pylori infection is less common among the well-off 
than the poor, and less common in small families than large ones. These factors 
in part explain why it's less prevalent in developed countries than in 
developing countries.

 Since 1968, the number of people in the United States infected with H. pylori 
has dropped by 50 percent. Similar trends are apparent in other developed 
countries.

"As H. pylori has been disappearing, peptic-ulcer disease and [lower-stomach] 
gastric cancers have predictably been decreasing," notes Blaser. "However, 
maladies such as gastroesophageal reflux disease, Barrett's esophagus [an 
ulcerlike disease in the esophagus], and cancers of the lower esophagus and 
gastric cardia [upper stomach] have been dramatically and progressively 
increasing."

 A few studies have begun to differentiate the effects of H. pylori on 
different segments of the gastrointestinal tract. The work focuses on a 
virulent strain of H. pylori carrying a gene called cagA. This strain is more 
likely than others to cause ulcers and stomach cancer and also to prevent 
diseases of the upper stomach and esophagus, Blaser contends. The prevalence of 
cagA strains varies from country to country; about 60 percent of H. pylori in 
the United States carries cagA.

 Last year, a group of researchers working with Blaser showed that people with 
reflux disease, Barrett's esophagus, and esophageal cancer were less likely to 
be infected with cagA strains than people without these diseases were. The 
distribution of other strains isn't known.

 Not everyone agrees that the link between H. pylori and esophageal cancer 
holds, says Adrian Lee of the University of New South Wales in Sydney. This 
September, debating Blaser at a meeting on H. pylori in Baltimore, Lee 
suggested that the rise in esophageal cancer and the absence of the bacterium 
might not be related. Changes in diet, body weight, or environmental exposures, 
all of which may be associated with both esophageal reflux and the transition 
to an industrialized lifestyle, might likewise explain the rise, he says.

 Others agree with Blaser that there's a trade-off between esophageal cancer 
and gastric cancer. "An increased risk of esophageal cancer is the price one 
has to pay for the loss of H. pylori," says David Y. Graham of the Baylor 
College of Medicine in Houston. He suggests, however, that the increased risk 
of esophageal cancer isn't directly linked to the bacterium but to H. pylori's 
effect in the stomach.

 When there is severe, widespread, and chronic inflammation-such as that often 
caused by cagA strains-the stomach produces less acid. So, infected people are 
less likely to suffer from severe reflux, which can result from either stomach 
ulceration or cancer, he says.

 While gastroesophageal reflux disease is now a growing problem in some 
developed countries, Graham notes that excess acid secretion can be easily 
managed by current medications. Moreover, not all people with high amounts of 
acid in their stomach also have the leaky valve that allows acid to eat away at 
the esophagus. "Reflux is a rare disease, and it will remain rare," he says.

 Graham notes that epidemiological data suggest that eliminating H. pylori is 
likely to lead to, at worst, 1 esophageal cancer death for every 50 gastric 
cancer deaths it prevents and may prevent additional deaths due to ulcer 
complications. Gastric cancer versus esophageal cancer "is a phenomenal problem 
compared to a trivial problem," he says.

 Blaser disagrees. In the United States, the number of esophageal cancers is 
increasing by 11 percent each year, the fastest increase of any cancer, he 
notes. He thinks the rise is lagging 20 to 30 years behind declines in H. 
pylori infection.

"I'm alarmed by the trends," he says. "Right now, gastric cancer is the bigger 
problem, but I'm afraid that the long-term trade-off isn't as favorable as it 
looks now. I believe we will eventually be looking at an epidemic of esophageal 
cancer if current trends continue."

 Blaser hasn't always been alarmed by the loss of H. pylori. "I've spent more 
than a decade showing that H. pylori is bad," he says. "But then I began to 
think about the biology. If [the bacteria] have been with us for thousands of 
years, then it follows that the loss of infection seen in the 20th century is 
the aberration.

"The chances are that the benefits of having H. pylori infection at least 
balanced the costs, or else we would have evolved a better immune response," 
Blaser says.

 It isn't clear when H. pylori first infected people or whether it affects 
other animals. A recent genetic analysis supports an ancient coexistence with 
humans.

 An Italian scientist compared the genetic makeup of four strains of the 
bacterium from people in Europe, China, Japan, and New Zealand. He showed that 
slight differences in the DNA of the strains were consistent with patterns of 
human migration that began 100,000 years ago.

"The overlap between genetically distinct human and H. pylori populations 
supports the hypothesis that Helicobacter was already established in man's 
stomach at least 100,000 years ago, before the beginnings of the human 
migrations, and followed him thereafter," says Rino Rappuoli, who works in the 
Siena, Italy, laboratory of Chiron, a biotech firm based in Emeryville, Calif. 
His report appeared in the May 21 Science.

 Nevertheless, Rappuoli isn't convinced by Blaser's arguments. "The idea that 
H. pylori must be doing something good because it has been with man for so long 
is a nice speculation, [but] the data that have been put forward for this 
theory are not yet convincing," says Rappuoli.

 Blaser suggests that the inflammation H. pylori triggers in the stomach is 
valuable. He notes that when Escherichia coli, a normal gut inhabitant, 
inflames the linings of the intestines, it stimulates a response that helps the 
human immune system fight other invaders.

 Some findings are beginning to support this hypothesis, says Blaser. He says 
that in a recent study, people infected with H. pylori had stronger immune 
responses to a cholera vaccine than did people who weren't infected.

 H. pylori may also prevent other, possibly more harmful bacteria from 
infecting the stomach, says Hans G. Boman of the Karolinska Institute in 
Stockholm. In the April 22 Nature, he reported that H. pylori makes a compound 
that kills other bacteria. With these intriguing findings, Boman says, 
physicians should wait for more studies on possible benefits of H. pylori 
before aggressively pursuing any program to eradicate the bacterium.

 These concerns aren't enough to change Graham's opinion that "the only good H. 
pylori is a dead H. pylori." He contends that the comparison of H. pylori to E. 
coli, as a possibly beneficial bacterium, doesn't hold. The inflammation caused 
by H. pylori is much more severe and more likely to cause disease than is the 
reaction triggered by the strains of E. coli that normally live in the human 
gut. The strength of those reactions implies that the immune system is still 
trying to get rid of H. pylori and that the bacterium hasn't had a long history 
of infecting humans, says Graham.

 He suggests that people might not have acquired H. pylori until they began to 
domesticate sheep. Shepherds in modern Italy are about 80 times as likely to be 
infected with H. pylori as are their siblings who aren't shepherds or as is the 
general population, Graham says. In the July 10 Lancet, he showed that 60 
percent of raw milk samples from sheep on Italian farms contain traces of DNA 
from H. pylori. This suggests that the bacterium could have been transmitted to 
people centuries ago from sheep-perhaps its original host-via milk, he says.

 Antibiotic therapy isn't perfect at eliminating the bacterium, possibly 
because H. pylori hides under the thick layer of mucus that protect the stomach 
lining against gastric juices. Even a combination of antibiotics eliminates 
only about 80 percent of infections.

 Nevertheless, there's little question about the benefit of antibiotic therapy 
for people suffering from ulcers. Getting rid of H. pylori infection also cures 
about half the patients with mucosa-associated lymphoid-tissue lymphoma. 
Medical organizations recommend that physicians test anyone with stomach cancer 
for H. pylori infection and treat them with antibiotics if they are infected, 
although the benefits of such treatment haven't been demonstrated.

 It isn't clear whether getting rid of H. pylori in people with no symptoms 
will reduce the risk of their later developing stomach cancer. Once the 
bacterium has been eliminated, adults rarely become reinfected. Several 
analyses have suggested that one-time screening for H. pylori infection among 
high-risk groups (such as those with a family history of the disease or a 
Japanese or Korean heritage) would be worthwhile.

 If eliminating H. pylori infection reduced a person's chance of developing 
stomach cancer by just 15 to 25 percent, once-in-a-lifetime screening and 
treatment might be as effective in preventing stomach cancer as are repeated 
mammograms for breast cancer or blood tests for prostate cancer, says A. Mark 
Fendrick of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

 Widespread screening, however, raises questions about whom to treat. Although 
preventive measures would benefit people who otherwise would go on to develop 
ulcers or cancer, most infected people never develop any symptoms. The drug 
regimen to kill the bacterium is expensive-perhaps prohibitively so in the 
countries with the largest numbers of people infected with H. pylori. 
Widespread treatment also might speed development of antibiotic resistance 
among bacteria.

 Most physicians don't yet recommend widespread screening for H. pylori among 
people who have no symptoms of stomach ailments. "Vaccines-the most effective 
medical practice in controlling infectious diseases-may represent the ultimate 
solution," says Rappuoli. Several vaccines are now under development.

 If doctors screen for the microbe and treat those who are infected or if a 
vaccine is developed and widely used, H. pylori's disappearance is likely to 
accelerate, warns Blaser. Unlike many physicians, he recommends against testing 
for and treating H. pylori infection in people with stomach pain but no proven 
ulcer.

" H. pylori can be good or bad, depending on context. It's entirely possible 
that physicians in the future will be administering selected H. pylori strains 
to colonize selected patients to reduce risks for particular diseases," he says.

"I completely disagree," Lee counters. "Just at the time that we've finally 
started to convince people that this bug causes gastric cancer, this doubt is 
stopping us from going on and aggressively eradicating this disease."

 Debate over whether it's worth eradicating a microbe that causes few symptoms 
in most people isn't new, Graham says. "A hundred years, ago doctors debated 
whether to treat asymptomatic syphilis and decided it should be done," he says. 
Today, asymptomatic cases are still treated aggressively.

 Once better therapies or vaccines to fight H. pylori are developed, says 
Graham, "we should get rid of every case."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 15, October 9, 1999, p. 234. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
