Cave finds revive Neandertal cannibalism, Science News Online (10/2/99)

 Cave finds revive Neandertal cannibalism 

 By B. Bower

 The butchered skeletal remains of six individuals, unearthed at a 
100,000-to-120,000-year-old cave site in southeastern France, offer compelling 
evidence of Neandertal cannibalism, according to a new report.

 Neandertal and animal bones found in Moula-Guercy Cave, which overlooks the 
Rhone River, exhibit identical signs of meat and marrow removal, says a team 
headed by anthropologist Alban Defleur of the CNRS Anthropology Laboratory in 
Marseille, France.

 Neandertals were the only members of the human evolutionary family known to 
have inhabited southwestern Europe at the time. Defleur and his coworkers thus 
propose that Neandertals killed and ate their own at Moula-Guercy-for as yet 
undetermined reasons.

"This is conclusive evidence that at least some Neandertals practiced 
cannibalism," holds anthropologist Tim White of the University of California, 
Berkeley, a member of Defleur's group. "Moula-Guercy was a temporary 
occupation, and we can't say what the reasons were for cannibalism occurring 
there."

 Reports of prehistoric cannibalism go back more than a century. Researchers 
have identified butchery marks on human bones at a 6,000-year-old French cave 
and at U.S. Southwest Anasazi Indian sites that are 800 to 1,600 years old (SN: 
1/2/93, p. 12).

 Controversy still surrounds claims that ancient groups pursued anything other 
than starvation-induced cannibalism in emergencies.

 Defleur began excavating Moula-Guercy in 1991. After finding Neandertal bones 
with stone-tool incisions suggestive of cannibalism, he invited White to help 
analyze the remains.

 Their report, published in the Oct. 1 Science, focuses on 78 pieces of bone 
from at least six smashed Neandertal skeletons found among animal bones and 
stone tools. The Neandertal remains come from two adults, two adolescents, and 
two children.

 The braincases had been broken into fragments and the limb bones shattered. 
The tongue of one child had been cut out. Microscopic scrutiny of incisions on 
the bones indicates that the skeletons were cut apart to obtain meat, the 
researchers contend.

 A reassembled leg bone also displayed dents made by a stone hammer, fracture 
marks produced when the bone was smashed, and striations from a stone anvil 
against which it was held. Bones of red deer and other animals that lay among 
the Neandertal remains showed the same types of marks.

 Neandertals often faced food shortages in the ice age environments of western 
Europe, suggesting that they turned to cannibalism at Moula-Guercy and 
elsewhere to stave off starvation, remarks anthropologist Erik Trinkaus of 
Washington University in St. Louis.

 White suspects that cannibalism had deeper meaning for Neandertals and other 
prehistoric groups. He plans to compare evidence at Moula-Guercy with that from 
other ancient cannibalism sites-including a cave containing 800,000-year-old 
butchered Homo bones, which Spanish scientists will soon describe in a 
scientific journal.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 14, October 2, 1999, p. 213. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
