Medicinal EMFs, Science News Online (11/13/99)

 Medicinal EMFs Harnessing electric and magnetic fields for healing and health

 By Janet Raloff

 Women at risk for osteoporosis got a daily buzz on this prototype bone-growth 
stimulator in a Creighton University study. (McLeod)

 Jan Andreason used to get slightly rattled every day-all in the name of 
science.

 Though in her mid-50s, Andreason has the thin, fragile bones seldom found in 
women under 70. Hoping to fight off further ravages of osteoporosis, she had 
volunteered in late 1997 as a subject in a year-long trial of a treatment for 
the brittle-bone disease.

 Participation wasn't difficult. All Andreason had to do was submit to 
twice-daily bouts on a 75-pound contraption installed in her guest bedroom by 
the Creighton University School of Medicine in Omaha, Neb. Resembling an 
upright bathroom scale with handlebars, the vibrating machine sent a gentle 
buzzing through every bone in her body.

 Most mornings, Andreason read the newspaper or blow-dried her hair while 
putting in 10 minutes on the device. Before bedtime, she'd step on the platform 
for a second 10-minute buzz.

 This shaky therapy may represent the future of bone health. Preliminary data 
from Andreason and 51 other postmenopausal recruits suggest that in some cases, 
the platform's vibrations may be able to halt the rapid bone loss that occurs 
in most older women, says Kenneth J. McLeod, a co-inventor of the device.

 Even newer data from a 2-year study of sheep suggest that scientists might be 
able to tailor the regimen to increase the mass of the bones most vulnerable to 
age-related thinning.

 The vibrating platform appears to work by triggering bones to generate tiny 
electric fields, explains McLeod of the State University of New York at Stony 
Brook, who directed the sheep experiments. These tiny currents may turn on 
genes that affect bone remodeling and growth.

 The experimental osteoporosis-fighting machine represents just one technology 
in a wave of new applications of electric and magnetic fields (EMFs) to bone 
injuries and related problems. All build on decades of work by physicists and 
surgeons. Though much of this work remains experimental, the Food and Drug 
Administration acknowledges that when properly applied, EMFs can make for good 
medicine.

 In a just-completed 2-year study, researchers put the hind legs of aging 
ewes-a model for osteoporosis in people-on this vibrating platform for a daily 
shake. The vibrated legs lost less bone than the animals' untreated forelegs. 
Depending on the frequency of the vibrations, some bones gained mass. (Simon 
Turner, Colorado State University)

 Most news reports about EMFs have focused on emanations from power lines, 
building wiring, and appliances. They have chronicled the continuing 
controversy over whether these fields have unhealthy effects, such as perturbed 
sleep patterns (SN: 1/10/98, p. 29), altered heart rhythms (SN: 1/30/99, p. 
70), and cancer (SN: 2/21/98, p. 119). Yet while these risks have grabbed 
headlines, EMFs have been quietly edging into medicine.

 Over the past 20 years, FDA has approved EMF generators for two medical uses. 
The devices are used frequently to treat bone fractures that have stopped 
healing. EMF treatment is also increasingly being applied to fuse spinal 
vertebrae in people with intractable back pain.

 The first inkling of potential benefits from EMFs emerged during the 1950s, 
McLeod notes. That's when a series of experiments showed that bone is 
piezoelectric, meaning that bending or deforming its crystal structure creates 
local electric currents. Physiologists quickly linked these currents to bone 
growth in studies that seemed to explain why exercise strengthens bones and 
immobilization weakens them. This link suggested that electric currents could 
be applied as therapy.

 From the beginning of EMFs' ascendancy to medical respectability, Carl 
Brighton has been an active player. An orthopedic surgeon at the University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia, he was the first doctor to 
treat a fracture with EMFs.

 In 1971, Brighton was faced with the case of a Camden, N.J., woman whose 
9-month-old ankle fracture steadfastly refused to heal. From his experiments, 
Brighton knew that electric fields have the capacity to knit unfused bones in 
animals. So, his team poked a metal pin into the woman's leg, anchored the pin 
to the broken bone, and hooked it up to a battery. Then, they put the leg in a 
cast and sent the woman home with the battery connected.

"Twelve weeks later, her bone was healed," Brighton recalls. The researchers' 
explanation was that the small current delivered by the battery to the 
patient's ankle-which they measured at 10 microamps-spurred specialized cells 
to grow new bone.

 Over the past quarter century, orthopedic researchers have been refining their 
techniques. Brighton developed one of the earliest of those 
modifications-delivery of fields via electrodes placed on the skin instead of 
on the bone. This method remains the only one that FDA has approved for fusing 
spinal vertebrae, he notes.

 More recent techniques enable fields to be delivered without electrodes 
touching the body. This is the most important therapeutic advance in recent 
years, suggests Arthur A. Pilla. A biophysicist at the Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine in New York City, he explains that the newer devices transfer a 
field's energy into the body from wire coiled around, but not touching, the 
injured area.

 For EMFs to penetrate the body, the coils must carry a pulsing electric 
current, he explains-not the simpler direct currents associated with 
electrode-generated fields. In designing the waveform for these oscillating 
fields-their shape, amplitude, and frequency-"we were guided by measurements 
people were making of natural, mechanically induced voltages in bone," Pilla 
recalls. The waveforms of these therapeutic EMFs differ dramatically from those 
generated by power lines and indoor wiring.

 His group won FDA approval in 1979 for the use of a pulsing EMF device for 
fusing broken bones. Pilla adds that the major manufacturers of EMF-generating 
bone-growth stimulators still rely on this basic waveform. Twenty years later, 
researchers still argue whether therapeutic benefits trace to the electric 
fields or the magnetic fields that these devices induce.

 Yellow dye highlights new growth in these sections of wing bones from live 
turkeys. In contrast to the wing treated with coils triggering a very tiny 
current in bone (left), the one placed in inactive coils (right) shows no new 
tissue. (McLeod)

 To study joint disease, orthopedic surgeon Roy K. Aaron has been working with 
a pulsed EMF technique. He and Deborah Ciombor, both at Brown University School 
of Medicine in Providence, R.I. recently used it to treat a strain of guinea 
pigs that ordinarily begin showing signs of osteoarthritis of the knee by 1 
year of age. The researchers began EMF therapy on one group of animals on their 
first birthday and continued it for 6 months. Another group received no 
treatment. At 18 months of age, most of the treated guinea pigs had relatively 
mild disease and a few appeared to be free of pain. All the untreated animals 
were crippled by the oseoarthritis.

"I was so surprised by the difference between the [treated and untreated 
groups] that I repeated the experiment," Aaron says. The results were the same. 
The data demonstrate that this treatment does not simply reduce symptoms, such 
as swelling, but actually modifies the development of disease, he says.

 EMF therapy also helps people with established joint disease, Aaron says. This 
month, he's completing a clinical trial of EMF therapy for men and women with 
advanced osteoarthritis in their knees.

 Two previous studies had found that EMFs reduce pain and swelling. EMFs also 
have that effect in his new trial-presumably, he says, "by changing the 
chemistry of the joint." Studies by his team and others indicate that these 
fields can increase a joint's production of natural anti-inflammatory agents, 
such as transforming growth factor-beta.

 Not surprisingly, Aaron notes, medical supply companies are now developing 
products, such as a glove with coils, to deliver EMFs to arthritis-savaged 
joints.

 Softer tissues also respond to these fields. For instance, Pilla observes that 
many people with bone breaks experience significant pain in muscles around 
their injuries. Shortly after EMF therapy begins, however, that pain disappears.

 Though the mechanism remains elusive, Pilla says, the treatment seems to 
affect swelling, which can cause pain. If this proves true, he says, EMFs might 
benefit people with carpal tunnel syndrome, where swelling in the wrist pinches 
nerves going to the fingers.

 Indeed, that's a possibility that Betty F. Sisken of the University of 
Kentucky College of Medicine in Lexington would like to explore. Currently, 
she's probing EMFs' direct influence on nerves.

 In their initial studies, she and her colleagues crushed a nerve in the hind 
leg of rats and then treated the animals with EMFs for 4 hours daily. In one 
6-day-long experiment, the treatment speeded the nerve's recovery by 22 
percent. In follow-up tests-where 16 rats received EMFs for 40 days and an 
equal number were allowed to heal unaided-treated animals again showed an 
accelerated recovery.

 Sections of bone from healthy female rat (left) and two whose ovaries were 
removed 6 weeks earlier to model women who lose bone after menopause. Bone from 
animal treated with combined EMFs (middle) shows less loss than one from 
untreated rat (right). (John H. Kinney, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory)

 Despite some exploration of EMFs to heal nerves and other soft tissue, the 
majority of studies continue to focus on bone.

 James T. Ryaby, vice president of OrthoLogic, a medical devices company in 
Tempe, Ariz., has been using what he calls combined fields-oscillating magnetic 
fields superimposed on a static magnetic field. They appear to spur bone growth 
more quickly than the older type of pulsed EMFs, Ryaby says.

 What's more, the combined-field devices require just a small percentage of the 
power used by typical pulsed EMF generators. This means the combined-field 
devices can run on conventional batteries, Ryaby says. His company is testing 
such a device for fusing vertebrae in patients with back pain.

 More tantalizing, says Ryaby, are the data from a just completed study with 
female rats suggesting that the combined fields can reverse the kind of bone 
loss women experience after menopause. After removing the rodents' ovaries to 
simulate a postmenopausal state, Ryaby's team watched the animals quickly lose 
bone. Six weeks later, some of the rats began receiving combined-field therapy 
for 30 minutes a day. Within a little more than a month, he says, the treated 
animals were regaining lost bone while their untreated counterparts continued 
to lose it.

 As exciting as the data are, Ryaby says his company has no plans to develop 
the technology for human use. Women just aren't likely to sign up for such 
therapy at menopause knowing that they would likely have to continue it the 
rest of their lives.

 Indeed, McLeod says, "a fear factor associated with EMFs clearly haunts the 
therapeutic field."

 Because of the stigma of EMFs, McLeod and Clint Rubin have been looking for an 
alternative. The Stony Brook pair may have found it in the bones themselves. 
Over the past 20 years, they have demonstrated that during walking, jumping, or 
even just maintaining a balanced posture, muscles exert enough strain on bones 
to generate microcurrents of electricity. The discovery inspired the scientists 
to create a device to encourage the body to make its own electric fields for 
building bones.

 The resulting vibrating platform "is highly innovative but not ready for prime 
time," says endocrinologist Robert Marcus of the Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center in Palo Alto, Calif. Overall, the benefit for women taking part in the 
Creighton study, led by Diane Cullen, "was less than overwhelming," he says. He 
acknowledges, however, that certain subgroups-such as those, like Andreason, 
who started out with the thinnest bones-appeared to derive benefit. He's begun 
using the device in a pilot project.

 The platform's commercial developer, Exogen of Piscataway, N.J., will 
fine-tune the device's frequency and the recommended treatment times before 
undertaking any study of a larger group in women, says Jack T. Ryaby, the 
company's scientific director.

 McLeod says that in his newest tests with aging sheep, platforms vibrating at 
90 Hz increased bone mass. This suggests that tripling the vibration frequency 
of the platform used for the Creighton trial might build new bone, not just 
stabilize loss.

 Moreover, if the sheep data translate to people, he suspects that women would 
need just 8 minutes a day on the faster-vibrating device. "This is really 
exciting because 8 minutes is easy," he says.

 For the larger range of problems, Pilla holds that applied EMFs will be more 
useful. However, medical generators today produce fields with a waveform that 
probably is far from optimal, he says. Though experiments aimed at improving 
these generators and securing FDA approval for devices with different waveforms 
would be costly, the payoff could be tremendous, he believes.

 To get to that payoff, scientists need to learn more about why these fields 
work. Many of the researchers who are developing new applications for these 
fields are therefore asking, What do cells of the body see in EMFs?

"These fields are too weak to power the biology or biochemistry that is active 
here," Pilla says. "They only deliver enough energy to trigger something"-much 
like a pacemaker triggers contractions in the heart.

 In Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics last February, he and his colleagues 
reported finding that pulsed EMFs appear to increase the binding of ions to 
receptors on the surface of cells. For instance, they've witnessed enhanced 
binding of calcium to the regulatory molecule called calmodulin. This 
difference may prove important in stimulation of bone-cell growth by EMFs, 
Pilla says.

 EMFs can also increase bone cells' production of insulinlike growth factor II, 
according to test-tube experiments by Ryaby of OrthoLogic and his colleagues. 
This hormonelike molecule plays a key role in bone growth and may be regulated 
by calcium binding to calmodulin.

 At the BioElectromagnetics Society meeting last June, Sisken's group reported 
on test-tube experiments showing that pulsed EMFs can turn on a gene in damaged 
nerves. That gene plays a role in triggering growth-related repair.

 Brighton is also working to elucidate which genes are altered by EMFs. "This 
is to me what's most exciting," he says. "We can turn genes on and off with 
this stuff."

 McLeod and his group tend to focus on physical effects of fields on cells. 
Their data indicate that EMFs may bias the movement of cell structures that are 
otherwise jostled by the random pushes and pulls of chemical and physical 
processes, McLeod says. He also finds that EMFs can alter the environment in 
which cells grow and move within the body. For instance, electric fields may 
alter the stickiness of surrounding proteins. Indeed, he argues that changes in 
a cell's behavior may trace as much to environmental alterations as to the 
cell's gene activity or membrane effects.

 Changes in cellular behavior may not be limited to the fields being used in 
therapy today, however. Aaron, for instance, has examined effects of the 60-Hz 
fields generated by power lines and home wiring.

 In the August Bioelectromagnetics, his group reports that field strengths 
similar to those in the home and workplace increased production of a protein 
that regulates proliferation and development of cells destined to become bone. 
The EMFs also stimulated some maturation in cells.

 Aaron concludes that fields associated with electric power may exert a 
beneficial influence on such tissues rather than harm them.

 All this basic research may add up to more effective devices and ubiquitous 
applications. For instance, Pilla says he believes generators might one day be 
miniaturized to the size of a dime and cost next to nothing.

 He envisions disposable bandages incorporating a tiny EMF device that would 
treat problems ranging from ankle sprains to bedsores.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 20, November 13, 1999, p. 316. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
