Thyroid Linked to Some Frog Defects, Science News Online (10/2/99)

 Thyroid Linked to Some Frog Defects 

 By J. Raloff

 Tadpoles raised in water from a lake with a low frequency of frog 
abnormalities (top) and in increasingly higher concentrations of water from a 
deformity hot spot. (D.J. Fort/The Stover Group)

 Since 1994, scientists across North America have been chronicling an epidemic 
of frog deformities, much of which seems to trace to something in lake water. 
Two studies now home in on some of the pollutants responsible and the means by 
which they wreak havoc.

 Toxicologist Douglas J. Fort of the Stover Group, a firm of toxicology 
consultants in Stillwater, Okla., and his colleagues collected samples from 
Minnesota and Vermont lakes. Half came from areas where frog-deformity rates 
were low, the rest from hot spots with high malformation rates.

 The researchers then performed experiments on Xenopus laevis frogs-the African 
species that serves as the amphibian analog of a lab rat.

 Frog embryos placed in a growth medium mixed with water from the 
low-deformity, or background, sites developed normally, Fort's team reports in 
the October Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry. However, those exposed to 
water from the hot spots came to display the same deformities seen in 
amphibians in the field. These include bent spines, malformed jaws, 
fewer-than-normal legs, and too many or too few eyes. Some tadpoles also failed 
to metamorphose.

 Because thyroid hormones orchestrate much of vertebrate development, including 
the metamorphosis of tadpoles, Fort suspected the water pollutants were 
interfering with this endocrine system. In follow-up tests, his group showed 
that extra thyroid hormone usually prevented or ameliorated the toxicity.

 Kinked spine in this Xenopus traces to water from a Minnesota hot spot. (D.J. 
Fort/The Stover Group)

 In a second paper in the same journal issue, the scientists reported that what 
makes a hot spot hot is not simply that its water is polluted. Explains Fort, 
all the sampled lakes were "chemical soups" of pollutants-only their recipes 
differed.

 For instance, he notes, hot-spot lakes "contained chemicals that we did not 
find in our [background] sites," such as the pesticides maneb, permethrin, and 
propylthiourea. Though individually many lake pollutants can induce some 
deformities, the team found that limb deformities and bent spines were 
triggered only by maneb or propylthiourea.

 Natural features of the water at certain sites-such as plant-breakdown 
products-proved capable of increasing some pollutants' toxicity, notes coauthor 
James G. Burkhart, a chemist at the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C.

 The new findings reinforce what Martin Ouellet of McGill University in 
Montreal has seen. He says, "Our epidemiological data clearly show amphibian 
deformities occur only in sites subjected to pesticides"-often a soup of 10 to 
20 such agents. Although a few studies have linked deformities to parasites 
(SN: 5/1/99, p. 277), experiments like those by Fort's team affirm that no 
single agent can explain all frog malformations worldwide, Ouellet adds.

 Indeed, frog X rays are revealing several distinct syndromes, Michael Lannoo 
of Ball State University in Muncie, Ind., told Science News. Rare symmetrical 
pairs of extra legs at various sites trace to parasites, he finds, while 
symmetrically truncated hind legs occur after overexposure to ultraviolet 
light. Lannoo applauds Fort's team for mixing field observations and tests to 
investigate what's behind the typically asymmetrical defects at the sites it 
studied.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 14, October 2, 1999, p. 212. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
