Flu Vaccine Aims at Constant Target, Science News Online (10/9/99)

 Flu Vaccine Aims at Constant Target 

 By N. Seppa

 Like a shape-shifter in a science fiction novel, the virus that causes 
influenza can morph into new forms. Mutations that alter the structure of 
proteins on its surface enable the virus to evade its host's immune system. 
Host antibodies search in vain for the flu virus versions that they had 
encountered previously.

 A new study points to an unchanging viral feature that the immune system might 
be trained to detect.

 The conserved protein, called M2, is dwarfed by its neighbors, hemagglutinin 
and neuraminidase. These capricious, larger molecules have made the flu virus a 
moving target. Scientists track changes in these proteins to redesign the flu 
vaccine annually, so they can reeducate immune cells to prepare for a new 
onslaught. The vaccines, however, only represent health authorities' best guess 
at what form the flu virus will take as it spreads in Europe and the Americas.

 The viruses that cause all forms of influenza A, the most severe flu, display 
the same M2 surface protein. By bonding the little M2 to a protein from a 
hepatitis B virus, Belgian scientists have built a molecule that attracts the 
attention of the immune system in mice. Confronted by this combination protein, 
immune cells make antibodies that stand ready to glom on to the M2 protein and 
hamper the virus' attempts to infect a host.

 In theory, whether or not the immune system recognizes the hemagglutinin or 
neuraminidase proteins the virus contains, it would still attack the virus' M2 
site, says study coauthor Walter Fiers, a molecular biologist at the University 
of Ghent.

 In the Belgian experiments, all the mice contracted the flu, as evidenced by 
weight loss and a temperature drop, when exposed to five times the amount of 
flu virus needed to cause illness. Of 36 mice previously given various doses of 
the M2-based vaccine, 30 survived the flu, but 9 of 11 unvaccinated mice died.

 In a second experiment, all 14 mice receiving a uniform, moderate dose of 
vaccine survived, whereas 16 unvaccinated animals all died within 9 days, the 
researchers report in the October Nature Medicine. In later tests, the vaccine 
provided immunity against additional influenza A strains.

"It's a very interesting study," says Jeffery K. Taubenberger, a molecular 
pathologist at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in Washington, D.C. 
"Clearly, they show that under these circumstances, they can ameliorate the 
disease-not preventing infection, but making it milder."

 A separate test demonstrated that the vaccinated mice retained their immunity 
to the flu for 6 months, says Fiers. Antibodies in vaccinated mice hobble M2 
and keep the virus from spreading from cell to cell, he says.

 While scientists can often develop a strong flu vaccine by tracking the 
hemagglutinin protein, their guess is sometimes off target, rendering the 
vaccine much less effective. Incorporating a more consistent-if less 
potent-M2-based component into the vaccine might prove useful in years plagued 
by bad guessing, Fiers says.

"It seems probable that a combination of old and new [vaccines] will be 
required to develop a truly 'universal' vaccine for influenza," says Edwin D. 
Kilbourne of the New York Medical College in Valhalla in the same issue of 
Nature Medicine.

 An M2 component that moderates the severity of the flu could be especially 
valuable in a pandemic, such as the devastating outbreaks that occurred in 
1918, 1957, and 1968, says Frederick G. Hayden, a clinical virologist at the 
University of Virginia in Charlottesville. In those years, flu strains 
incorporating abrupt changes in their large surface proteins hit populations 
worldwide.

 The new study is "a very interesting initial set of experiments," Hayden says. 
He adds that the real value of an M2 vaccine won't become certain until it's 
tested in larger mammals.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 15, October 9, 1999, p. 228. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
