Life found beneath Antarctic ice sheet, Science News Online (10/9/99)

 Life found beneath Antarctic ice sheet 

 By R. Monastersky

 Pushing the known envelope of life to a new extreme, scientists have found 
evidence that viable microorganisms populate a gigantic freshwater lake hidden 
for hundreds of thousands of years beneath the Antarctic ice sheet.

 Called Lake Vostok, the near-freezing body of water is locked in perpetual 
darkness beneath 4,000 meters of ice (SN: 10/2/99, p. 216). No one has yet 
collected samples of the trapped water, but an international drilling team has 
bored down to within 120 m of the lake and pulled up samples of the deep ice. 
According to glaciologists, ice from this level represents lake water that 
froze to the bottom of the glacial sheet.

"When you take this ice and melt it down, you do find some viable cells," says 
David M. Karl of the University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu, who reported 
his results last week at a meeting in Cambridge, England. Originally living in 
the lake, these organisms became trapped in the lowermost ice as it froze, he 
says.

 Another group, led by John Priscu of Montana State University in Bozeman, also 
reported observing microbes in the frozen lake water. Priscu's team, however, 
didn't find evidence that the cells were alive.

 Karl and his colleagues used nutrients labeled with radioactive carbon to test 
for living microbes in the melted ice. By tracking the carbon, they 
demonstrated that glucose and acetate were broken down to form carbon dioxide. 
Living cells carry out these same reactions in a process called respiration.

"I think that was a really clever way to look at metabolism. He showed they're 
viable," says Priscu.

 Karl notes that a similar experiment gave a positive result when it flew on 
the Viking spacecraft in the 1970s. In that case, researchers concluded that no 
organisms were involved but extreme ultraviolet radiation hitting Mars had 
broken down the radioactively labeled molecules into carbon dioxide. However, 
the Hawaiian team performed its Vostok experiment in the dark and conducted 
several control tests to rule out false-positive results, says Karl.

 At this point, neither team can identify the microorganisms. About 1 
micrometer in size, they could be either bacteria or members of a domain of 
life called archaea, which populates many extreme environments. Priscu's team 
is currently trying to sequence DNA isolated from the ice and match it against 
known organisms. "That will tell us if they are ancient or unique," he says.

 Whatever microbes are present in the deep ice must be mini-Methuselahs. Both 
Priscu and Karl used radioactively labeled compounds to test whether the cells 
were growing, a different process from respiration. Neither group could find 
evidence that the organisms bulked up or reproduced. "These cells are probably 
growing very, very slowly," says Karl.

 A French team also tested the ice but couldn't demonstrate that the cells they 
found were originally from the ice rather than contaminants introduced during 
drilling or lab studies.

 To confirm the presence of living microbes in the lake itself, scientists must 
punch through the ice sheet and collect samples of the water, says Karl. Such a 
mission would also help determine how organisms can survive in such a starved 
environment. Some geologists have suggested there may be hot springs at the 
bottom of the lake spewing out nutrients. At the Cambridge meeting, researchers 
discussed mounting an international mission to breach the lake without 
contaminating the water.

 That's going to be a difficult task, says Tommy J. Phelps of Oak Ridge (Tenn.) 
National Laboratory, who studies bacteria living within Earth's crust. "I would 
hate for my grandchildren to blame our generation for perturbing the lake," he 
says.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 15, October 9, 1999, p. 230. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
