Science News Online (11/20/99) Quantum Games

 Quantum Games Taking advantage of quantum effects to attain a winning edge

 By Ivars Peterson

 Over a chessboard or in a diplomatic conference room, players strive for even 
the slightest advantage that would tilt a game's outcome in their favor. 
Reasoning, bullying, bluffing, and cheating can all come into play in the 
search for a winning strategy.

 Game theory offers mathematical tools for analyzing simple games. Originally 
formulated in the 1940s, it provides a framework for deciding who wins under 
various circumstances and suggests optimal strategies for achieving certain 
ends.

 Because researchers can interpret many human activities in terms of games, 
they've applied game theory to important issues in fields such as economics 
(SN: 3/28/98, p. 205), international relations (SN: 5/4/96, p. 284), and 
computer science and artificial intelligence (SN: 7/18/98, p. 40).

 Until recently, however, the realm of games appeared far removed from the 
domain of physics and quantum mechanics, which governs the interactions of 
atoms and electrons. Now, theorists are poised to exploit peculiarities of 
quantum behavior to work out novel strategies for winning games.

 It's like having a quantum penny, says mathematician David A. Meyer of the 
University of California, San Diego. An ordinary penny comes up either heads or 
tails. A quantum penny has the additional property that it can be put into a 
state that mixes both heads and tails.

 The extra possibility of a mixed state permits quantum-game strategies that 
can theoretically be more successful than conventional ones in various games, 
Meyer contends.

 In the light of quantum theory, coin tossing, chess, and perhaps even 
international negotiations take on a startling, new dimension. In some cases, 
using a hypothetical quantum computer in place of a conventional one should 
speed up searches to identify a winning strategy. In other instances, quantum 
logic changes the game itself.

 Computers play a mean, brute-force style of chess. When chess computer Deep 
Blue triumphed over world champion Garry Kasparov in 1997, it relied heavily on 
extensive searches (SN: 5/17/97, p. 300). For a given arrangement of chess 
pieces, the computer simply looked ahead a fixed number of moves, evaluated the 
strength of each move, and selected the best one.

 In principle, a chess computer can foresee a game's end by checking each 
possible path to its outcome. It can then choose an appropriate sequence of 
moves to ensure a win, maintain a draw, or delay a loss. In a game of 40 moves, 
however, the number of different board positions that can develop exceeds 
10120. There's no way even the fastest conventional computer can check every 
possibility to play a perfect game.

 That's where quantum computers would help.

 Ordinary computers rely on vast arrays of tiny transistors, arranged in logic 
units called gates, to perform their calculations. They typically use the 
presence or absence of certain amounts of electric charge to represent the 0s 
and 1s of a computer's binary code.

 The hypothetical quantum computer replaces the 0s and 1s with entities called 
quantum bits, or qubits. Each qubit is encoded as a quantum state-a particular 
energy level of an atom, for instance. One energy level would correspond to the 
0 state and another, to the 1 state. Unlike an ordinary bit, however, a qubit 
can also exist as a combination, or superposition, of those two states.

 Computer scientists can, in principle, take advantage of superposition and the 
wavelike nature of quantum particles. They would set up calculations so that 
computational paths yielding undesirable results cancel each other out, while 
computational paths leading to the answer reinforce each other (SN: 1/14/95, p. 
30). In effect, quantum interference allows them to zero in quickly on the 
relevant result.

 In 1996, Lov K. Grover of Lucent Technologies' Bell Labs in Murray Hill, N.J., 
invented a quantum-based procedure that would significantly speed up searches 
of an unsorted list to find a desired item (SN: 8/31/96, p. 143).

 Grover's search algorithm can itself be thought of as a kind of game, Meyer 
remarks. As in the game of 20 questions, which calls for "yes" or "no" answers 
to specific requests for information, Grover's procedure queries a database to 
learn whether one is on the right track to the answer.

 David Deutsch and Artur Ekert of the University of Oxford in England have 
considered how a chess-playing quantum computer would use Grover's procedure. 
It could investigate a trillion possible continuations from a given position in 
the same number of steps as a conventional computer would need to check out a 
million. Quantum superposition allows the computer to cancel out a lot of 
unpromising possibilities that a conventional computer must look into one by 
one.

 Several researchers, including Grover and Scott Aaronson of Cornell 
University, have investigated such potential improvements in performance. They 
discovered that the search speed-up in a game in which two players take turns 
looks especially promising if there is, at most, just one winning choice per 
move. Since then, Grover has generalized his quantum-search method to cover 
situations where there may be multiple solutions.

 So, if Deep Blue comes out of retirement someday, it might face a newfangled 
quantum computer and quite possibly a crushing defeat.

 The results would be even more dramatically one-sided if a player were to 
stack the quantum deck. Such a surreptitious act could change a game of chance 
into one he or she can't lose.

 Say the Starship Enterprise faces a dire emergency, and Captain Picard is 
preparing for the worst. Suddenly, Q appears on the scene. This all-powerful 
but malevolent being offers to help, provided that Picard can beat him at a 
childishly simple game involving a penny.

 The adversaries start with a closed box containing a penny, heads up. Neither 
can see into the box at any time. Hiding his action from Picard, Q either flips 
over the box (and the penny) or leaves it as it is. Picard then takes a turn, 
after which Q gets a final chance. Q wins if the penny is heads up when the 
adversaries together open the box.

 Q's penny-flip challenge is an example of a two-person, zero-sum game: What 
one player gains, the other loses.

 Applying standard game theory, Picard figures that his chances of winning the 
game are 50:50. He agrees to play-but loses to Q, not just once but again and 
again.

 Meyer invented this Star Trek scenario for his article in the Feb. 1 Physical 
Review Letters. It illustrates what would happen if one player takes advantage 
of a quantum strategy and the other doesn't.

 Picard doesn't know that the penny in question is a quantum coin-an object 
that can be both heads and tails at the same time. Q does, so he performs a 
quantum flip on the penny. Instead of swapping tails for heads, this particular 
move leaves the coin in a superposition of the two states, half heads and half 
tails.

 On his turn, Picard responds with a standard flip or does nothing. Neither 
choice, however, alters the penny's mixed state. Q then does another quantum 
move that unscrambles the superposition, bringing the coin back to heads to win 
the game.

 The key to Q's success is that he has access to quantum moves unavailable to 
Picard, Meyer says. A quantum computer should have a similar advantage over a 
conventional computer.

 Researchers are now looking closely at the sorts of problems that stump 
standard mathematical methods but can be solved efficiently by algorithms that 
take full advantage of quantum effects. So far, they've identified only a 
handful of such algorithms, including a method for factoring whole numbers (SN: 
5/14/94, p. 308) and Grover's quantum-search technique.

 A game-theory perspective may suggest new possibilities for efficient quantum 
algorithms, Meyer says. Meanwhile, he's looking for other games in which 
quantum strategies potentially offer an advantage.

 It's also possible to imagine a quantum game with quantum players, in which 
everyone wins.

 Consider the game called the Prisoners' Dilemma, which has been the subject of 
thousands of experiments and theoretical investigations in social science, 
psychology, and economics since it was invented in the early 1950s.

 Two prisoners charged with a serious crime are held in separate cells. Their 
captors offer each of them the same deal.

 If one testifies against the other and the other says nothing, the squealer 
goes free and his associate gets a heavy sentence. If both remain silent, each 
one gets a light sentence. If both snitch, each gets a medium sentence.

 Unable to confer and lacking faith in the other's trustworthiness, each 
prisoner inevitably concludes that the best strategy is to spill the beans. 
Both end up serving a medium sentence, which is far worse than the light 
sentence they would have received if they had trusted each other and said 
nothing.

 The same thing can happen when two competing stores cut prices to lure 
customers or when two countries are in an arms race. Even though each party 
makes the best possible choice from its own viewpoint, both end up worse off 
than if they had cooperated.

 The dilemma inherent in this situation, however, can disappear in a quantum 
version of the game, says physicist Jens Eisert of the University of Potsdam in 
Germany. "The players escape the dilemma if they both resort to quantum 
strategies," he remarks.

 Eisert, Potsdam colleague Martin Wilkens, and Maciej Lewenstein of the 
University of Hannover in Germany describe their approach in the Oct. 11 
Physical Review Letters.

 In the standard version of the Prisoners' Dilemma, one can either squeal or 
stay silent. The quantum edition allows a third option: a superposition of 
squealing and staying silent. Moreover, the choices of the two prisoners can be 
entangled, so that one influences the other.

 Quantum particles show just that sort of behavior. If two particles are in an 
entangled state, then even if the particles are physically separated by miles, 
they behave in some respects as a single entity rather than two separate 
entities (SN: 8/5/89, p. 88).

 So, when a physical process creates an entangled pair of photons of light, 
detecting the state of one of them automatically fixes the corresponding state 
of the other, even when the two photons are far apart. Quantum cryptography 
takes advantage of this effect (SN: 2/10/96, p. 90).

 Eisert and his collaborators describe a physical model of the Prisoners' 
Dilemma in which both prisoners have secret access to such particles and can 
manipulate their states. In effect, the prisoners become quantum players.

 The researchers demonstrate that the best strategy for both prisoners is 
initially not to squeal or stay silent. Instead, they can feel each other out 
using weird quantum combinations and, in the end, make the choice that rewards 
them.

"Very much as in quantum cryptography and computation, we have found superior 
performance of the quantum strategies if entanglement is present," Eisert and 
his coworkers assert.

 At this early stage, no one knows where quantum game theory may eventually 
lead. Eisert, Meyer, Grover, and others have taken just the first steps into a 
strange, unexplored realm.

 Many questions remain. Meyer, for instance, is now pondering what might happen 
in games that involve three or more people, when coalitions, betrayals, and 
shifting allegiances come into play.

 At the same time, researchers keep in mind that quantum computation is, as 
yet, a theoretical playground. The late Rolf W. Landauer often urged his 
colleagues to include the following disclaimer with their papers: "This scheme, 
like all other schemes for quantum computation, relies on speculative 
technology, does not in its current form take into account all possible sources 
of noise, unreliability, and manufacturing error, and probably will not work."

 Nonetheless, researchers find themselves irresistibly drawn to the subject. 
Insights from the nascent field of quantum game theory could shed light on 
quantum communication issues (SN: 4/3/99, p. 220), for instance, or play a role 
in schemes to ensure fairness in Internet gambling.

 Even more intriguing is the possibility of a link to the behavior of 
biological systems. "We may speculate that games of survival are being played 
already on the molecular level, where quantum mechanics dictates the rules," 
Eisert and his colleagues note.

"It will be some time before quantum games in any form become practical," 
Grover cautions. "Nevertheless, the concept is very exciting and has already 
stimulated a number of new ideas."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 21, November 20, 1999, p. 334. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
