Traffic may worsen hay fever and asthma, Science News Online (11/20/99)

 Traffic may worsen hay fever and asthma 

 By J. Raloff

 As roads grow ever more congested, commutes lengthen. Even though individual 
vehicles spew less pollution, the air remains choked with combustion 
byproducts. Now, urban denizens have yet another reason to hate traffic: It 
pollinates their air.

 A new study finds that cars and trucks stir up a lot of dust, much of it laden 
with allergy-causing plant pollens and molds.

 Over an 8-month period, Ann G. Miguel of the California Institute of 
Technology in Pasadena and her colleagues vacuumed dust from paved roads at 
three Southern California sites-a relatively rural road in Riverside, a 
residential street in Long Beach, and a highway running through an industrial 
portion of downtown Los Angeles. Each thoroughfare was chosen because it ran 
directly in front of a pollution monitor measuring the quantity of particulate 
matter in air.

 From earlier studies led by atmospheric chemist Glen R. Cass, also of Caltech, 
he and his colleagues knew how to calculate what share of the particles 
measured at a monitoring station come from road dust thrown into the air. In 
laboratory tests, they determined how much of the vacuumed dust could trigger 
an allergic response. Their new data, reported in the December Environmental 
Science & Technology, indicate that up to 12 percent of the allergenic 
particles in air at the tested sites came from road dust kicked up there.

 Some 40 to 70 percent of the particles in this road dust measured 10 
micrometers in diameter or smaller, and so are known as PM-10. These are small 
enough to be inhaled into the lungs-or remain airborne long enough to travel 
miles.

 Assays showed that the PM-10 fraction was every bit as allergenic as larger 
particles. This may surprise many pollution chemists and allergists, Cass says, 
"because people think of pollen grains as being larger." In fact, most pollen 
in the road dust was broken, but the fragments retained their potential to 
cause an allergic reaction.

 However, Cass points out, even particles bigger than PM-10, which remain 
airborne for only a few hundred feet, can still travel far enough from the road 
to reach local homes. Moreover, the share of pollens and molds in road dust 
could be higher in sites where rainfall and vegetation are more abundant than 
in the arid sites the team studied, Cass observes.

 The researchers conclude that the dust raised by traffic may trigger hay fever 
symptoms, such as runny nose, watery eyes, and sneezing. Inhaled more deeply, 
they say, these particles can cause the tissue swelling in lungs and shortness 
of breath that mark allergic asthma.

 Traditional pollutants in vehicular exhaust, such as nitrogen dioxide, can 
also trigger asthma. David V. Bates of the University of British Columbia in 
Vancouver finds this article to be an "interesting contribution"-especially 
because breathing a very low concentration of nitrogen dioxide can exaggerate 
the asthmatic effect of subsequent exposure to an allergen, he says.

 M. Eric Gershwin, chief of allergy at the University of California, Davis 
School of Medicine considers especially notable the new study's failure to 
detect latex in road dust. He says, "There had been theories that latex from 
tires [SN: 4/22/95, p. 244] was responsible for the increasing incidence of 
asthma."

 The new data may also help explain reports that living near a busy road can 
exacerbate asthma symptoms, says Douglas W. Dockery of the Harvard School of 
Public Health in Boston. "We've been postulating that this might be due to 
diesel exhaust," he says, "but the [new study] suggests it may instead be due 
to the resuspension of road dust."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 21, November 20, 1999, p. 325. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
