Grade Meat Tender, Grade Meat True..., Science News Online (11/27/99)

 Grade Meat Tender, Grade Meat True... 

 By J. Raloff

 MARC scientist runs a rib eye through the image-analysis program. Green in 
right image shows the largest area of lean tissue, a step in estimating the 
retail yield of a carcass. (Keith Weller)

 Having trouble selecting meat that will practically melt in your mouth? You're 
not alone. Restaurants and butchers, too, encounter the same frustration. Even 
cuts labeled prime, the top grade, sometimes offer diners a tough chew.

 The problem, explains Mohammad Koohmaraie, is that the current carcass-grading 
procedures-designed to distinguish the tough from the tender-rely heavily on 
marbling, the presence of intramuscular fat. Yet only about 10 percent of the 
variation in a steak's tenderness correlates with marbling, according to 
research by his team at the Agriculture Department's Meat Animal Research 
Center (MARC) in Clay Center, Neb.

 The MARC scientists have now cobbled together an alternative tenderness-rating 
system. In tests, it has offered an unprecedented 94 percent accuracy.

 Today, meat graders slice open a carcass 1 to 3 days after slaughter and 
estimate its tenderness by rating its appearance-muscle maturity and color as 
well as marbling. The system that Koohmaraie's group has developed requires 
slicing off a 1-inch rib-eye steak, cooking it for 4 minutes, then cutting it 
with a miniature guillotine that measures shear force.

 To make the system even more attractive to meat packers, the scientists have 
just added an image-analysis program. From a glance at the uncooked rib eye, a 
computer calculates the pounds of retail cuts that the rest of the carcass will 
yield when butchered.

 Although not automated, the system "is ready for prime time," Koohmaraie says. 
It adds $4.50 per carcass, or 15 cents per pound retail, he calculates.

 Meat producers should be able to easily recover these costs, according to 
in-store studies led by Ted C. Schroeder at Kansas State University in 
Manhattan. His team grilled two rib-eye steaks from different carcasses and 
offered shoppers a taste test. Their reward: a free steak from the tougher 
carcass.

 The vast majority not only preferred the tender steak but offered hard cash to 
swap the tough freebie for the more tender meat. Most anted up at least 
$1.23-and some paid over $3-per pound.

 This suggests that by marketing the tender cuts under a new, brand-name label 
that guarantees tenderness, savvy packers could quickly "corner the market" for 
high-value meats, says Gary C. Smith of Colorado State University in Fort 
Collins. Though large-scale packers might initially balk at adopting this new 
grading system, he says they'll soon realize that without it they risk losing 
the most lucrative part of the market.

 Indeed, they're already losing big time, argues Wayne D. Purcell of Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University in Blacksburg. Every year for the 
past 20, U.S. consumers have purchased less beef than they did the year before. 
They've been turned off in part, he maintains, by the industry's "25 percent 
product-failure rate"-unexpectedly tough meat.

"Would you buy John Deere tractors if 25 percent of the new ones wouldn't 
start?" he chides producers.

 Now that the MARC group has unveiled a solution, Purcell says, "I think the 
general consensus in the industry is that we need to move forward on it."

 In the long term, he and Smith argue, the ability to identify-and charge a 
premium for-guaranteed-tender carcasses should give producers an economic 
incentive for breeding animals with more tender muscle.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 22, November 27, 1999, p. 340. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
