Scientists eye whirlpool in Earth's core, Science News Online (11/13/99)

 Scientists eye whirlpool in Earth's core 

 By O. Baker

 Heat-driven circulation of liquid iron in Earth's fluid core constitutes the 
geodynamo believed to produce the planet's magnetic field. Discovery of 
upwelling and westward circular motion (top, bold arrow) beneath the North Pole 
supports this model. A rock mantle surrounds the core. (Adapted from Glatzmaier 
& P. Roberts, 1997/ Contemporary Physics)

 Reaching back to the compass readings of early polar explorers, geophysicists 
have now pieced together evidence of a slowly whirling vortex within Earth's 
liquid-iron interior. This result suggests that a long-nurtured theory of 
Earth's magnetism is on target.

 Einstein described geomagnetism as one of the chief unsolved puzzles of 
physics. Neither Earth's liquid outer core nor its solid, yet superhot, inner 
core has struck scientists as likely sources of its magnetic field. Heat cooks 
the magnetism out of magnets, and liquefaction melts it away. Physicists were 
flummoxed.

 Over several decades, an idea has emerged: Earth's core acts like a giant 
dynamo. Heat causes churning in the liquid outer core, which Earth's rotation 
transforms into a liquid whirlpool that swirls around the planet's axis. This 
circulation produces a magnetic field roughly aligned with that axis.

 Basic physics says that electric currents give rise to magnetic fields and 
moving magnets generate electric currents. These two effects enable a churning 
outer core to magnify the small magnetic field that the planet captured from 
its surroundings as it formed. As opposing streams of molten iron, carrying 
tiny magnetic fields, sweep past one another, each induces currents in the 
other. This creates more magnetism, which induces more currents, and so on.

 Supercomputer simulations suggest that dynamo motions could indeed arise 
within the core and create a field like Earth's. The simulations fall short of 
nailing the matter down, however. "You have to make approximations," says 
geophysicist Bruce A. Buffett of the University of British Columbia in 
Vancouver. "We really don't know how accurate these simulations are," he says.

 In the Nov. 11 Nature, however, geophysicists at Johns Hopkins University in 
Baltimore report that a whirlpool slowly spins in the liquid outer core far 
below the North Pole, much as the simulations predict. The finding provides 
physical evidence that the geodynamo model is on the right track, according to 
Buffett.

"That's really very encouraging," he says.

 The finding derives from magnetic measurements made by sailors, explorers, and 
scientists from 1870 to 1990. Peter Olson and Jonathan Aurnou of Hopkins didn't 
analyze these data directly. They looked at the models of Earth's field at 
different times that were developed by three other groups. Analysis of the 
changes over time revealed rotation, Olson and Aurnou say.

 A different line of evidence bolstering the geodynamo theory comes from recent 
supercomputer simulations. In the Oct. 28 Nature, Gary A. Glatzmaier of the 
University of California, Santa Cruz and his colleagues suggest that not only 
can the geodynamo explain the basic conundrum that puzzled Einstein early in 
this century, but it also answers a compounding enigma that emerged in the 
1960s.

 The mysterious finding was that Earth's magnetic field can flip. Certain rocks 
bear the imprint of the field that existed when they solidified. Such rocks of 
different ages testify that the magnetic poles intermittently swap. Tens of 
thousands of years separate some reversals, while tens of millions of years 
separate others.

 Simulations of the geodynamo by Glatzmeier's group predict such behavior if 
the temperature of the rock surrounding the core is uneven and varies over 
time-reasonable assumptions, comments Buffett.

 Olson and Aurnou's failure to detect a whirlpool beneath the South Pole, 
Buffett says, threatens to throw a wrench in one wheel of the dynamo. Because 
Antarctic data are sparse, however, the failure does not definitely contradict 
the model, he says. Impending satellite data may well settle the question soon, 
says Olson.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 20, November 13, 1999, p. 310. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
