New Flea Imperils Fish, Fouls Gear, Science News Online (11/13/99)

 New Flea Imperils Fish, Fouls Gear 

 By J. Raloff

 The spread of fishhook water fleas from Lake Ontario to Lake Michigan and six 
of New York's Finger Lakes-probably by unintentionally transferred water. 
(MacIsaac)

 The Great Lakes have some new inhabitants. Nestling side by side, 50 to 80 of 
them could fit within 1 square inch of space. But their small size belies the 
potential that these fishhook water fleas hold for causing big damage.

 Anglers are already complaining that gelatinous blobs comprising hundreds of 
these little animals are fouling their fishing lines. Sport fish may soon begin 
suffering from these zooplankton, as well. The voracious fleas devour the same 
small plankton that larval fish need to survive.

 Indeed, "small fish could end up being big losers here," observes Hugh J. 
MacIsaac, an aquatic ecologist at the University of Windsor in Ontario. He 
described the flea's explosive North American invasion at an international 
conference Monday sponsored by the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center in 
Edgewater, Md.

 At a meeting MacIsaac attended in Dublin 15 months ago, Russian scientists 
described the impact of the flea, Cercopagis pengoi, on fishing fleets in the 
Baltic Sea. As the fleas' numbers peak in summer, they clog nets with their 
bodies, which hook together into masses that look like frost, says MacIsaac. 
The Russians warned that freighter traffic from the Northern European home of 
this flea could soon transport the nuisance to America.

"Literally, within one day of coming home," MacIsaac notes, "I received the 
first notification that this flea was in our lakes." In August 1998, Canadian 
anglers began reporting knots on fishing lines that jammed their gear. Those 
knots turned out to be clumps of Cercopagis.

 Within a month, the flea was sighted widely over Lake Ontario. Despite hopes 
that the pest would die out over winter, August 1999 counts in Lake Ontario 
exceeded 600 fleas per cubic meter of surface water. And not just in hot spots. 
"This was an average for sampling over the entire lake," notes Joseph 
Makarewicz of the State University of New York at Brockport.

 Three months ago, Cercopagis also turned up in northern Lake Michigan. A week 
ago, researchers with the Illinois Natural History Survey in Zion reported 
finding 50 of the fleas per cubic meter in water from southern Lake Michigan. 
It's only a matter of time, MacIsaac says, before the flea enters the Illinois 
River on its way to the Mississippi and connected waters. The aggressive 
invader has already infested six of New York's Finger Lakes.

 With no way to eradicate the flea, MacIsaac says, one can only hope to slow 
its spread-such as by bleaching fishing gear after its use in infected waters.

 At stake is the Great Lakes' multibillion-dollar fishing industry, says Paul 
D.N. Hebert of the University of Guelph in Ontario. Even if the flea only 
starves out the larvae of noncommercial fish low in the food chain, it could 
indirectly trigger the collapse of top predators, such as salmon and trout, he 
notes. In the worst case, he says, "we could wake up one morning with no fish 
in the Great Lakes, except perhaps carp."

 Sexual female water flea carrying a single resting egg in her brood pouch 
(arrow). Her nearly half-inch-long, kinked tail spine deters predation. (Igor 
A. Grigorovich/University of Windsor)

 Right now, Cercopagis has few known North American predators. Its spiked tail 
spine, which can be nearly a half-inch long, makes the flea too big for most 
North American plankton feeders to swallow.

 Aiding the flea's invasions is its asexual reproduction. During most of the 
summer, Cercopagis females reproduce almost exclusively by cloning. "A single 
female can seed a lake," Hebert notes. As the water cools or food becomes 
limited, the females begin developing into a sexual form, MacIsaac notes. If 
unmated, sexual females bear only males. Heterosexual unions then produce 
"resting eggs," which are able to survive harsh conditions, including cold 
winters, he says.

 Like the zebra mussel, round goby (SN: 7/31/99, p. 68), and most other recent 
aquatic immigrants to the Great Lakes, the fleas have come from northern 
Europe, probably traveling in ballast water. "If these ships were discharging 
chemical pollutants, there would be a public uproar," Hebert argues. Instead, 
they release a more persistent, biological pollutant, he says-and yet garner 
almost no public notice.

 He and MacIsaac are currently looking to use genetic analyses to locate the 
invading fleas' home port in Europe. Makarewicz is working with Edward Mills of 
Cornell University to identify U.S. predators and better predict how the flea 
will alter local food webs.

 Since 1993, U.S. and Canadian laws have prohibited the discharge of ballast 
waters into the Great Lakes. Yet introductions of invasive species continue 
unabated. At the Smithsonian meeting this week, scientists began looking for 
patterns in these invasions.

 Explains Greg Ruiz of the Smithsonian's Edgewater lab, "We hope to begin 
investigating whether [control programs] are targeting the right things"-and if 
not, to recommend improvements.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 20, November 13, 1999, p. 308. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
