Vacuum tubes' new image: Too small to see, Science News Online (11/6/99)

 Vacuum tubes' new image: Too small to see 

 By P. Weiss

 Varying the voltage of the gate, an electrode in the ultrasmall vacuum tube 
shown in this diagram, adjusts the current zipping from a cathode pillar to the 
anode. Insulating material appears in magenta. (Driskill-Smith et al./APL)

 In the lilliputian realm of modern electronics, old-style vacuum tubes have 
all the charm of hulking Gullivers. However, researchers have recently been 
reducing these components to daintier proportions (SN: 4/20/96, p. 249). They 
hope to exploit ways in which vacuum tubes outperform semiconductor devices.

 A team in England has now developed a vacuum tube whose size rivals that of 
transistors in today's microcircuits. The evacuated hollow in the so-called 
nanotriode occupies only about a billionth the volume of a grain of salt, says 
Haroon Ahmed, whose group describes the device in the Nov. 1 Applied Physics 
Letters.

 Capp Spindt of SRI International in Menlo Park, Calif., hails the article as 
"the first credible report of an operating vacuum diode or triode on this 
scale." Diodes act as one-way valves for current between two electrodes; 
triodes control current via a third electrode.

 Akintunde I. Akinwande of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology calls the 
results "really spectacular."

 Alexander A.G. Driskill-Smith, David G. Hasko, and Ahmed, all of the 
University of Cambridge, fabricated the prototype device from alternating 
layers of metals and insulators. The inventors expect the triode to operate 
under conditions of radiation or heat that would make standard semiconductor 
components fail.

"It looked pretty exciting from that point of view," says Ahmed.

 Old-fashioned vacuum tubes initiate a current by boiling electrons off heated 
electrodes. By contrast, in the microscopic vacuum tubes, devices called field 
emitters shoot electrons from the most prominent tip of an array of tiny, 
unheated posts or pyramids. The electrons are torn from the tip by an enormous 
voltage produced when an external electric field becomes concentrated there. 
Field-emission research has intensified in the past decade because emitters can 
be used in flat displays for computers and other items.

 Another research team in 1991 reported sealing minuscule emitters inside an 
evacuated cavity, thus creating a vacuum tube, but it's not as small as the 
Cambridge tube, Akinwande says.

 For tubes of the Cambridge type to play a role in digital circuits, their 
traits must improve, says Ivor Brodie of SRI. The maximum current is low-about 
10 nanoamperes-and too irregular, he says. Akinwande estimates that the tube's 
roughly 10-volt operating voltage probably can be reduced to around 2 volts, a 
level at which some low-voltage semiconductor devices now function.

 Vacuum tubes handle high-frequency signals better than semiconductor 
components do. Unlike electrons in a semiconductor, which are slowed by 
collisions with crystal-lattice atoms, electrons in a tube fly unobstructed 
through the vacuum.

 Consequently, arrays of nanotriodes may find use as amplifiers and oscillators 
for high-frequency, high-power signals, such as those in cellular phone systems 
or military radar, Ahmed says.

 Other possible roles include pressure and acceleration sensors and satellite 
microthrusters, Akinwande adds.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 19, November 6, 1999, p. 292. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
