Y2K problem looms in Hubble repair, Science News Online (11/6/99)

 Y2K problem looms in Hubble repair 

 By R. Cowen

 Scene depicts the upcoming mission to replace failed gyroscopes on Hubble. 
(NASA)

 Space agency officials have their fingers crossed that the shuttle will roar 
into space on schedule next month, carrying astronauts who will replace three 
failed gyroscopes on the Hubble Space Telescope. Already postponed 2 months, 
the repair mission is critical: If one more of Hubble's six gyroscopes fails, 
the telescope won't be steady enough to observe the heavens.

 There's another reason the space agency hopes the mission won't miss its 
December launch window and get bumped into next year, Science News has learned. 
Because planning time for the Hubble mission was unusually short, NASA hasn't 
certified that the software the shuttle will use to navigate and rendezvous 
with Hubble meets year-2000 (Y2K) standards.

 The now-infamous Y2K problem stems from the use of two digits instead of four 
to represent the year in computer programs (SN: 1/2/99, p. 4). Systems 
continuing to use that shortcut may not know whether 00 means the year 1900 or 
2000, creating the potential for serious errors.

 Scheduled for launch between Dec. 2 and 14, the 9-day Hubble-repair mission 
will include four space walks. Although anxious about the schedule, "we have no 
reason to believe that NASA can't get the mission off on time," says Steven 
Beckwith, director of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, which 
operates Hubble. If inclement weather or other circumstances force the mission 
to forgo a December launch, however, the Y2K factor could loom large in efforts 
to quickly reschedule.

 If tests now under way reveal that the NASA software will need only minor 
modifications to be Y2K-compatible, a postponed mission could fly as early as 
mid-January. But if the software, essentially the same used to coordinate 
Hubble repairs in 1997, has to be replaced with a newer version, the fix could 
delay the launch by 4 months, says Denny Holt, manager for the Hubble mission 
at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston.

 Holt notes, however, that there's only an "outside chance" that the old 
software would have to be scrapped, causing such a major delay. So far, tests 
have not uncovered Y2K-related problems. The analysis, however, won't be 
completed until next month.

 Hubble has had only three working gyroscopes since January and another could 
fail at any time. In announcing plans for the repair mission last March (SN: 
3/27/99, p. 203), the agency had pushed for the earliest launch possible, an 
October date. Wiring problems discovered in the shuttle, however, forced the 
mission to be rescheduled to December.

 In choosing the earliest launch date, the agency hoped to avoid what NASA 
chief scientist Edward J. Weiler called a "science emergency." Each month that 
the telescope lies dormant, about $20 million in operational costs would go to 
waste.

 To save time, NASA decided last spring to use the same software that 
successfully navigated the shuttle during a Hubble repair mission 2 years ago. 
They had estimated that testing the old software for Y2K problems would have 
added another 6 months to the planning time, Holt says. If modifying the 
program now proves necessary, he says, the experience acquired in certifying 
Y2K compatibility for a newer version of shuttle software should make that task 
easier.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 19, November 6, 1999, p. 294. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
