Science News Online (1/16/99): A Fireproof Future?

 January 16, 1999

 A Fireproof Future?

 Plastics that don't burn could stop a fire in its tracks

 By C. Wu

 In Greek mythology, the Titan Prometheus stole fire from the gods and gave it 
to humankind-an act of insubordination for which Zeus punished him horribly. To 
us mortals, Prometheus' gift is both a blessing and a curse.

 Fire provides warmth and light, but when it rages uncontrolled, it also causes 
devastating losses of life and property. Each year, fires destroy property 
valued at billions of dollars. Total expenses attributable to fires also 
include the huge costs of insurance, fire-protection systems, and lost wages.

 Smoke detectors provide some warning of uncontrolled fires. Although they can 
be found in three out of four dwellings in the United States, when there's a 
fire, there is only a 20 percent chance that there will be a working detector 
present, says Richard G. Gann, chief of the fire science division at the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Gaithersburg, Md. Even 
the most advanced detection and suppression systems currently available aren't 
foolproof.

 One strategy to lessen the toll taken by fires is to make things out of 
materials that are less liable to burn-or even that don't burn at all. The 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is avidly exploring this approach, 
setting itself a long-term goal of achieving a completely fireproof airplane 
cabin.

 Right now, no commercially available materials, except for metals, are 
sufficiently flame resistant, says Richard E. Lyon, a polymer scientist and 
manager of the fire research program at the FAA's William J. Hughes Technical 
Center at the Atlantic City International Airport in New Jersey.

 At the 1998 Annual Conference on Fire Research held at NIST in November, 
scientists presented their recent work on new fire-retardant materials, 
focusing on plastics. Gann says, "The science in that area is moving very, very 
nicely."

 One promising candidate may be available to airplane manufacturers by the end 
of the year, says Lyon. Researchers are uncertain, however, whether cost and 
demand will drive such materials into construction and consumer goods.

 Scientists began studying the flammability of materials in earnest after World 
War II, when U.S. residents enjoying newfound wealth began living in larger 
homes with more furnishings. "At about the same time, the plastics industry 
took off," Gann says, "and the fire problem took off, too."

 Plastics' combination of low cost, moldability, strength, and flexibility make 
them ubiquitous as industrial materials. However, many plastics burn easily 
being composed primarily of carbon.

 Airplane cabins, for example, consist mostly of plastics, or polymers. An 
all-metal airplane cabin would be impervious to flame but impractically heavy, 
not to mention uncomfortable.

 Because of the heightened dangers of fire in an enclosed cabin surrounded by 
jet fuel, much fire-retardant research has focused on materials for the seats, 
walls, and carpets in airliners. The plastics currently in airplane cabins have 
an overall fire potential comparable to that of an equivalent weight of 
aviation fuel. Once they are burning, the materials give off the same amount of 
energy per kilogram.

 To reduce the risk of fire, materials in airplanes must pass strict 
flammability tests. Airplane manufacturers "are using the best materials they 
have now," says Lyon, "and they're still not good enough."

 Scientists consider several characteristics of a material to assess its 
flammability: how long it takes to ignite, how hot and how fast it burns, and 
the types and amounts of toxic gases it produces in a flame.

 FAA hopes to find cabin materials by 2002 that, when burning, release heat 
half as fast as the materials used today. The heat-release rate is the primary 
measure of a material's flammability, and a lower rate translates into more 
time for a person to escape a fire. By 2009, the agency hopes to have materials 
that release no heat, essentially not burning at all.

 For the past 2 years, a consortium of universities and companies has been 
working with the FAA toward these objectives. The fire-research group at the 
Hughes Technical Center acts as a clearinghouse for the consortium. 
"Universities send us samples, and we run all the tests," says Lyon.

 The Hughes researchers test samples ranging in size from a few milligrams to 
thousands of kilograms. The standard device for testing materials' flammability 
is a cone calorimeter. It measures the heat, smoke, and gases given off as a 
flat, hockey puck-size sample is heated and burned.

 Even tests on tiny samples, which may be all that are available, can provide a 
good picture of how materials will behave in a large fire, Lyon says. The 
Hughes researchers also do full-scale tests. For example, they can build a 
whole airplane cabin of test articles and set it on fire.

 Several of the experimental materials they have tested come close to the FAA's 
goal of a 50 percent reduction in heat-release rate. At least two strong 
polymers called cyanate ester resins approach the FAA's long-term goal of total 
fire resistance.

 One of these polymers, produced by Ciba Specialty Chemicals in Brewster, N.Y., 
is flame-resistant but prohibitively expensive to produce. In collaboration 
with the FAA, Ciba developed the second resin, which is inexpensive and has 
"almost zero heat release," Lyon says. "I think it will revolutionize the 
chemical industry." Ciba is filing a patent on the material and developing a 
marketing plan.

 Richard N. Walters of Galaxy Scientific Corp. in Egg Harbor Township, N.J., 
who is testing the materials for the FAA, says that these cyanate esters might 
be used in composite panels and circuit boards in planes.

 The technical challenge in making fire-retardant polymers is to reduce 
flammability while retaining the properties that make plastics appealing. The 
long carbon backbones that underlie these polymers' structure make perfect fuel 
for a fire.

"You're asking [polymers] that are organic . . . not to behave like an 
organic," says Jeffrey W. Gilman of NIST.

 The kinds of plastic that do survive high temperatures are often brittle and 
hard to mold-not good choices for airplane seat cushions, for example. Seat 
cushions are now made from polyurethane, a stretchy polymer known as an 
elastomer. Although polyurethane is flammable, manufacturers comply with FAA 
fire regulations by wrapping the cushions in a fire-resistant fabric like 
Kevlar, the material used in bulletproof vests.

 Adding flame-suppressing substances to the material provides another way to 
fireproof polymers. In the past, the additives of choice were 
halogen-containing molecules. They stop the chemical action of a fire by 
mopping up reactive molecules as they are released. Although halogens did this 
job well, they fell out of favor because they may release toxic dioxins when 
they burn.

 Manufacturers make some polymers fire retardant by adding metal oxide 
hydrates, compounds that release water at high temperatures. The water absorbs 
the heat and cools down the fire. Such materials are common in wiring 
insulation.

 Some polymers effectively fend off flames by actually getting scorched-but 
only on their surface. These materials form a layer of char that insulates the 
rest of the material from the fire, a process akin to searing meat on the grill 
to preserve the tender flesh inside.

 At the NIST conference, Gilman described one such material: a nylon 
incorporating tiny, flat particles of a silicate clay called montmorillonite. 
Researchers were originally interested in this material for its ability to seal 
out water and for its high strength. Later, they found that the clay made the 
nylon less flammable.

"Typically when you add flame retardants, you tend to take away from the 
mechanical properties," says Emmanuel P. Giannelis of Cornell University, who 
is studying the material. However, incorporating 2 to 6 percent clay into a 
polymer such as nylon or polyamide reduces the heat-release rate 40 to 80 
percent while doubling the strength, says Gilman.

 Giannelis and his collaborators at NIST speculate that the 
nylon-montmorillonite composite provides flame resistance by producing a unique 
kind of char. "When the polymer burns away, the residue consists of alternating 
layers of silicate and carbon char," a combination that might have unusually 
good insulating properties, says Gilman. In contrast, pure nylon forms almost 
no char and is highly flammable.

 Even though small amounts of the silicate improve the composite's strength, 
there's a limit to how much can be added without ruining the material's other 
mechanical properties. If too much layered silicate is included, "then we're 
talking about concrete, not a moldable polymer," Gilman says. The nylon 
containing 2 to 6 percent clay would still be workable in manufacturing, the 
researchers note.

 The FAA is interested in the modified silicate for making molded airplane 
components. Scientists at Toyota Central Research and Development Laboratories 
in Japan have been considering the composite for use in heat-resistant engine 
parts, says Giannelis. It also works as packaging material, such as plastic 
wrap or bottles.

 When an organic material like a polymer burns, the intense heat of the blaze 
causes a host of chemical changes. The material decomposes and releases carbon 
dioxide, water vapor, and other gases. Soon, all that's left is an 
unrecognizable lump of gunk.

 Charles A. Wilkie of Marquette University in Milwaukee is taking those 
chemical transformations and turning them into an asset. His strategy is to 
make materials that harness the potentially destructive energy of a fire to 
provide fire resistance.

"We want to have something that is a normal polymer at room temperature. Then, 
when it's challenged by a fire, we want to have the polymer magically convert 
itself into something which is fire resistant," he explains.

 Wilkie and his colleagues start with highly flammable polystyrene, best known 
as the Styrofoam of disposable coffee cups. Polystyrene is one of the most 
widely used plastics, forming the molded parts on many consumer goods. The 
researchers modify the plastic by adding a second polymer, called 
para-vinylbenzyl alcohol, and a catalyst. A new polystyrene forms with a 
network of bonds, or crosslinks, between polymer molecules.

 To preserve the mechanical properties of the polystyrene, the chemists add 
only low concentrations of the second polymer. Wilkie and his team have found 
that use of a specific catalyst, phosphate ester, reduces the peak heat-release 
rate of the plastic to less than 40 percent of that of pure polystyrene.

"It doesn't burn as hot, and it takes about three times longer to reach that 
hotness," Wilkie says.

 Unlike pure polystyrene, the new material forms a char, which provides 
additional protection from burning. Wilkie suspects that charring is related to 
crosslinking of the polymer. "We're trying to clarify it, but it's not easy," 
he says.

 Wilkie and his colleagues have also modified another plastic to increase its 
fire resistance. ABS, or acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene, is used to make 
computer cases and automobile body parts. The researchers have added a surface 
coating of sodium methacrylate, which in a blaze decomposes into a sodium 
carbonate char. Once charred, the material's rate of heat release drops 
dramatically, and the time it takes for the modified ABS to reach its peak 
heat-release rate increases from 9 to almost 19 minutes.

"You have twice as long to get away from a fire, [and that fire] is between a 
third and a fourth as intense," Wilkie notes.

 These materials, though promising, are still a long way from 
commercialization, Wilkie cautions. For example, his group has looked only at 
ABS samples as large as a fingernail. "Maybe we will come up with something 
that is practical. We like to think that it's possible."

 Fire-resistant materials will have to be very practical in order to supplant 
the inexpensive but flammable ones used today. Even in an area as important as 
airplane safety, the cost of a material plays a major part in whether 
manufacturers will adopt it.

"The problem with all this stuff is that fire behavior doesn't pull new 
products into the market," says Lyon. "They have to be fireproof but sell 
themselves in another way."

 In the future, the FAA might upgrade its regulations to encourage the use of 
new fireproof materials, Lyon adds, but "it can't upgrade the regulations until 
the materials exist." Only then might passengers expect to sit on seat cushions 
that can not only serve as flotation devices in an emergency but can also 
squelch a flame.

 From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 3, January 16, 1999, p. 40. Copyright C 1999 
by Science Service.


