Waking Up to the Dawn of Vertebrates, Science News Online (11/6/99)

 Waking Up to the Dawn of Vertebrates 

 By R. Monastersky

 First fish: An artist's conception of the Myllokunmingia. (John Sibbick)

 Paleontologists have long regarded vertebrates as latecomers who straggled 
into evolutionary history after much of the initial sound and fury had fizzled. 
Chinese paleontologists, however, have discovered fossils of two fish that push 
the origin of vertebrates back to the riotous biological bash when almost all 
other animal groups emerged in the geologic record.

 Preserved in 530-million-year-old rocks from Yunnan province, the paper 
clip-size impressions record the earliest known fish, which predate the 
next-oldest vertebrates by at least 30 million years.

 The fossil finds, while not totally unexpected, thrill paleontologists who 
despaired of ever uncovering such evidence from Earth's dim past. "It's 
important because up to now the vertebrates were absent from the big bang of 
life, as we call it-that is, the great early Cambrian explosion, where all the 
major animal groups appeared suddenly in the fossil record," comments Philippe 
Janvier, a paleontologist at the National Museum of Natural History in Paris.

 The Chinese fish come from a site near the town of Chengjiang, the world's 
richest locale for documenting the early part of the Cambrian period. Together 
with the middle-Cambrian animals found in Canada's famous Burgess Shale, the 
Chengjiang fossil fauna reveals the diversity of life in the seas following the 
Cambrian explosion.

 Among the tens of thousands of animals found in these two deposits, 
paleontologists had previously pulled up two slender creatures that fit into 
the chordate phylum-the broad category that includes vertebrates. But those two 
species lacked well-defined heads, sophisticated gills, and other features that 
would provide them entree into the vertebrate subphylum. Instead, they resemble 
the living invertebrate called amphioxus, a passive filter-feeding marine 
animal.

 The new Chengjiang species have a number of features not seen in amphioxus or 
other invertebrate chordates. "It is practically certain that these are 
vertebrates," says Janvier.

 Both the Chinese specimens have a zigzag arrangement of segmented muscles-the 
same type of pattern seen in fish today, reports Degan Shu of Northwest 
University in Xi'an, China, and his colleagues. The fossils, named 
Myllokunmingia and Haikouichthys, also have a more complex arrangement of gills 
than the simple slits used by amphioxus, according to the team's report in the 
Nov. 4 Nature.

 Although the ancient Chinese animals qualify as vertebrates, they lack the 
bony skeleton and teeth seen in most, but not all, members of this subphylum 
today. Instead, these early jawless fish appear to have had skulls and other 
skeletal structures made of cartilage, says Simon Conway Morris of the 
University of Cambridge in England, who collaborated with the Chinese team.

 The researchers propose that vertebrates evolved during the explosive period 
of animal evolution at the start of the Cambrian and only some 30 million years 
later developed the ability to accumulate minerals in their bodies to form 
bones, teeth, and scales.

"It is interesting that the gap is so big between the first [jawless 
vertebrates] and the first evidence of biomineralization," says M. Paul Smith 
of the University of Birmingham in England, who studies early fish.

 The appearance of the first vertebrates marked a profound transition in the 
lifestyle of our ancestors, says Smith. The earliest chordates presumably 
resembled amphioxus in being nearly brainless animals that lacked paired eyes 
and fed by filtering food from the water. Evolution formed the vertebrate body 
by fashioning fish with distinct heads, paired eyes, and other features for 
hunting.

 The new discoveries indicate that these swift progenitors of sharks were 
darting around the seas with the other animals that attended the Cambrian 
carnival. The festivities may have begun far earlier. Genetic evidence hints 
that most animal phyla evolved hundreds of millions of years before they began 
leaving fossil evidence, a point debated by paleontologists.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 19, November 6, 1999, p. 292. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
