A Controversial Shot in the Arm, Science News Online (11/6/99)

 A Controversial Shot in the Arm Possible AIDS vaccine taps an unlikely protein 
called Tat

 By John Travis

 Copies of HIV bud from a white blood cell, as seen in a false-color 
micrograph. (Luc Montagnier, Institut Pasteur/ Science Source)

 In 1890, in work that later won him a Nobel prize, the German scientist Emil 
von Behring successfully immunized rabbits and mice against tetanus and 
diphtheria, two serious illnesses that commonly afflicted people. Instead of 
vaccinating the animals with weakened copies of the bacteria responsible for 
the diseases, Behring made use of the fresh discovery that the microbes cause 
sickness by secreting toxins into the bloodstream.

 When he and a colleague injected harmless amounts of the toxins into his 
animals, their immune systems made antibodies that bound and neutralized the 
toxins. More importantly, the antibodies prevented illness when the researchers 
later injected the rabbits and mice with the bacteria.

 Physicians quickly began to treat infected people with antitoxin antibodies 
generated in animals. Several decades later, scientists adapted the antitoxin 
strategy for mass immunization by inoculating people with toxoids, inactive 
versions of the toxins made by the diphtheria and tetanus bacteria.

 AIDS investigators embracing this century-old strategy argue that the HIV 
protein Tat is also a secreted toxin, one that dangerously subdues the immune 
system. They therefore predict that vaccinations with Tat, a molecule 
previously recognized as helping HIV turn on its genes, may prevent HIV 
infection or keep AIDS symptoms from developing in a person already infected 
with the virus.

"We don't think Tat is just another player in the immunosuppression [caused by 
HIV], we think it's the key player," says David I. Cohen of Queen's College in 
Flushing, N.Y. "Unless we get immunity to Tat, and that isn't going to be easy, 
we're not going to get a good protective vaccine."

 Controversy swirls around Tat, however. There's an ongoing debate, even among 
those who advocate using the protein in a vaccine, about what the secreted form 
of Tat actually does in a person infected with the AIDS virus. Consequently, 
many scientists think that Tat vaccinations are unlikely to succeed.

"I'm not impressed by the cumulative body of evidence," says John P. Moore of 
Rockefeller University in New York. "Yes, there are effects in [test-tube] 
systems for extracellular Tat. Now, is that physiologically relevant to HIV 
infection? There's no good evidence to say so."

 Disregarding such strong opinions, however, a few research teams have taken a 
dramatic step. They've begun to inject people with inactivated forms of Tat.

 At first glance, Tat makes an unlikely candidate for a component of an AIDS 
vaccine. Unlike components of other viral vaccines, Tat isn't present on the 
surface of the viral particles that roam the bloodstream of an infected 
individual. HIV makes Tat only after the virus gets inside a host cell. The 
protein then activates viral genes crucial to HIV replication. It's difficult 
for most scientists to imagine how an immune response would reach a viral 
protein inside a cell and control an HIV infection.

 In the late 1980s, however, some scientists began to observe higher 
concentrations of Tat outside infected cells than could be accounted for by the 
bursting of cells dying from the virus. They eventually concluded that cells 
infected with HIV actively secrete Tat.

 The burning question then became, What is Tat doing out there? For the past 
decade, biologists have tried to address that issue by exposing various human 
cells to Tat and documenting their responses. It's an understatement to say 
that there's a lack of consensus about the results of those efforts.

"How Tat functions inside the cell is now fairly well understood. But what it 
is doing outside the cell is controversial," says Andrew P. Rice of the Baylor 
College of Medicine in Houston. "There are enough fairly credible publications 
that one has to take seriously the concept that Tat has effects outside the 
cell. What those may be is a morass in the scientific literature."

 Many factors contribute to the confusion over Tat. For one, the protein isn't 
easy to keep in its biologically active state. "A lot of people said that Tat 
didn't do anything, but you can trace that to the fact that they didn't know 
how to handle the molecule properly," argues C. David Pauza of the University 
of Wisconsin Medical School in Madison. "It rapidly reverts to an inactive 
form."

"It's a nightmare to work with," agrees Rice.

 Another complication may result from there being two forms of Tat, one with 72 
amino acids and one with 101. The two proteins can trigger profoundly different 
responses, says Eric M. Verdin of the University of California, San Francisco. 
In fact, some of his experiments suggest opposing roles for the two Tats. The 
long version seems to act as an immune suppressor, whereas the short one 
stimulates immune cells.

 Then, there's the thorny issue of the appropriate laboratory dose of Tat. In 
many of their experiments, scientists have used far larger amounts of Tat than 
cells would appear to encounter in the body. Yet researchers caution that it's 
impossible to gauge how much Tat exists in the microenvironments between cells.

 Those caveats aside, scientists have recorded a diverse, and sometimes 
contradictory, array of functions for extracellular Tat. One study suggests 
that Tat attracts immune cells, perhaps to lure future victims of HIV. Several 
research teams have reported that Tat induces immune cells to make extra copies 
of the surface proteins through which HIV infects those cells. Another recent 
publication describes how Tat wakes immune cells from their resting state and 
makes them more vulnerable to virus replication (SN: 7/26/97, p. 53).

 In terms of immune suppression, investigators have assigned several roles to 
Tat. A few test-tube studies suggest that it can induce uninfected immune cells 
to commit suicide. An Italian research team reported last year that Tat impairs 
the cell-destroying ability of immune sentinels called natural killer cells.

 Also last year, a study concluded that the viral protein spurs immune cells 
called macrophages to release large amounts of alpha-interferon. This chemical 
seems to suppress other immune cells from making several other compounds that 
stymie HIV's ability to infect cells. The work came out of a collaboration led 
by two scientists who have long proclaimed the importance of extracellular 
Tat-Robert C. Gallo of the University of Maryland's Institute of Human Virology 
in Baltimore and Daniel Zagury of the University of Pierre and Marie Curie in 
Paris.

 Cohen's work also draws attention to the influence of Tat on macrophages. In 
the Sept. 14 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, he and his 
colleagues offer evidence that Tat hinders the immune system of live animals. 
For example, they report that if mice are injected with active Tat, they have a 
much more sluggish antibody response to the foreign protein than mice injected 
with an inert form of Tat do. Rodents receiving the active Tat also do a poor 
job of making antibodies against another HIV protein, leading Cohen's group to 
conclude that Tat suppresses the animals' overall immune response.

 The investigators believe that macrophages lie at the heart of this blunted 
immune response. They found that small quantities of Tat trigger the cells to 
make a surface molecule called FasL. This protein, in turn, commands the 
suicide of some immune cells that help in the attack on HIV.

"The macrophage swallows Tat and turns into an immunosuppressive beast," 
contends Cohen.

 Many investigators, however, remain unconvinced that any of the proposed roles 
for extracellular Tat take place in an infected person. "You always have to be 
careful to what extent these experiments mimic the reality of life. You can do 
a lot of things in the test tube that have little bearing on what goes on in 
vivo," notes Beatrice Hahn of the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

 Scientists who favor using Tat to vaccinate people argue that several 
observations support their novel strategy, even if questions remain about how 
Tat acts. "There are a number of studies in humans and monkeys that indicate 
that the immune response to Tat correlates with nonprogression to AIDS," says 
Barbara Ensoli of Istituto Superiore di Sanit  in Rome.

 Last year, for example, Zagury, Gallo, and their colleagues reported that 
HIV-infected people who naturally had higher blood concentrations of 
Tat-neutralizing antibodies were less likely to develop AIDS rapidly.

 A research group led by Ab Osterhaus of Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam in 
the Netherlands, made a similar discovery 2 years ago. Studying a dozen people 
with HIV, the scientists found that those who progressed quickest to AIDS had 
relatively few virus-killing immune cells, known as cytotoxic T lymphocytes, 
that recognize Tat.

 Osterhaus also recently reported that a Tat-based vaccine seems to protect 
monkeys from SIV, a simian version of HIV. In the June Vaccine, he and his 
colleagues described vaccinating two monkeys with a harmless virus engineered 
to make the SIV forms of Tat and another protein, Rev. The scientists then 
injected the two monkeys, as well two unvaccinated monkeys, with SIV. In the 
untreated monkeys, SIV quickly established itself and replicated extensively. 
In the immunized pair of monkeys, however, Osterhaus' team found evidence that 
the virus was present only for the first few weeks. Over the next 36 weeks, the 
scientists didn't detect the virus in the animals' blood.

 Ensoli and her colleagues recently took a different tack. They injected 
monkeys with an active form of Tat and later inoculated the monkeys with an 
SIV-HIV hybrid virus, or SHIV. Only two of seven vaccinated monkeys developed a 
persistent SHIV infection, while a pair of unvaccinated animals both did, 
Ensoli's group reported in the June Nature Medicine.

 The apparent success of the vaccine drew front-page headlines in Europe long 
before the researchers published their data. AIDS scientists, however, have 
proven to be a much tougher audience. Both publicly and privately, they've 
criticized the report for several shortcomings. Even researchers pursuing 
Tat-based vaccines have complained, for example, that the SHIV strain used by 
Ensoli does not offer a stiff challenge to a monkey's immune system. "It's 
barely growing in the animals to begin with, so it's not that difficult to 
protect against," says Pauza.

 Ensoli rejects that argument, stressing that unvaccinated monkeys given the 
SHIV virus develop a vigorous infection and suffer a dramatic loss of immune 
cells. Half of her control monkeys have already died, she told Science News.

 Another criticism focuses on Ensoli's use of an apparently active form of Tat. 
The scientists convinced that the viral protein is immunosuppressive argue that 
inactivated forms are safer and still generate an impressive immune reaction.

"Why would you ever give a poison if you can get just as good an immune 
response with a toxoid?" asks Gallo. At a meeting last month, for example, 
Pauza presented unpublished data showing that immunization with an inactivated 
Tat protects rhesus monkeys from the effects of an infection with a strain of 
SHIV.

 Ensoli, who believes that HIV uses extracellular Tat to spread to other cells 
and replicate more efficiently, argues that the protein itself isn't harmful. 
"We never saw any kind of toxic effect in all the monkeys we vaccinated with 
Tat," she says.

 Researchers who split on whether Tat is a toxin also disagree about how a 
Tat-based vaccine may protect a person. Ensoli and Osterhaus contend that 
Tat-recognizing immune cells are most crucial, while Pauza, Gallo, and Cohen 
stress the importance of antibodies that neutralize the protein.

 Despite the disagreements, investigators have already begun to test a Tat 
vaccine in people in Europe. In the past 2 years, several dozen HIV-infected 
and uninfected people have received injections of inactive Tat. They suffered 
no ill effects and developed a strong antibody response to the viral protein, 
says Gallo, who is collaborating with Zagury and other researchers on the study.

 These initial trials were intended solely to test the safety of the vaccine 
and its ability to trigger an immune response to Tat. Gallo, Cohen, and other 
investigators plan to start U.S. trials next year that would begin to evaluate 
whether the immunization strategy helps HIV-infected people avoid AIDS. Study 
subjects will be patients who either aren't responding to conventional drug 
therapy or can't tolerate its side effects.

 Investigators express the hope that periodic immunizations with Tat could 
offer a practical alternative for HIV-infected people in developing countries 
that cannot afford the expensive daily drug regimens available in the United 
States and Europe. "Our mind is on trying to help the Third World," says Gallo.

 He and others even envision that a Tat-based vaccine, in conjunction with 
other vaccines being developed, can prevent infection with HIV. If 
Tat-neutralizing antibodies defuse the protein's ability to suppress the immune 
system, the body's response to components of other AIDS vaccines now being 
developed might defeat the virus.

"Tat is going to be a very important addition to conventional vaccines against 
HIV and has the potential to push them over the top. I think it will enhance 
vaccines using other viral proteins," says Pauza. "I was very skeptical when we 
started. Now, the data have beaten me into submission."

 For many AIDS scientists, however, those same data aren't nearly convincing. 
Still, given that the other vaccines currently in clinical trials aren't 
expected to succeed, most investigators are unwilling to simply dismiss the 
idea that Tat-based vaccines can make an impact in the fight against HIV.

"I want to keep an open mind," says Gary Nabel, director of the newly created 
Vaccine Research Center at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. 
"We're not so far along in vaccine development that we can afford to ignore any 
option."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 19, November 6, 1999, p. 300. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
