Animal Whodunit, Medical Mystery, Science News Online (12/11/99)

 Animal Whodunit, Medical Mystery Scientists cross species barriers to diagnose 
West Nile encephalitis

 By Susan Milius

 Chilean flamingos at the Bronx Zoo proved vulnerable to West Nile virus. 
(Wildlife Conservation Society)

 Puzzles of pathology were abundant in New York last summer. The New York City 
Department of Health was in overdrive by late August, tracing people stricken 
with an odd viral encephalitis. A private veterinarian in Laurel was worrying 
about an equally odd cluster of sick horses on Long Island. In Albany, the sole 
wildlife pathologist employed by New York State was striving to find out what 
was suddenly killing hundreds of crows.

 Then at the Bronx Zoo, the pathologists came back from Labor Day weekend to 
find a range of dying and strangely ill birds, such as a cormorant that spent 
its last hours swimming in circles and a bald eagle with tremors.

 By the end of September, after much sampling and testing, researchers had 
finally figured out that their mysteries shared a common villain: the West Nile 
virus, a mosquito-borne pathogen found for the first time in the Western 
Hemisphere. It killed 7 of the 60 people eventually diagnosed with the virus, 9 
of 23 horses, a variety of zoo birds including flamingos and a snowy owl, and 
several thousand wild crows.

 As the outbreak waned, or possibly went into a winter lull, the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) drew an unusual mix of 
investigators-specialists in human diseases, veterinary pathologists, and even 
an ornithologist-to a November workshop in Fort Collins, Colo., to sort out the 
lessons of the outbreak. New York City's assistant commissioner for 
communicable diseases, Marcelle Layton, argued that knowing the particulars of 
the animal cases sooner might have eased the way for physicians trying to 
identify the cause of the human outbreak.

 The doings of nonhuman New Yorkers are now shedding light on questions of how 
the virus spreads and whether it will settle down to stay.

 For the future, Layton urges public health officers to look out for "unusual 
events in animals." Layton had never met the Bronx Zoo pathologist before the 
West Nile outbreak, but now, she assured the workshop assembly, they make it a 
point to do lunch.

 The horse had collapsed in the field and was thrashing, unable to get up, by 
the time John Andresen reached it on Aug. 26. "It was in bad shape," he 
remembers. Before he even managed to contact its owner, the horse died.

 Looking back, Andresen recognizes this as an encounter with West Nile virus. 
At the time, though, he didn't suspect anything outside the usual realm of 
neurological miseries he'd diagnosed over 33 years of practice. The equine 
specialist in a group practice, Andresen cares for a couple thousand horses in 
the rural part of Long Island.

 During the week after the thrashing horse died, he received calls from two 
alarmed owners whose horses were acting strangely. One horse walked with its 
head tilted, and it leaned against a fence as if trying to keep its balance. 
The other had begun to stagger and trip over its own hind legs. Then it started 
tripping over its front legs, too.

 Andresen worked through a list of possible causes for the illness. Was an ear 
infection disorienting the horses? Rabies?

 Or was it EPM, short for equine protozoal myelitis? This disease comes from 
infection by the parasite Sarcocystis neurona, which spends part of its life 
cycle in possums. As they potter around the countryside, they shed the parasite 
in their droppings, and horses pick up the disease as they graze outdoors or 
eat hay from a field visited by a possum. The parasite doesn't seem to bother 
many of the horses that carry it, but in stressed or older animals, it can work 
its way into the brain. These animals start staggering, dragging their hind 
legs, showing attitude changes, or displaying a host of other neurological 
symptoms.

 Andresen took spinal fluid from the tripping horse, and the lab detected the 
EPM parasite. That result could mean that the parasite was indeed causing the 
disease or that a horse that tolerated EPM had coincidentally developed another 
neurological disease.

 In all, Andresen did spinal taps on five horses, and all tests came back 
positive for EPM. "We were led a little astray," he says.

 Even if EPM was knocking out Long Island's horses, why the sudden increase in 
cases? Typically Andresen sees four or five a year, not three in a week, 
clustered within about 5 miles of each other.

 In early September, he called the state veterinarian to report the troubling 
mystery. "I can't remember the last time I did that," he says.

 Like the doctors studying the human outbreak in the parallel universe in New 
York City, Andresen worked long hours, sometimes visiting patients at midnight. 
He saw horses with the illness in racing barns, in backyards. He saw 
4-year-olds go down as well as elderly animals. Some died as quickly as his 
first patient, some lingered, and some, amazingly, bounced back.

 He attended an Arabian mare that a woman had cherished for 19 years. One of 
his own horses, a Percheron, collapsed. Except for two horses at Belmont race 
track, close to the city, the disease stayed within Andresen's rural area, 60 
to 80 miles east of the city on the North Fork of Long Island.

 On Oct. 8, the U.S. Department of Agriculture dispatched one of its 
early-response teams, including a veterinary pathologist and an epidemiologist, 
to scrutinize each place where a horse had gotten sick, and they collected 
samples for analysis.

 Also starting in August, pathologist Ward Stone faced another animal-disease 
mystery. People around New York City and Long Island reported unusual numbers 
of dead crows. Looking back at his records, Stone notes that a dead crow 
collected sometime between Aug. 2 and Aug. 9 was sent to him from Nassau 
County. At the time, Stone couldn't tell much. "It was warm weather," he says, 
and the carcasses had started to decompose fast.

 As more crows arrived, he spent hours trying to figure out the cause of death. 
He logged more than 100 necropsies, some taking 15 minutes and others taking 
hours. Toxicology tests ruled out poisoning by lead or a range of pesticides. 
"We did a lot of toxicology," Stone remembers glumly.

"I like crows-I've raised them," he says. "I know they didn't normally die in 
these numbers." Yet he couldn't figure out a disease diagnosis that made sense.

"I thought it could be something new," he recalls. The boom in fast travel and 
trade, jetting people and their goods from continent to continent in just 
hours, spreads wildlife pestilences just as it does human diseases. Stone 
notes, for example, the arrival of duck plague, a European disease that has 
killed 10,000 ducks at a time in the United States. Drawing on his 3 decades as 
a wildlife pathologist, he predicts that invading diseases will appear with 
increasing frequency. "That's what's been happening," he adds grimly.

 As Stone worried about the dying crows, he sent samples of their tissue for 
analysis to specialized labs, including the National Veterinary Services 
Laboratory in Ames, Iowa.

 At the Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo, Tracey McNamara also got her 
first hint of trouble from crows. Calls came in from New Yorkers puzzled by 
unusual numbers of dead birds, and fallen crows began turning up on the zoo 
grounds. She sent some of them to Stone, but starting Sept. 7, the crisis 
intensified.

 Birds in several of the zoo exhibits began to develop neurological oddities 
and, not infrequently, die soon afterward. "We had a trumpeter swan doing the 
backstroke," she remembers. The swan recovered, but a Chilean flamingo, guanay 
cormorant, bald eagle, and snowy owl were not so lucky.

 At first, McNamara wondered whether one of two dreaded bird diseases-Newcastle 
disease and highly pathogenic avian influenza-had slipped through the zoo's 
tight quarantine and hygiene procedures. Chicken and other poultry farmers fear 
huge losses from these infections, so potential outbreaks shoot tremors through 
the veterinary community.

"I'm probably the only pathologist in New York City who's seen both," she says, 
and her intuition told her she was dealing with something else among the zoo 
birds. "Plus," she adds, "our chickens were fine."

 Examining the deceased birds, McNamara found signs of hemorrhage in their 
brains. Could they have died from eastern equine encephalitis, which despite 
its name can attack birds, especially emus, and produce these symptoms? The 
pattern of species affected didn't make sense in that case. "Our emus were 
fine," she said. "Luckily, we had emus."

 As she talked to other pathologists about the zoo deaths, she encountered 
skepticism for her idea that the disease was novel. "If I had a nickel for 
every person who told me I was nuts, I'd retire," she says.

 In early September, McNamara rushed tissue samples of the birds to the 
National Veterinary Services Laboratory and the CDC laboratory in Fort Collins, 
Colo.

 People with West Nile encephalitis (locations marked with circles in inset) 
were clustered around New York City, as were birds (stars) but not horses (blue 
triangles). (New York State Department of Health)

 By this time, New York was feverish with the news of the viral encephalitis 
outbreak in people. On Sept. 3, CDC had reported a probable outbreak of St. 
Louis encephalitis, which is spread by mosquitoes. The agency's preliminary 
tests had screened the encephalitis patients for only viruses known to strike 
in North America. No one had reported the St. Louis encephalitis so far north 
before, but New York City didn't wait for confirmatory tests. The mayor ordered 
spraying to kill mosquitoes in Queens, which had come to be called the hot zone 
of the outbreak.

 Medical entomologists in helicopters roared over neighborhoods looking for 
possible mosquito breeding havens, like half-filled swimming pools or mounds of 
abandoned tires. The city bought and distributed more than 300,000 containers 
of DEET bug repellant.

 As the city widened its mosquito-control spraying, debate flared about the 
safety of the insecticides being used in the operation. Police escorted the 
truck carrying the pesticide into the city.

 Could the CDC results apply to the animals' illnesses? With a wry chuckle at 
the power of hindsight, Andresen recalls that two of the horse owners insisted 
that their animals had the same disease as the people in New York. However, he 
discounted that idea because there had been no reports of such problems in city 
horses.

 Amid all the furor, McNamara immediately wondered if the disease that was 
striking people could be killing her zoo's birds. However, previous U.S. 
outbreaks of St. Louis encephalitis hadn't affected birds. As she puts it: "Why 
were we losing North American and South American species if it's something 
that's always been here?"

 Results from the veterinary lab in Ames started confirming McNamara's hunches. 
The lab ruled out the dread poultry diseases as well as eastern equine 
encephalitis. Working with tissue from a dead zoo bird, they isolated the virus 
and took vital measurements under a transmission electron microscope. This 
turned out to be the first isolation of the new virus, which the Ames lab sent 
to the CDC facility in Fort Collins for identification.

 Meanwhile, CDC researchers there were also working on samples from people in 
New York, performing more sensitive tests to distinguish closely related 
viruses. These analyses showed a slight indication of St. Louis encephalitis 
but a vastly stronger reaction for West Nile virus.

 Named for the province of Uganda where it was first described in the 1930s, 
the West Nile virus spreads via mosquitoes and causes encephalitis in people 
and horses in Africa, Australia, the Middle East, and parts of Europe.

 Tests in government and academic labs soon confirmed that in New York, people, 
horses, crows, and zoo birds had succumbed to the West Nile virus.

 Just as epidemiologists predicted, the outbreak died down after mosquito 
spraying. Then, cold weather presumably curbed the adult mosquitoes that had 
been carrying the disease.

 Andresen's own horse has recovered from encephalitis, as has the beloved 
19-year-old Arabian. Crows seem again to be doing more flying than dying. 
During this merciful lull, as the public health community plots its strategy 
for next year, many of the big questions involve animals.

 Adults of Culex pipiens, the mosquito suspected of most frequently spreading 
the disease, can survive the winter, perhaps lurking in New York's sewers, says 
Nicholas Komar of CDC in Fort Collins. Once infected, a mosquito bears the 
virus for life. Yet the presence of virus-carrying mosquitoes doesn't guarantee 
another outbreak.

 One important factor will be how the species that the mosquitoes bite react. 
West Nile virus has been isolated from at least 23 species, according to Komar. 
Although not all showed symptoms, a wide range of birds contracted the 
virus-the flamingos, the owl, domestic geese, chickens, a Cooper's hawk, a 
yellow-billed cuckoo, a sandhill crane, a pigeon, a house sparrow, and so on. 
The bird species stretched over at least 10 taxonomic orders. The virus has 
even turned up in tissues from a stray cat.

 Labs are now starting to test bats and other mammals from New York.

 An animal that hosts the virus doesn't necessarily spread it. The virus has to 
reach high levels in the bloodstream before a feeding mosquito is likely to 
pick up enough virus to pass the disease to the next animal it samples.

 The reservoir issue arouses particular passion among horse owners, explains 
USDA veterinary epidemiologist Oliver Williams in Riverdale, Md. This fall, the 
European Union, Hong Kong, and several other racing destinations closed their 
borders to horses that had passed through New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut 
within the previous 2 weeks. This raised tensions over whether horses would be 
able to reach races with multimillion-dollar purses.

"There's no evidence to date that the horse can serve as a sufficient source of 
virus to infect mosquitoes," says Peter J. Timoney, director of the Maxwell H. 
Gluck Equine Research Center in Lexington, Ky. He says that a study in France 
and another in Egypt more than 30 years ago failed to find significant 
concentrations of West Nile virus in the blood of horses exposed to the microbe.

 It's clear that the virus can reproduce and increase its numbers in birds, 
Komar says. Using data collected in studies in other parts of the world, he 
estimates that a bird can pass along West Nile infection to a mosquito for 
perhaps 1 to 4 days. If Komar had to guess which species play the most 
important role in New York's risk of outbreak, he says he'd pick starlings, 
house sparrows, and pigeons. Surveys suggest that fewer than 15 percent of them 
have been exposed to the virus, but their huge numbers give them significance.

 Though a popular emblem of the West Nile outbreak, crows make an unlikely 
reservoir. For a rough estimate, Komar and his colleagues examined blood 
samples from 65 crows still flying around New York City. Only two showed 
evidence of exposure to the virus. Considering the number of dead crows 
previously reported and the probable population, thanks to several Christmas 
bird counts, Komar estimates that when West Nile virus swept through the 
region, it killed about 98 percent of birds it infected. Because reservoir 
animals must survive to incubate a disease, crows are more likely to serve as 
sentinels for the disease than as reservoirs, he concludes.

 Just what creature brought the virus to the United States makes another great 
conservation starter. The latest clue, a slim one at best, comes from Robert 
Lanciotti at CDC's Fort Collins laboratory.

 He's sequenced the virus' genes and compared them with those of the other 
strains in the three main geographical branches of West Nile virus. The virus 
from the New York outbreak shares more than 99 percent of the sequenced region 
with a strain collected in Israel from a goose in 1998, but it doesn't as 
closely resemble African or Australian strains.

 All the talk of animals as reservoirs, disease carriers, or warning signs left 
Stone sounding a little testy by the end of the CDC workshop. He fretted about 
whether the disease will ravage New York's small band of ravens, relatives of 
the susceptible crows, or will threaten wild bald eagles.

 Although studies in nonhuman species can be useful to understanding diseases 
in people, Stone wants to see concern for animals in their own right. "They're 
beautiful. They play an ecological role," he says. "I'm worried about the 
wildlife."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 24, December 11, 1999, p. 378. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
