Monarch butterflies use magnetic compasses, Science News Online (11/27/99)

 Monarch butterflies use magnetic compasses 

 By S. Milius

 Monarchs can check magnetic fields as a backup to their sun compass.

 Built-in magnetic compasses may orient monarch butterflies during their 
mind-boggling, southwestern migration, according to new experiments in Kansas.

 The butterflies flutter up to 2,500 miles in autumn from breeding grounds in 
the eastern United States and Canada to a winter haven in Mexico. These 
millions of migrants are going to a destination not one of them has ever seen.

 The generation taking to the air in the fall represents the great-great 
grandchildren, or even more distant descendants, of the monarchs that left 
Mexico the previous spring. Yet the new generation returns to the same dozen or 
so roosting areas that their ancestors used.

 Previous studies showed that monarchs can orient by the sun. The new work 
provides the first direct evidence that monarchs can also sense directions from 
the magnetic field, according to Orley R. Taylor of the University of Kansas in 
Lawrence. He, Jason A. Etheredge of Kansas, and their colleagues describe the 
results in the Nov. 23 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

"This is not the last word," Taylor says. "What the butterflies are doing is 
very complicated."

 The researchers caught migrating monarchs in fall and released them into a 
tube, in which they crawled upward to a circular tabletop arena. In a room with 
no shielding from Earth's magnetic field, most of the butterflies took flight 
toward the southwest. In a shielded room, however, they flew in random 
directions.

 Next, researchers created a magnetic field oriented in the opposite direction 
from Earth's. Butterflies then flew northeast, as if their compasses had 
reversed.

 The team studied fall migrants because the same generation flying north in 
spring gets hard to handle, Taylor says. "They're completing a reproductive 
death run, like salmon," as he puts it. Females lay eggs daily even though 
their route covers 1,000 miles. By the end, "they have practically no wings 
left; they're crawling from plant to plant to lay eggs-it's awesome," Taylor 
says.

 Charles Walcott of Cornell University calls the monarch paper "terrific" and 
notes that other researchers have been stumped by the challenge of devising a 
way to test butterflies for magnetic orientation.

 For animal compasses, "we used to think there was a single secret," he says, 
sounding wistful. Studies now show that animals combine methods using "a 
Chinese-menu approach," Walcott explains. Night-migrating birds, for example, 
can orient by the sunset glow and star patterns as well as by the magnetic 
field.

 Kenneth P. Able of the State University of New York at Albany says he suspects 
that magnetic orientation "is a very widespread ability." Honeybees, some 
wasps, some fish, sea turtles, and even a species of mole rat can take bearings 
magnetically. Also, "it looks like every migratory bird you test, if you do it 
right, has a magnetic compass," Able says. However, he points out, discovering 
a compass takes the scientists just a small step toward explaining how monarchs 
navigate.

"I'm not sure anybody is ever going to answer that," says Karen S. Oberhauser, 
who studies monarchs at the University of Minnesota. "Insects sense the world 
in very different ways from humans. They use things we can't perceive, maybe 
even things we can't conceive."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 22, November 27, 1999, p. 343. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
