A million healing words flow from compendium, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 A million healing words flow from compendium

 By J. Raloff

 ISFAHAN, Persia, March 1023-Faced with a particularly puzzling or difficult 
case, royal physicians and hospital surgeons have traditionally turned to the 
wandering bachelor healer, Abu Ali ibn Sina. In the future, consulting this 
renowned medical scientist will no longer require trekking throughout Persia. 
Doctors can instead let their fingers do the walking through Ibn Sina's new 
Canon of Medicine, an encyclopedic compendium of medical wisdom.

"It's like having an entire medical school in a book," observes physician Abu 
Raihan Muhammad al-Biruni, reached at his home in Ghazna, Uzbekistan. "For many 
of us, medicine is not a full-time job," he points out. "If, as I do, you spend 
at least as much time immersed in astronomy, mathematics, and geology," he 
says, "Ibn Sina's new canon can prove a lifesaver-literally."

 Ibn Sina, himself a part-time philosopher, mathematician, astronomer, jurist, 
and theologian, explains, "I sat up nights writing this five-volume work over 
much of the past 11 years in the hope that it might give me my life back." As 
his reputation has grown over the past few decades, colleagues have 
increasingly been dropping by unannounced to discuss a case or sending him 
problem patients without warning. None has ever been turned away, he says.

 With the encyclopedia now published, Ibn Sina says, "I hope clinicians can 
find the help they need within their hospital-or certainly within their 
caliphate."

"The reason we refer to Ibn Sina as the 'Prince of Physicians,'" observes Omar 
al-Haqqi, chief physician at Bukhara Medical College, "is not because he is 
necessarily the best clinician or experimentalist of all time. His real 
achievement-the one for which he will be remembered through the ages-is his 
unerring ability to systematize a library of medicine into a few volumes that 
are at once logical and useful."

 The new encyclopedia covers traditional medical science, such as the known 
diseases of organs, their symptoms, and their cures. The book catalogs the uses 
and efficacy of some 760 drugs. Its 1 million words also describe many new 
observations, theories, and techniques. The book thereby advances the medicine 
inherited from the Greeks, Ibn Sina asserts.

 For instance, the canon takes the radical view that when physicians are 
presented with a new, potentially therapeutic agent, they should resist using 
it until the substance has been tested in animals.

 Also, Ibn Sina identifies a new and potentially deadly condition, meningitis, 
and reports that tuberculosis is contagious. Moreover, he offers the novel 
observation that many diseases spread in epidemic fashion via diseased soil and 
water.

 The encyclopedia offers up the first detailed descriptions of the eye, 
including the cornea, iris, retina, aqueous humor, and optic nerve. Ibn Sina 
also puts forward a new theory developed by optics specialist Ibn al-Haytham. 
It holds that what we see is not due to rays emanating from our eyes. Instead, 
al-Haytham's data make a compelling case that we see because rays of light 
bounce off objects and then enter our eyes.

 The canon considers the role of emotions in health, noting that music can 
benefit patients and that love sickness can masquerade as more organic ailments.

 In a sense, Ibn Sina has been working on these volumes since his late teens 
when, as a reward for his medical prowess, he was given unfettered access to 
the royal library of Nuh ibn Mansur, the king of Bukhara. "It was at this time 
that I not only developed a real love of books but also realized their power to 
take the wisdom and observation of a few and translate it to the many," Ibn 
Sina recalls.

"My colleague has now done just that," says Ibn al-Haytham. "Between the covers 
of Ibn Sina's canon is a bazaar of medical insights. It offers one-stop 
shopping for healers of any experience level."


