Kids' ADHD Care Gets a Wake-up Call, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 Kids' ADHD Care Gets a Wake-up Call 

 By B. Bower

 A combination of carefully monitored stimulant use and intensive behavioral 
training reaps promising benefits for children diagnosed with attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), as well as for their parents, according to a 
much-anticipated study of how best to treat the problem.

 However, the investigation also indicates that many kids with ADHD receive 
neither behavioral training nor careful dose calibrations for the stimulants 
that physicians prescribe.

"Standards of practice for ADHD treatment need to be improved," says 
psychologist Stephen P. Hinshaw of the University of California, Berkeley, one 
of the study's six principal investigators. "The level of care achieved in this 
project should be carefully considered by the medical community."

 Investigators at 10 sites in the United States and Canada recruited 579 
children ages 7 to 10 with ADHD, many already getting stimulants. None suffered 
from depression or other ailments that can cause ADHD-like symptoms. The sample 
included 114 girls and 163 blacks and Hispanics. Family incomes for the 
children ranged from welfare level to affluent.

 The researchers randomly divided the children into four groups, giving them 
different treatments lasting up to 14 months. One group received behavioral 
therapy delivered by a specially trained psychotherapist, which included 35 
weekly sessions to help parents deal with a child with ADHD; a summer camp 
designed to encourage kids' social and academic skills; and 10 to 16 meetings 
between a therapist and each child's teacher to plan classroom strategies.

 A second group underwent a medication program consisting of careful adjustment 
of a child's dose of Ritalin or a related stimulant over 28 days, followed by 
monthly physician visits and regular physician reviews of teachers' behavior 
ratings. Children took medication in three daily doses.

 A third group got both behavioral treatment and medication management.

 Finally, a comparison group received neither treatment from the study team, 
which referred the participants to community mental health providers. These 
physicians prescribed stimulants or, in a few cases, other drugs to two-thirds 
of the youngsters. A small number of participants sought some form of 
psychotherapy.

 Over 14 months, all four groups displayed marked reductions in ADHD symptoms, 
Hinshaw and his coworkers report in the December Archives of General 
Psychiatry. These consist of various signs of inattention, hyperactivity, and 
inability to control impulses.

 Medication management alone and the combined treatment yielded the most 
symptom improvement, with neither clearly being the best. However, combined 
treatment proved more effective at quelling aggressive behavior and boosting 
teacher-rated social skills and reading achievement. Parents in this group also 
reported the best relations with their child. These findings held regardless of 
sex, race, or family income.

 Further data analysis, set to appear in the Journal of Abnormal Child 
Psychology, indicates that school behavior improved most for kids in the 
combination group whose parents tempered their harsh disciplinary practices.

 Kids receiving stimulants from community sources typically did not undergo 
initial dose adjustments and took larger doses than those getting the study's 
medication-management or combination treatment.

 About two-thirds of the children receiving behavioral treatment alone did well 
enough to stay off medication throughout the study. "Psychosocial interventions 
can profoundly affect ADHD, even if a genetic predisposition is involved," 
Hinshaw contends.

 Further research needs to examine medication management and behavioral 
treatments in community settings, says psychologist Eric Taylor of the 
Institute of Psychiatry in London in a comment published in the same issue of 
Archives of General Psychiatry. Studies that modify exposure to behavioral 
treatment according to individual needs may yield steeper declines in ADHD 
symptoms, he proposes.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 25 & 26, December 18 & 25, 1999, p. 388. 
Copyright C 1999, Science Service. 
