Mars craft finds evidence of a past ocean, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 Mars craft finds evidence of a past ocean 

 By R. Cowen

 Mars as it may have looked more than 2 billion years ago, with an ocean (blue) 
filling the northern lowlands. The area occupies one-third of the planet's 
surface. (Illustration by Peter Neivert, Brown U./NASA Mars Global Surveyor 
Project)

 Icy rivers thunder through steep canyons. Floodwaters spill out of lakebeds. 
Rushing streams drag house-size boulders and carve long, sinuous channels. To 
these images of what Mars may have looked like some 2 billion years ago, when 
it was warmer and wetter than today, scientists can now add a seascape.

 Last week, researchers reported their strongest evidence to date that an ocean 
once filled the Red Planet's northern lowlands. The volume of water was so 
large that it would have formed a 100-meter-deep sea if spread over the entire 
planet, says study coauthor James W. Head III of Brown University in 
Providence, R.I. He adds, where there was water, there could have been life.

 The findings, described in the Dec. 10 Science, support an ocean model 
independently proposed by two teams of scientists in 1989 and 1991. Both teams 
based their proposal on Mars images taken in the mid-1970s by the Viking 
spacecraft. Viking revealed an array of dried-up channels and valleys that 
could have been carved by flowing water. The teams suggested that if ancient 
Mars did harbor large amounts of water, much of it would have emptied into the 
northern lowlands and formed a vast sea.

 To test the hypothesis, Head's team mapped the lowlands using an altimeter 
aboard the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, which has orbited the Red Planet 
since late 1997. By measuring the time taken for laser light pulses to bounce 
back from the Martian surface, the craft measures the planet's high and low 
points.

 A team including Head reported evidence last year that the northern lowlands 
represent a dried-up ocean basin (SN: 4/4/98, p. 218). Four new lines of data 
support that notion, Head and his collaborators now say.

 The researchers found that a border region surrounding the lowlands has nearly 
constant elevation, reminiscent of the level surface of a shoreline. In 
addition, the low-lying area adjacent to this border is unusually smooth, as if 
sediment had settled on an ocean floor.

 Parallel to the possible shoreline, the altimeter revealed a series of 
terraces-irregular layers of material that remain after water recedes. 
Moreover, the volume of water suggested by the findings matches previous 
estimates of water on ancient Mars, Head notes.

"If you believe that Mars once had an ocean, it's a slam dunk" for 
corroborating that idea, says R. Stephen Saunders of NASA's Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.

 Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif., agrees, 
but he notes that combined with other data, the findings present a puzzle.

 Imaging a few patches along the boundary of the northern lowlands, Surveyor's 
camera failed to find the distinctive shoreline now indicated by the 
topographic data. Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edgett of Malin Space Science 
Systems in San Diego, Calif., reported these results in the Oct. 1 Geophysical 
Research Letters. Analyzing other images, Carr also saw no shoreline.

 The two sets of images, however, comprise less than 1 percent of the possible 
shoreline, notes Carr, who suggests a way out of the conundrum. The Martian 
ocean may have vanished as many as 3.8 billion years ago, he says. The Red 
Planet's wind would then have had plenty of time to erase shoreline 
features-particularly at the fine scale recorded by Surveyor's camera. Carr 
notes that wind erosion would have little effect on the height of the 
landscape, however.

 Farther back in time the planet was considerably warmer than it was 2 billion 
years ago, Carr notes. Under these conditions, an ocean could more easily 
disappear, he says. For instance, warm temperatures could promote the seepage 
of water into the ground. Carr presented his model this week at a meeting of 
the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 25 & 26, December 18 & 25, 1999, p. 390. 
Copyright C 1999, Science Service. 
