Future for digital snapshots looks crisp, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 Future for digital snapshots looks crisp 

 By P. Weiss

 This photo taken with the new digital image sensor shows distinct 
black-and-white lines converging on the target, demonstrating unusually high 
resolution. (Phillips Semiconductors)

 Although digital cameras provide both instant gratification and computer-ready 
images, conventional cameras still make sharper pictures. That crucial 
advantage of film cameras may, however, be going the way of flashcubes.

 Dutch researchers have developed a prototype image sensor on a chip that 
produces a picture whose quality rivals that of 35-millimeter film, they say-at 
least for black-and-white. They packed 6.2 million sensing cells onto their 
device by shrinking each cell to 3 micrometers (mm) on a side. The chip 
measures 11 mm on the diagonal, which is larger than typical commercial chips.

 By decreasing cell size and increasing chip area, "we can obtain the quality 
of standard film," says Herman L. Peek of Philips Semiconductors Image Sensors 
in Eindhoven, who led the chip's development. The densest arrays now used in 
commercial digital cameras have 3.2 million light-sensing cells, each 3.5 mm on 
a side, on a chip measuring 9 mm diagonally, he says.

 Peek and his colleagues unveiled their new technology Dec. 8 at the 
International Electron Devices meeting of the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineers in Washington, D.C.

"To make pixels that size and to make 6 million of them, that's a pretty good 
feat," says Robert K. Reich of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's 
Lincoln Laboratory in Lexington.

 By adding minuscule filters and microlenses to the chip, the group intends to 
make the chip suitable for color photography. However, tests at Hewlett-Packard 
Laboratories in Palo Alto, Calif., show that such modifications reduce 
resolution by about 25 percent, says Hewlett Packard's Rick Baer. The Dutch 
researchers intend to regain that resolution through future improvements, Peek 
adds. For now, they compose color photographs by overlaying images shot through 
external filters.

 Electronics designers usually show their prowess by putting more components 
into an ever-shrinking area. However, carpeting a larger chip with tiny 
components presents its own challenge, Reich says. A larger area can harbor 
more performance-wrecking defects. Over the years, the Dutch group has refined 
its fabrication methods, culminating in this imager, Reich says.

 Jim Sturm of Princeton University predicts that the time is not far off "when 
we won't have to use old-fashioned film for very-high-resolution images."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 25 & 26, December 18 & 25, 1999, p. 388. 
Copyright C 1999, Science Service. 
