Buoy oh buoy: Comprehensive El Niño data, Science News Online (12/11/99)

 Buoy oh buoy: Comprehensive El Nino data 

 By O. Baker

 A buoy, carrying instruments above water and on an anchored line below, 
transmits readings via satellite. (L. Stratton, Tropical Atmosphere Ocean 
Project, NOAA)

 The El Nino Pacific warming of 1997 and 1998 shut down the nutritional 
conveyor belt to a vast swath of ocean surface, newly released data show. The 
1998 La Nina cooling, in turn, switched this belt to fast forward, fertilizing 
the biggest bloom of microscopic plants yet measured in the equatorial Pacific.

"This is the largest El Nino^-La Nina event ever observed, and it was observed 
in great detail," comments biological oceanographer Michael R. Landry of the 
University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu. Landry says the new measurements 
provide a first overview of how ocean ecosystems, global carbon dioxide 
concentrations, and the physical forces behind El Nino interrelate. "This is a 
tremendous technical and conceptual achievement," says Landry.

 The data come from two sources: buoy-mounted sensors, which transmit readings 
from 72 equatorial sites, and an optical satellite sensor. The combined systems 
report wind speed and direction, temperature, and marine concentrations of 
carbon dioxide, nutrients, and chlorophyll-the green, light-harvesting molecule 
that plants produce.

 The measurements show that during the 1997^-1998 El Nino, the equatorial 
Pacific ceased producing carbon dioxide and became a net absorber of that 
greenhouse gas.

 While scientists had already surmised from scattered shipboard readings that 
such a transition had occurred, marine geochemist Taro Takahashi of Columbia 
University comments that the new data detail the phenomenon for the first time. 
He says these numbers will figure critically in global-warming predictions.

 Other measurements confirm that across most of the equatorial Pacific, El Nino 
deepens the warm-water layer inhabited by the primary producers in the ocean 
food web-the photosynthetic plankton.

 Earlier evidence suggested that this deepening would diminish the nutrient 
supply to these microbes by pushing the cold equatorial undercurrent downward 
and farther from the plankton. The cold water originates near South America and 
carries nutrients to the relatively infertile midocean region along the 
equator. Scientists have proposed that trade winds draw this cold water upward.

 Multiple measurements confirm the basic elements of this system. During the 
last El Nino, nutrient upwelling halted as winds flagged, the undercurrent lost 
strength, and chlorophyll concentrations across the equatorial Pacific 
plummeted to their lowest recorded levels.

 During the subsequent La Nina, these trends reversed, with a vengence.

"The dramatic bloom that occurred after El Nino was completely unexpected," 
says Francisco P. Chavez, a biological oceanographer at the Monterey Bay 
Aquarium Research Institute in Moss Landing, Calif. He and his colleagues 
describe the recent findings in the Dec. 10 Science.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 24, December 11, 1999, p. 374. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
