Weights make haste: Lighter linger, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 Weights make haste: Lighter linger

 By P. Weiss

 PISA, Italy, December 1612-In a new test of an old idea about motion, 
philosophers recently dropped objects from the cathedral bell tower, which 
tilts because of a construction flaw. The experimenters observed that large, 
heavy bodies fall faster than small, light ones of the same material-a behavior 
of matter described long ago by Aristotle but often disputed in recent decades.

 Not only did the investigators witness a difference in speed, but they also 
noted that "in proportion as the weight increases, so does the velocity," says 
Giorgio Coresio, professor of Greek at the University of Pisa, who led the 
study.

"Thus was confirmed the statement of Aristotle, in the first book of De Caelo, 
that 'a mass of gold or lead, or of any other body endowed with weight is 
quicker in proportion to its size,'" Coresio concludes. He describes the 
experiment in a new book Operetta intorno al Galleggiare de Corpi Solidi.

 Skeptics of Aristotle's statement say that they remain unconvinced, however. 
Such a test of the ancient assertion is so dramatic "that I meant to do it 
myself, but I don't recall if I ever got around to it," comments Galileo 
Galilei, philosopher and mathematician to the Grand Duke of Tuscany.

 He contends that even casual observations negate Aristotle's law and Coresio's 
assertions. "If two stones were flung at the same moment from a high tower, one 
stone twice the size of the other, who would believe that when the smaller was 
half-way down the larger had already reached the ground?" he asks.

 Galileo adds, "How ridiculous is this opinion of Aristotle is clearer than 
light" when one thinks it through, applying Archimedes' notions regarding the 
buoyancy of bodies in a medium.

 He notes that other philosophers have carried out experiments similar to that 
of Coresio and his colleagues but have refuted Aristotle. Fifteen years ago, 
Jacopo Mazzoni, also of the University of Pisa, reported that he had observed 
objects falling at the same speed regardless of weight (SN: 5/15/1597, p. 310) 
and pieces of an object descending at the same rate as the whole.

 On the other hand, it has proved difficult to demonstrate that bodies of 
different weights fall at exactly the same rate, Galileo concedes. For 
instance, experiments in which he has rolled balls down inclined planes have 
not yielded clear-cut evidence.

 Regarding Mazzoni's experiment, Coresio replies, "Perhaps he made his 
experiment from his window, and because the window was low, all his heavy 
substances went down evenly. But we did it from the top of the cathedral 
tower." The 190-foot-tall tower provides an unusually well-placed perch from 
which to launch long descents.

 A 30-foot drop would surely be enough to show the difference if Aristotle's 
proposition were true, contends Simon Stevin, engineer to Prince Maurice of 
Nassau. He and a fellow experimenter reported in 1586 that they had dropped two 
lead balls, one 10 times the other in weight, from such a height onto a plank. 
They heard "the sound of the two striking ... as one single report," he says 
(SN: 11/7/1605, p. 293). What's more, the same also held true for balls of 
different materials, he notes.


