Danish astronomer argues for a changing cosmos, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 Danish astronomer argues for a changing cosmos

 By R. Cowen

 HVEN, Denmark, January 1578-Heavens! Could the teachings of Aristotle and 
other scholars all be wrong?

 This placid island seems an unlikely place from which to challenge the 
prevailing view of the universe. But that's just what Danish astronomer Tycho 
Brahe has done. Two of his recent discoveries promise to shatter centuries of 
learned pronouncements that the cosmos is eternal and immutable. The findings 
suggest instead that chaos, turmoil, and change rule the universe.

 Just 6 years ago, Tycho observed that stars can suddenly appear in the sky, 
blazing brighter than the planet Venus at its most luminous, and then fade from 
view. Now, he declares that the fuzzy, highly unstable objects known as comets 
reside in a region far beyond the moon, a region of the heavens thought to be 
unwavering and immutable.

 The findings have all of Europe agog.

 Tycho's odyssey began on the evening of Nov. 11, 1572. Walking back to his 
alchemy laboratory at Herrevad Abbey, near Copenhagen, the 26-year-old 
astronomer saw a brilliant white object that outshone Venus. Several of his 
servants and peasants confirmed his observations, he reported at the time.

 The object, slightly northwest of the constellation Cassiopeia, remained for 
18 months in a patch of sky where no star had ever been seen before. At times, 
it was so bright that observers could view it in broad daylight. It also 
changed from white to red to leaden gray.

 Tycho and other astronomers scrambled to determine whether the new object 
moved across the sky. Any discernible motion would indicate the point-like 
object was not a star but an object nearer than the moon, within the so-called 
sublunary sphere. If so, the theories of Aristotle, Plato, and others who 
extoll the purity of the heavens could still hold.

 The young astronomer had just built a new version of a sextant, a 
compass-shaped device that accurately measures the latitude and longitude of 
distant objects. Tycho's sextant, which features 5.5-feet-long arms joined by a 
brass hinge, is unsurpassed in detecting the subtle movement of distant 
objects, he says. When he applied the device to the bright apparition, he 
reports in his book De Stella Nova, it stood stock-still and so must be a star.

 The startling discovery so intrigued King Frederick of Denmark that he 
bequeathed this island to Tycho for a new observatory. Still, the astronomer's 
finding cannot alone refute centuries of scholarly thought. A new study 
reported by Tycho just a few days ago, however, could force scientists to 
revise their long-held beliefs.

 The newest drama began last November while Tycho was catching fish at dusk in 
one of his island's many ponds. He noticed what appeared to be a bright star in 
the western sky. As the evening grew darker, however, he saw that the object 
had a reddish tail, the telltale signature of a comet.

 After sketching the comet, Tycho recorded its distance from two nearby stars 
in order to determine its position. Over the next few weeks, he diligently 
tracked the fading comet's motion and found that it has no measurable 
parallax-the extra motion of nearby objects due to Earth's movement through the 
heavens.

 Indeed, in a report to the king, Tycho calculates that the comet must lie 
farther away than 230 times the radius of Earth, or more than four times the 
distance to the moon. There can be no doubt that the comet is a bona fide 
celestial body, beyond the sublunary sphere, and thus in direct conflict with 
the teachings of the ancients, Tycho says.

 The king and others seem swayed by Tycho's careful measurements. Whether this 
comet of 1577 turns out to be an evil omen or a harbinger of good tidings 
remains to be seen, but it may spark a revolution in the way people view the 
cosmos.


