Science News Online (1/23/99): Cellular conversion turns brain into blood

 January 23, 1999

 Cellular conversion turns brain into blood

 By J. Travis

 Talk about a career change. The unspecialized cells that normally give rise to 
the various cell types in the brain can also act as bone marrow, the crucial 
source of an adult body's blood cells.

 Scientists discovered this remarkable ability when they injected these 
so-called neural stem cells into the blood of mice whose own bone marrow had 
been almost completely destroyed by irradiation. The neural stem cells, whose 
progeny were identifiable by means of a genetic marker previously slipped into 
them, engrafted as normal bone marrow transplants do and began producing blood 
cells.

"We really had a hard time convincing ourselves of our own data," notes Angelo 
L. Vescovi of the National Neurological Institute in Milan, Italy. He, 
Christopher R.R. Bjornson of the University of Washington in Seattle, and their 
colleagues describe the neural stem cell transplants in the Jan. 22 Science.

 The experiments suggest that a cell's lot in life, usually determined during 
the growth of an embryo, isn't as hard and fast as once thought. "Even when a 
cell seems to have committed to a particular organ, there are still some cells 
that can switch that fundamental identity. That's an intriguing biological 
concept," says Evan Y. Snyder of Children's Hospital in Boston, who has 
isolated human neural stems cells (SN: 11/7/98, p. 293).

 Until recently, scientists assumed that most adult cells had made irreversible 
commitments to a particular fate, becoming heart cells or liver cells, for 
example. The cloning of Dolly the sheep and other animals from various adult 
cells challenged that dogma, however. Still, those experiments involved 
removing the genes of an adult cell and placing them into an egg, a transfer 
that somehow reverted the genes to their embryonic state (SN: 4/5/97, p. 214). 
In the new experiments, the researchers have shown that they can directly 
change the role of some adult cells simply by placing them in a new environment.

 Vescovi notes that his unusual experiment was prompted in part by reports of 
brain tumors that contained muscle cells in addition to brain cells. Those 
cases hinted that brain cells could develop into very different cell types.

 After injecting the neural stem cells into mice, the researchers showed that 
the cells seeded the animals' bone marrow and spleens, which also produce new 
blood cells. They also showed that individual white blood cells from the 
animals had the genetic marker belonging to the neural stem cells.

 Although the researchers are confident that the transplanted neural stem cells 
produced new red blood cells, they haven't proved that point. Mature red blood 
cells have no DNA-containing nuclei, making it impossible for the investigators 
to detect the genetic marker used to label the neural stem cells and their 
progeny.

 Vescovi's team is now testing whether human neural stem cells can also act as 
bone marrow when injected into mice. "If the principle holds for human cells, 
we'd like to try therapy," says Vescovi. Noting that hematopoietic stem cells, 
the bone marrow cells that give rise to blood, are difficult to grow and 
manipulate, the researcher suggests that neural stem cells might substitute for 
the treatment of many blood disorders.

"We have no problems expanding endless supplies of neural stem cells, and we 
even have human neural stem cells now," comments Snyder. "I'd be ecstatic if . 
. . the cells I've isolated with one intent can now address a magnitude-greater 
level of diseases."

 Neural stem cells may have a future outside the bloodstream as well. "We're 
actively investigating whether our [neural] stem cells can give rise to other 
solid organs. For instance, can they give rise to muscle or liver?" asks Snyder.

 In addition to searching for the chemical cues that switch neural stem cells 
into blood producers, Vescovi plans to study whether hematopoietic stem cells 
or other nonneural tissues can give rise to brain cells.


