Imagine that: Animal magnetism exposed, Science News Online (12/18/99)

 Imagine that: Animal magnetism exposed

 By B. Bower

 PARIS, December 1785-Imagination and wonder, those bewitching sirens of 
superstition, received official condemnation with the release of an 
investigation of animal magnetism by a French Royal Academy of Sciences 
commission. Those who claim to use animal magnetism, also known as mesmerism, 
to elicit various physical cures and wild convulsions from their subjects 
actually exploit the awesome force of human imagination, the report concludes.

 Commission members hope that their findings will help launch an era of sober, 
rational thinking led by philosophers, scientists, and other enlightened 
thinkers.

"Enthusiasts of mesmerism may be sincere, but the cures and convulsions that 
they produce actually spring from their subjects' fervid imaginations," 
remarked commission member and American inventor Benjamin Franklin in an 
interview conducted at a Parisian saloon. "Now excuse me, I must hasten outside 
and fly my kite in a raging thunderstorm to find out if a key hanging from its 
tail conducts electricity."

 At the king's behest, the royal commission investigated miraculous medical 
cures and mental transformations attributed to German physician Anton Mesmer. 
He and his disciples claim to manipulate an invisible magnetic fluid in their 
subjects to unleash astonishing physical and mental powers.

 Au contraire, responds the royal commission. Franklin and his band of 
enlightened men stoically sat through sessions conducted by accomplished 
mesmerists. Rather than convulsing violently, commission members remained calm 
and rational to the core.

 The commission report concludes that mesmerism incites dramatic responses in 
three ways. Its practitioners make physical contact with their subjects, the 
subjects imitate reactions that they have seen in others undergoing mesmerism, 
or the subjects submit to the "terrible power" of their imaginations.

 The fascination with animal magnetism has grown out of a long-standing 
interest in allegedly wondrous events and objects. Consider Gervase of Tilbury, 
an English noble who in 1210 published a description of 129 marvels of the 
known world. His catalog of the amazing included a magnetized stone, an herb 
that restored sight to blind sheep, werewolves roaming the countryside, and a 
water source that changed location whenever something dirty was put into it.

"I have it on good authority that all of my marvels are genuine," wrote Gervase 
in an unpublished diary, "but people may think of it only as Gervase's Believe 
It or Not."

 Wonder exists as a craving for novel or unexpected events where the causes are 
unknown, Gervase explained.

 Since then, religious and scholarly communities have often viewed 
marvels-presented in collections and public displays-as the exceptions that 
confirm the established order of nature. European voyages of discovery, which 
yielded a stream of surprising finds from foreign lands, raised wonder's 
intellectual status to new heights.

 However, dissenting scholars argued during the Middle Ages that wonder has 
more in common with ignorance and fear than with intellectual discovery. The 
royal commission's report on animal magnetism sides with those foes of 
unbridled imagination.

"The mesmerists who murmured and gesticulated at me had no effect on my 
rational capacities, though the experience was rather relaxing," Franklin says. 
"I now feel compelled to crow like a rooster when I hear the word spectacles, 
but I'm sure that's just coincidence."


