Science News Online (1/23/99): More Than the Brain's Drain

 January 23, 1999

 More Than the Brain's Drain

 By J. Travis

 It may lack the majesty of the mighty Mississippi, but there's a vital river 
running through your head.

 This neurological stream consists of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), a clear, 
colorless liquid that constantly bathes the brain and spinal cord. The average 
person has about 150 milliliters, less than a cupful, of this fluid within his 
or her body. Suggesting a new importance for CSF, some scientists are now 
arguing that its currents carry important signals for sleep, appetite, and sex.

 Tissue called the choroid plexus, deep inside the brain, secretes most of the 
CSF. The fluid, which is about 99 percent water, starts its journey from the 
two lateral ventricles, which are side-by-side cavities in the upper brain, and 
then travels down to the third ventricle and on to the fourth, which is near 
the brain stem. From there, it either wells up over the brain's surface or 
flows down the spinal canal. Ultimately, it's absorbed into the bloodstream.

 Since scientists discovered CSF, several roles have been recognized for the 
liquid. It helps provide the nervous system with a steady supply of nutrients. 
The brain also literally floats in CSF, which dramatically reduces the weight 
pressing down upon the spine.

 Furthermore, the fluid provides a watery padding that protects the brain's 
fragile cellular network. Blows to the head would cause significantly more 
damage if CSF weren't there to absorb and diffuse the impact.

 Finally, since it's replaced several times a day, CSF flushes the central 
nervous system. Biologists have compared cerebrospinal fluid to urine, another 
liquid created in the body that removes harmful substances.

"The [traditional] view is that the cerebrospinal fluid is the drainage system 
of the brain," notes Michael N. Lehman of the University of Cincinnati College 
of Medicine.

 While not dismissing these long-recognized roles, Lehman and a small group of 
scientists recently gathered to discuss whether this thin broth plays an even 
more active role. At a Society for Neuroscience symposium in Los Angeles last 
November, they offered provocative evidence that CSF may actually comprise a 
river of information within the central nervous system.

 The neuroscientists are quick to admit that they haven't yet proven that the 
body uses cerebrospinal fluid to send messages. "We're posing the question and 
determining the strength of the evidence," says Rae Silver of Columbia 
University.

 Lehman and Silver organized the recent symposium because of an interest that 
grew out of their studies of the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). This small 
region of the mammalian brain controls the daily, or circadian, rhythms of 
animals, including people. The SCN was thought to exert its influence by 
sending electrical signals to other areas of the brain via nerve cell 
connections.

 Yet Lehman, Silver, and their colleagues found evidence that a soluble 
chemical released by the SCN acts as a circadian signal. They had encased SCN 
tissue in a polymer capsule, which they implanted into the ventricles of 
hamsters whose own SCN tissue had been destroyed. The capsule prevented the 
nerve cells within from making connections to those outside. The encapsulated 
transplants nonetheless restored many of the animals' lost circadian rhythms, 
the researchers reported several years ago.

 The SCN had previously been found to rhythmically secrete substances-the 
hormone vasopressin, for example-into CSF. Since the capsule allows chemicals 
to diffuse through it, Lehman and Silver speculated that in their experiments, 
a diffusible circadian signal was transmitted within the liquid to targets 
throughout the brain. Such a signal molecule has not yet been identified.

 Other researchers have documented that molecules drifting in CSF can penetrate 
the brain. Miles Herkenham of the functional neuroanatomy section at the 
National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md., described at the 
symposium an example of such work.

 His research team injected a radioactively labeled form of inulin, a 
carbohydrate molecule that stays outside cells, into rodents' brain CSF and 
then monitored the marker's location. Herkenham showed in dramatic time-lapse 
images that within 4 hours, inulin had suffused the extracellular space of the 
whole brain.

 Other researchers have shown that even larger molecules, such as proteins that 
stimulate the growth of nerve cells, can depart from CSF and diffuse through 
brain tissue. "There is a potential, if you wait long enough, for these 
molecules to go long distances," says neuroscientist Charles Nicholson of the 
New York University Medical Center.

 Given that potential, the question remains whether some areas of the brain 
release substances into the cerebrospinal fluid that signal other regions or 
perhaps the whole brain.

 Some of the earliest research to hint at communication skills of CSF was 
performed on sleep-deprived animals, James M. Krueger of Washington State 
University in Pullman told the symposium. Scientists observed many years ago 
that when they injected CSF from such animals into the ventricles of normally 
rested animals, sleep resulted. "There's something in cerebrospinal fluid 
that's transferable and induces sleep," says Krueger.

 In fact, there are many such sleep-inducing substances in CSF (SN: 6/10/95, p. 
356). Krueger's research group concentrates on interleukin-1, a protein 
originally implicated in the functioning of the immune system. The 
investigators have found that interleukin-1 most effectively induces sleep when 
it is injected into the subarachnoid space, the CSF-filled region covering the 
surface of the brain.

 The researchers are now trying to determine whether CSF normally carries 
interleukin-1 to the sleep-triggering region of the brain. While the protein's 
concentration in CSF definitely increases as animals become sleep-deprived, the 
CSF might merely receive overflow from the brain rather than being the medium 
through which a command to sleep travels, says Krueger.

 Appetite might be under the sway of CSF. Scientists have identified several 
substances that stimulate eating when injected into the brain. The most potent 
is a small protein called neuropeptide Y (SN: 7/27/96, p. 63).

 Satya P. Kalra of the University of Florida in Gainesville and his colleagues 
have been working to determine how the brain uses this neuropeptide to regulate 
eating. When they implanted a pump that constantly releases the peptide into 
the CSF-filled ventricles of rodents, the animals "eat and eat and eat," says 
Kalra.

 Neuropeptide Y is normally present in CSF, which makes Kalra and his 
colleagues suspect that the fluid carries the peptide to the hypothalamus, the 
brain region where the molecule seems to act to produce feeding behavior. 
Moreover in fasting animals, cells near the ventricles release the peptide, he 
notes.

 Reproduction is as basic a function as sleeping and eating, and scientists 
suspect cerebrospinal fluid may influence it as well. Donal C. Skinner of the 
National Institute of Agronomy Research in Nouzilly, France, reported at the 
Los Angeles symposium that gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) appears in the 
CSF of sheep. The hormone's concentrations there rise and fall roughly in 
parallel with its abundance in blood.

 Secreted primarily by the hypothalamus, GnRH normally stimulates the brain's 
pituitary gland to make luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone. 
These two hormones drive the creation of eggs or sperm and, ultimately, sex 
hormones such as estrogen and testosterone. Curiously, Skinner says that the 
GnRH in cerebrospinal fluid does not seem to reach the pituitary gland.

 Studies have suggested that GnRH also influences sexual behavior in many 
animals. One form of the hormone, for example, elicits courtship behavior in 
sparrows when it's injected into the birds' ventricles. Skinner's team is now 
studying whether the hormone's presence in the CSF bathing the brain regulates 
sheep sexual behavior.

 The hormone melatonin is another candidate for a message conveyed by 
cerebrospinal fluid, Skinner's colleague Benoit Malpaux told the symposium 
participants. Produced by the brain's pineal gland, this hormone regulates many 
daily biorhythms; it induces sleep, for example. It can also govern seasonal 
reproductive activity.

 Since the pineal gland and the brain cells that melatonin targets are located 
close to the third ventricle, Malpaux suggests that the gland secretes the 
hormone directly into CSF. Indeed, he reports, the concentrations of melatonin 
in sheep's CSF are much higher than in their blood. The hormone follows a 
similar daily cycle in both fluids: Concentrations rise at night and fall 
during the day.

 Determining the capabilities of cerebrospinal fluid is not just an academic 
exercise. In the Jan. 24, 1998 Lancet, for example, Edward Rubenstein of 
Stanford University noted that, with age, the brain's choroid plexus calcifies, 
which leads to a dramatic decline in the production of CSF. He suggests that 
changes in CSF physiology contribute to dementia in some elderly people.

 Fully testing such a hypothesis, however, won't be possible until 
neuroscientists better understand the roles played by the brain's small, but 
mighty, river.


