Science News Online (1/2/99): Agents of Cooperation

 January   2, 1999

 Agents of Cooperation

 Orchestrating the actions of mobile snippets of smart software

 By IVARS PETERSON

 No traffic jams. No parking hassles. No jostling crowds. No inattentive, 
harried sales clerks.

 Instead, you get expert help in choosing the perfect gift and finding it at 
the lowest possible price-all provided in the comfort of your own home.

 That's one vision of shopping on the World Wide Web. Indeed, you can already 
take advantage of services that scour the Web to give you a list of on-line 
vendors and the prices they charge for a specific product, whether a video 
game, book, or Beanie Baby.

 These services, sometimes called shopbots, automate comparison shopping. They 
represent a recent commercial application of research on a broad class of 
computer programs known as intelligent agents.

 A shopbot program typically resides at a Web site. It sends out inquiries on 
behalf of a customer to other Web sites, collects the relevant information, and 
compiles a report tailored to the customer's requirements.

 Other software agents automatically retrieve airline flight information, 
filter electronic mail to highlight messages important to the user, and alert 
investors to significant changes in selected stock prices.

 It's like having a digital secretary to take care of some of your needs and an 
electronic adviser to help you make decisions.

 There's much more ahead if projects now at the research stage come to fruition.

 Vinton G. Cerf of MCI WorldCom predicts that, within 25 years, businesses and 
consumers will routinely use mobile intelligent agents to perform a wide 
variety of tasks, often without the users being aware of the agents' 
activities. These pieces of software would roam the Internet to perform their 
duties, jumping from computer to computer.

 Imagine a seething swarm of billions of such agents, finding and processing 
information, passing it on to people or other agents, negotiating with each 
other, and coordinating their activities. They could even alter their behavior 
as they learn and adapt to the ever changing landscape of cyberspace.

 With access to such information resources, financial programs could tell 
consumers when interest rates have fallen enough to warrant refinancing a home 
loan. Huge, complex telecommunications networks could monitor, repair, and 
maintain themselves, becoming largely independent of human supervision.

 Getting there, however, won't be easy. It may not even be desirable. 
Nonetheless, many research groups throughout the world are now exploring the 
possibilities.

     

 One pioneer in the development of software agents is Pattie Maes of the Media 
Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 In the early 1990s, she and her coworkers designed an agent that could learn 
to sort electronic mail according to priority by analyzing a user's reading 
habits. It could also figure out how to fulfill common requests, automatically 
replying when authorized to do so by the user.

 Another Maes project, called Firefly, produced an agent that recommended 
movies, books, and music by quizzing visitors about their personal preferences, 
then comparing the answers to those of other people with similar tastes.

 Allowing agents to act on their own is a key requirement. Maes and her 
colleagues define an autonomous agent as a "computational system" that can 
inhabit a complex, constantly changing environment, sense what is going on, and 
act independently to accomplish a specified set of tasks or achieve certain 
goals.

 The underlying software technology is an offshoot of research in artificial 
intelligence. A software agent often makes inferences on the basis of a set of 
rules specifying its actions in a variety of situations.

 Nearly a decade ago, Japanese researchers investigated putting together chunks 
of software that could work together as an autonomous agent. One product of 
that research was a talking head on a computer screen that could smile, frown, 
or look perplexed-using the appropriate facial expression as it replied to a 
spoken question. That effort was viewed as a step toward creating a "computer 
buddy" who could chat with its owner, joke around, or offer advice on a variety 
of matters (SN: 10/9/93, p. 229).

 It also provided a way to give software agents in a computer environment 
lifelike representations-or characters-that people would find meaningful or 
entertaining (SN: 12/19&26/92, p. 440).

     

 In recent years, attention has focused on allowing autonomous agents to learn 
and modify their own behavior. Such capabilities would make them more versatile 
and robust, enhancing their value, many researchers contend.

 One way to do that is by incorporating artificial neural networks. Each new 
piece of information that an agent encounters alters its programmed web of 
linked nodes, making some connections stronger and others weaker. Those 
changes, in turn, affect the way it processes subsequent data.

 Researchers have used neural networks successfully in a wide variety of 
computer programs, including one that taught itself winning strategies in the 
game of backgammon by playing thousands of games and learning from the results 
(SN: 8/2/97, p. 76). Intelligent agents increasingly incorporate that kind of 
technology.

 One capability agents may need to learn early on is how to negotiate.

 In booking a hotel room or managing your stock portfolio, your agent may very 
well run into another agent at the other end of the line operating on behalf of 
the other party involved in the transaction.

 A much higher level of sophistication comes with agents that cooperate, says 
Katia Sycara of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. If their goals aren't 
compatible, the agents can even antagonize one another.

 Sycara and her collaborators have been developing a system that acts as a 
matchmaker or broker between different types of agents. Called RETSINA, it 
coordinates intelligent agents that gather, filter, and integrate information 
on the Internet.

 One piece of the work addresses the problem of integrating information coming 
from diverse sources. In addition, the researchers have developed a language 
called LARKS that allows agents to communicate with each other-a prerequisite 
to cooperation and negotiation.

 Coordinating the activities of a collection of agents spread across a computer 
network offers several advantages, says Mark Klein of the Center for 
Coordination Science at MIT's Sloan School of Management. Efficient 
coordination would simplify the acquisition of information, improve 
performance, and make the system more tolerant of component failure, he 
contends.

 Researchers are still striving to find coordination mechanisms that are 
efficient, reliable, and work with many agents, Klein says.

     

 So far, agents typically have been confined to a single computer or a limited 
network of computers all using the same operating system. Installed at a host 
computer, they perform their duties by sending messages over the Internet and 
ordering the transfer of information, as needed, from place to place.

 Now, researchers are designing agents that can travel around networks of 
dissimilar computers. Whenever necessary, such a mobile agent sends itself to 
another computer, where it continues its assigned task.

 Mobile agents have the advantages of reducing communication requirements and 
operating more flexibly than current agents, Klein says.

 A data-processing agent, for example, could move to a computer where the data 
it needs are stored, sift through the information, and come back with a compact 
result. That saves having to move the data from computer to computer.

 Mobile agents offer an attractive answer for managing commercial 
telecommunications networks, says Patricia Morreale of the Stevens Institute of 
Technology in Hoboken, N.J.

 Instead of merely sending messages identifying a trouble spot, for example, a 
network maintenance agent could travel to the computer where the problem 
appears most severe to get a firsthand look at the situation. It could then 
respond, perhaps by deploying other specialized agents to do its bidding.

 Mobile agents can react much more quickly than their static counterparts in 
situations where instantaneous action is often required, Morreale remarks. 
Moreover, because a mobile agent can focus on the trouble spot, the system is 
much less likely to be swamped by extraneous alarms and messages when an 
emergency occurs.

 Another possibility, say researchers at the Hewlett-Packard Laboratory in 
Bristol, England, is the use of a swarm of navigation agents to wander 
telephone networks to find speedy paths for telephone calls from one switching 
center to another. By leaving a kind of digital "scent" trail, agents following 
the shortest, quickest paths at any given moment could signal the best 
available routes for telephone calls.

 To enhance their capabilities further, autonomous, mobile agents could be 
allowed to evolve and develop new behaviors to cope with new situations.

     

 Some researchers, however, are nervous about what might happen when mobile, 
autonomous intelligent agents begin working together in an open computer 
network like the Internet, and individual agents evolve into new forms. Agents 
could become more akin to artificial life than mere pieces of software.

 In 1991, Thomas S. Ray, now at the University of Oklahoma in Norman, created 
an electronic ecosystem he named Tierra (SN: 8/10/91, p. 88). The organisms 
that populated his world consisted of strings of computer instructions, 
expressed as ones and zeros. Various rules specified how these strings interact 
with each other, depending on their places in a computer's memory.

 By allowing mutations that modify instruction strings and other types of 
interactions, Ray found that he could obtain all sorts of surprising behavior, 
including rampant propagation and diversification among Tierra's digital 
denizens.

 Intelligent agents have far greater capabilities than Ray's simple automatons 
though they don't yet mutate and evolve in a Darwinian sense. What might happen 
in an information-driven, agent-mediated economy is one of the main issues now 
being studied at the recently formed Institute for Advanced Commerce at the IBM 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.

 Computer simulations of bustling digital marketplaces populated by various 
types of agents provide insights into the kinds of collective behavior that 
could emerge.

 In one scenario, agents allow vendors to change prices and product offerings 
in response to demand and the competition much faster than a person ever could. 
Simulations show that such an economy quickly degenerates into vicious price 
wars and market crashes, while customers interested in the less popular 
products are poorly served.

 By studying the conditions that lead to undesirable collective behavior, IBM 
researchers hope to understand better how to prevent these phenomena from 
occurring in the real world as agents race onto the Internet.

"These insights can then help us design rules of behavior and interaction that 
we can incorporate into agents and agent markets," says IBM's Jeffrey O. 
Kephart.

 It may be useful, for example, to make agents more aware of the likely 
outcomes of their decisions and so to instill some common sense. That remains a 
tough problem for artificial intelligence researchers, however.

     

 Compared with the intelligent agents being studied at IBM, today's shopbots 
are decidedly primitive. Extremely myopic, they typically search a limited 
number of Web sites, sometimes only those of vendors who have paid for the 
privilege of being included.

 You don't get advice on the ideal gift. There's no guarantee that the final 
list really includes the lowest available price.

 That may change very quickly, however. Each week brings new agents onto the 
scene as one startup company after another tests its wares on the Internet. The 
fittest survive-at least for a while.

 From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 1, January 2, 1999, p. 12. Copyright C 1999 
by Science Service.


