Science News Online (1/30/99): Speech Insights Sound Off in the Brain

 January 30, 1999

 Speech Insights Sound Off in the Brain

 By B. Bower

 Talk is cheap and, not surprisingly, plentiful. It gushes from our mouths like 
water from a burst dam. Yet we capture meaning from the conversations cascading 
around us with seemingly little effort. This impressive achievement depends as 
much on the ability to track the rhythm and intonations of spoken language as 
on the more obvious need to interpret word meanings and grammar, according to a 
new study.

 Brain cells react in a unique pattern and with lightning speed to so-called 
prosodic features of speech, such as drawing out a word, pausing for emphasis, 
and raising the pitch of one's voice, reports a team of neuroscientists headed 
by Karsten Steinhauer of the Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience in 
Leipzig, Germany. Immediate neural responses to these speech modulations allow 
listeners to get a head start in decoding the sometimes fuzzy meanings of 
sentences, Steinhauer and her colleagues contend.

 Their findings dovetail with recent evidence, gathered by psychologists such 
as Peter W. Jusczyk of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, indicating that 
infants and young children closely track prosodic aspects of speech to gain a 
foothold on its grammatical structure.

"I'm not surprised that there are specific brain responses linked to prosodic 
features of language," Jusczyk comments. "We find that infants as young as 2 
1/2 months begin to notice prosodic cues used by adult speakers and use them to 
mark phrases within sentences."

 Traditional theories of language comprehension have held that adults employ 
prosodic cues only to flesh out a sentence's meaning after they have deciphered 
its grammatical structure. For instance, rising pitch toward the end of an 
utterance signals a question, whereas falling pitch indicates a statement.

 The new study, published in the February Nature Neuroscience, places prosodic 
cues at the core of understanding the grammatical structure of speech.

 The researchers placed caps studded with electrodes on the scalps of 56 native 
German speakers. The setup allowed for recordings of electrical activity at the 
brain's surface as the volunteers heard a series of sentences.

 Some sentences were grammatically straightforward, such as "Since Jay always 
jogs a mile and a half this seems like a short distance to him." Others were 
harder to understand, such as "Since Jay always jogs a mile and a half seems 
like a very short distance to him." Especially for readers, "a mile and a half" 
is first perceived as the object of "jogs" rather than the subject of the 
subsequent verb "seems," as required in the second sentence.

 When sentences such as these are spoken, differences in the duration of words 
and pauses and variations in pitch and loudness serve to group words into 
distinct "intonational phrases," Steinhauer's group asserts.

 While listening to both straightforward and ambiguous sentences, participants 
exhibited neither of two brain-wave responses known to indicate difficulty at 
understanding words, the scientists say. The researchers then spliced the 
recorded sentences so that prosodic cues did not match sentence structure. Upon 
hearing the first word in a sentence that signals its grammatical structure 
("seems" in the second sentence above), volunteers displayed the neural signs 
of confusion about word meaning.

 Moreover, a distinct type of brain-wave response occurs within a fraction of a 
second after the conclusion of each intonational phrase in a sentence, the 
investigators find.

 The discovery of this new component of the brain's electrical activity 
suggests that the detection of intonational phrases is a crucial aspect of 
speech perception, note psychologists Cyma Van Petten and Paul Bloom of the 
University of Arizona in Tucson in a commentary on Steinhauer's article.

"Intonational cues may control initial decisions about sentence structure," Van 
Petten and Bloom remark.


