The best Leonid show is yet to come?, Science News Online (12/4/99)

 The best Leonid show is yet to come?

 By R. Cowen

 The streaks of light came fast and furious. Some raced across the sky in 
nearly parallel tracks, leaving behind hazy trails. A few seemed to dive into 
the moon.

 If last month's Leonid meteor shower proved disappointing in the United 
States, it took Europe and the Middle East by storm. And if the predictions of 
two astronomers continue to hold true, Earth will be in for a really big show 
in 2001 and another in 2002.

 At the shower's peak, on Nov. 17, some observers saw between 3,000 and 5,000 
shooting stars, or meteors, in a single hour. Activity reached a crescendo at 
9:05 p.m. EST-just 3 minutes earlier than predicted by David J. Asher of Armagh 
Observatory in Northern Ireland and Rob McNaught of the Australian National 
University in Weston.

 Scenes from the 1999 Leonid shower: Meteor's fireball and its fading light 
seen for more than 20 minutes over the Italian Alps. (CLorenzo Comolli)

 This is the first accurate prediction of a meteor storm, says Brian G. Marsden 
of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Mass.

 The Leonid meteor shower happens every November, when Earth passes through a 
stream of dusty debris, or meteoroids, expelled by Comet 55P/Tempel-Tuttle. 
Dust grains slam into Earth's atmosphere and burn, creating the streaks of 
light known as meteors. About every 33 years, when the comet passes near, Earth 
encounters a large amount of debris, resulting in a heavy shower or storm.

 Exactly which years the Leonid dust particles will generate a storm has been 
difficult to predict. That's because astronomers hadn't realized that the 
debris stream is composed of distinct, narrow strands of dust, each expelled by 
the comet during a different passage by the sun, notes Asher. It's a matter of 
hit or miss: If Earth plows through the center of a dense strand, a storm will 
occur.

 By simulating the motion of strands in the solar system, Asher and McNaught 
conclude that the dust strand Earth traveled through last month was shed by the 
comet in 1899. Although that's the same material the planet traveled through 
during the spectacular storm of 1966, last month's event wasn't as dazzling 
because Earth crossed the strand's edge rather than its center, Asher says.

 Donald K. Yeomans of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, 
Calif., says he agrees with the pair's explanation for the 1999 event. "I do 
take their future predictions more seriously now," he adds.

 Next year, McNaught and Asher calculate, Earth will pass for the first time 
through the edge of a band of dust cast off by the comet in 1866, yielding a 
puny shower. In 2001, however, Earth will plow sequentially through no less 
than three trails-debris expelled in 1767, 1699, and 1866-and the light show 
should prove more stunning than last month's. In 2002, when Earth again 
encounters material from 1866, as well as from 1933, the Leonids should also 
put on a great show, McNaught and Asher say.

 Their findings may shed light on a puzzling feature seen just hours after the 
Leonid shower reached its 1999 peak. Observers saw flashes of light near the 
moon, as if meteoroids had crashed on its surface. Researchers reported the 
phenomenon in a Nov. 26 circular of the International Astronomical Union.

 The brilliance of these flashes requires that the meteoroids have as much mass 
as a bowling ball-a rare but not extraordinary occurrence, estimates Alan W. 
Harris of JPL. Moreover, Asher and McNaught calculate that the moon intercepted 
a denser part of the 1899 stream than Earth did and thus encountered a greater 
number of large meteoroids at the time the flashes occurred. However, cautions 
Paul R. Weissman of JPL, the flashes could merely have been sunlight glinting 
off satellites or space debris.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 23, December 4, 1999, p. 356. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
