Science News Online (1/9/99): Life's First Scalding Steps

 January 9, 1999

 Life's First Scalding Steps

 Biology might have begun in cauldrons at the bottom of the sea

 By S. Simpson

 In a back room at the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.), Jay A. 
Brandes packs water and powdered rock into a 24-carat-gold capsule not much 
bigger than a daily vitamin. He injects gases like those spewed by a volcano 
and then seals the receptacle. Finally, he places the shiny amulet inside "the 
bomb," a device isolated from the rest of the world by steel panels salvaged 
from a scrapped battleship. Within, the mixture is besieged with scorching 
temperatures and bone-crushing pressures, forces like those at work at seafloor 
geysers. Brandes and his colleagues then look inside the tortured capsule for 
evidence of the chemical steps that sparked the beginnings of life.

 Using no more than the cocktail of chemicals discharged at undersea 
hydrothermal vents, the researchers are trying to mimic reactions that occur 
within living cells.

 Oceanographer Jack Corliss first discovered these vents in 1977, while 
exploring a volcanic ridge at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. Before then, 
oceanographers had considered the ocean floor cold and mostly barren. Corliss' 
view outside the tiny research submersible revealed a different world.

 Peering out a porthole, Corliss became the first person to witness the 
biological wonderland of shoe-sized clams, 6-foot tube worms, and blizzards of 
strange microbes thriving at the vents, which spew out a hellish mix of 
shimmering brines. If these creatures can subsist in a bath of scorching 
chemicals and heat from the planet's interior, he reasoned, then perhaps this 
is where life got its start.

 Corliss' proposal that life sprung from water, gas, and rocks far out of the 
sun's reach inspired grandiose theories but remained virtually untested for 20 
years. Most origins-of-life researchers were still busy pondering the long-held 
notion that life's precursor chemicals linked up at the surface of a 
sun-drenched pond or ocean. In this more traditional scenario, the sun simmered 
a prebiotic soup for millions of years to cook up the first cellular organisms.

 Only in the past few years have scientists such as those at the Carnegie 
Institution begun to roll up their shirtsleeves and get down to the business of 
determining what biochemical reactions are possible at hydrothermal vents. In a 
series of recent experiments, researchers have found that the harsh vent 
conditions can foster some of the chemical steps thought necessary for early 
life. Their results are capturing the attention of a growing group of 
scientists-and raising belief in the chance of finding life elsewhere in the 
universe.

 The most detailed step-by-step blueprint for how Earth's oldest raw materials 
could have given rise to the stuff of life came out of the imagination of 
Gunter Wachtershauser, an organic chemist at the University of Regensberg in 
Germany. Ten years ago, Wachtershauser conceived of an assembly-line process at 
the ocean floor that transforms basic inorganic chemicals into organic chains, 
the biological molecules that are the building blocks of life.

 Wachtershauser's factory enlists the elements of modern industry-all readily 
available at vents. The conveyor belt is the flat surface of metal sulfide 
minerals, such as iron pyrite, abundant in seafloor rocks. The raw materials 
are carbon- and hydrogen-rich gases from volcanic belches dissolved in the 
seawater. The workers that drive the assembly line-the keys to the whole 
process-are metallic ions in the sulfides.

 In living cells, complex proteins called enzymes play the role of factory 
laborers, bringing certain molecules together and splitting others apart. 
Before enzymes appeared on the planet, Wachtershauser says that metallic ions 
filled that catalytic role. Without these mediators, reactions might take 
months or years, or never happen at all, he adds. New components would never 
get added to the molecules passing by on the conveyor.

 In Wachtershauser's theory, the first organic molecule put together on the 
conveyor belt was acetic acid, a simple combination of carbon, hydrogen, and 
oxygen that is best known for giving vinegar its pungent odor. Formation of 
acetic acid is a primary step in metabolism, the series of chemical reactions 
that provides the energy that cells use to manufacture all the biological 
ingredients an organism needs.

 According to the theory, metabolism came before all else. Once a primitive 
metabolism evolved, it began to run on its own, and only later were cells' 
other basic elements, such as a genetic code, invented.

 Wachtershauser focuses on the heart of modern metabolism, the citric acid 
cycle. All living cells use this series of reactions to extract energy from 
food. The cycle makes changes in several chemical compounds, but it always 
begins with acetic acid. Inside a cell, the two carbon atoms in each acetic 
acid molecule are eventually expelled as carbon dioxide in a reaction that 
gives off a packet of energy.

 Because the citric acid cycle is intrinsic to all modern life, Wachtershauser 
guesses that its basic reactions are close to the chemistry with which life 
began-with one significant variation. In the oxygen-deficient world at 
hydrothermal vents, heat-loving bacteria operate the cycle backward (SN: 
3/29/97, p. 192). Instead of giving off carbon dioxide to make energy, they 
incorporate carbon atoms to build a succession of more complex organic 
molecules. Wachtershauser says life's first chemicals were built the same way.

 Around the vents, he theorizes, catalytic metallic ions first enabled the 
materials around them to fashion acetic acid. In the next step, the ions 
catalyzed the addition of a carbon molecule to the acetic acid to get 
three-carbon pyruvic acid, which is another key chemical in the citric acid 
cycle and also reacts with ammonia to form amino acids, which themselves link 
up to form proteins.

 After writing the blueprint, Wachtershauser set out to prove each step. He 
produced the first important component of his assembly process 2 years ago. He 
and fellow German chemist Claudia Huber, of the Technical University of Munich, 
reported in the April 11, 1997 Science that they generated large quantities of 
activated acetic acid from basic raw materials at 100o C. This is the 
temperature typical of the fringe of a hydrothermal vent, where the volcanic 
brines mix with near-freezing ocean water.

 Critics complain that Wachtershauser's experimental temperature represents a 
limited zone in the vent environment. Toward the scalding core of a vent 
system, temperatures are nearer 350o C.

 A longtime supporter of the primordial soup hypothesis, Jeffrey L. Bada of the 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., has conducted several 
experiments showing that certain life-critical chemicals could not survive in 
their scorching birthplace for more than a few minutes or days. By testing 
reactions at only a single temperature, Bada says, Wachtershauser is "not 
playing with a full deck of cards."

 Such a rebuke doesn't apply to other experimentalists, such as the Carnegie 
Institution team, who are joining the game. The Carnegie researchers at times 
closely follow Wachtershauser's blueprint, but they're aiming for results much 
broader, and perhaps more convincing, than the German chemist has achieved to 
date.

 They are trumping Bada's criticism by testing chemical reactions over a much 
wider range of temperatures. What's more, with their bomb apparatus, the team 
can perform experiments at the extreme pressures that are typical under 
thousands of meters of seawater, a factor Wachtershauser never explored.

 Christopher Chyba of the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) 
Institute in Mountain View, Calif., is encouraged by the growing interest in 
this research. "A variety of ideas, many of them flowing out of 
Wachtershauser's hypothesis, are now leading to a kind of renaissance of 
experiments in the origins of life," he says.

 It was another origins-of-life theorist who got the Carnegie team involved. 
About the same time that Wachtershauser began considering metabolism as the 
root of life, a similar idea came to biologist Harold J. Morowitz of George 
Mason University in Fairfax, Va. He also was drawn to the primitive power of 
the citric acid cycle. Unlike Wachtershauser, Morowitz's first ponderings were 
still steeped in the primordial soup.

 It took prodding from his friend Corliss, now at the Central European 
University in Budapest, for Morowitz to move his envisioned birthplace of 
prebiotic metabolism out of the light and into the ocean depths. That's when he 
turned to his George Mason colleague Robert M. Hazen, who also holds a position 
at Carnegie's Geophysical Laboratory. Hazen had long studied what happens to 
the structures of mineral crystals buried deep inside the Earth, so his 
high-pressure expertise translated easily into methods for testing what might 
happen to chemicals at vents.

 Hazen and Morowitz assembled specialists, each capable of attacking the 
origins-of-life question from a different area of expertise, from several 
institutions. What's more, they are backed by NASA's new Astrobiology 
Institute, which is exploring where and how life may exist throughout the 
universe. "We're trying to use a systematic approach to what is a huge and 
complicated field," Hazen says.

 Their approach recently took advantage of Brandes' focus on nitrogen, another 
important life-building element. Organisms gain nitrogen through reactions 
involving ammonia, a simple combination of nitrogen and hydrogen. In 
Wachtershauser's theoretical assembly line, ammonia is a key player: It helps 
convert compounds from the citric acid cycle into amino acids. Yet few had 
expected ammonia to survive the vent inferno.

 Brandes led the way to proving that expectation false. In the tiny gold 
capsules, he mixed water with nitrogen oxides presumed to be present in ancient 
oceans and added Wachtershauser's sulfide minerals to jump-start any reactions. 
Inside the bomb, heating elements and pneumatic pistons subjected the capsules 
to conditions typical of hydrothermal vents. After only 15 minutes at 500o C 
and a pressure 500 times that at the planet's surface, the experiment created 
ammonia-and lots of it. What's more, the ammonia was stable up to a fiery 800o 
C. The team reported their findings in the Sept. 24, 1998 Nature.

 Once the Carnegie researchers knew that the hydrothermal mix could create 
ammonia, they turned to the next step, in which ammonia combines with pyruvic 
acid to build the amino acid alanine. Again, the scientists mixed their 
ingredients in a gold capsule and heated and squeezed them. Even without a 
catalyst, as much as 40 percent of the pyruvic acid converted to alanine.

 Amino acids made at hydrothermal-vent conditions don't impress the researchers 
who have most enthusiastically promoted the primordial soup hypothesis. They've 
had amino acids in hand for decades. Back in 1953, chemist Stanley L. Miller of 
the University of California, San Diego shot a streak of electricity through a 
laboratory mixture of methane, hydrogen, and ammonia-a replica of the 
primordial atmosphere. This imitation lightning sent chemicals raining down 
into a flask of oceanlike water below, which grew red and yellow with amino 
acids in a week's time.

 Research has since drawn Miller's hypothetical atmosphere into question, 
causing many scientists to doubt the relevance of his findings. Recently, 
scientists have focused on an even more exotic amino acid source: meteorites. 
Chyba is one of several researchers who have evidence that extraterrestrial 
amino acids may have hitched a ride to Earth on far-flung space rocks.

 Amino acids from a variety of sources almost certainly seasoned a broth on the 
planet's surface 4 billion years ago, Chyba says, but he points out that no one 
has ever satisfactorily explained how the widely distributed ingredients linked 
up into proteins. Presumed conditions of primordial Earth would have driven the 
amino acids toward lonely isolation. That's one of the strongest reasons that 
Wachtershauser, Morowitz, and other hydrothermal vent theorists want to move 
the kitchen to the ocean floor. If the process starts down deep at discrete 
vents, they say, it can build amino acids-and link them up-right there.

 Last year, Wachtershauser and Huber did just that. They reported in the July 
31, 1998 Science that at 100o C, they got amino acids to connect into short 
proteinlike chains called peptides. Even so, Bada won't budge from his 
surface-soup stance. He sees no reason why amino acids simmering in pools of 
water on rocky shorelines couldn't link up through just the same reaction. "I 
guarantee that experiment would work just as well at 25o C," says Bada. "It 
would take longer, but you'd make the same product."

 That may be so, Wachtershauser says, but the molecular links are broken nearly 
as fast as they're created in both situations. All the chances lie in the 
blindingly quick activity at the vents, he says. "You throw the dice much more 
often."

 Busily throwing the dice in his laboratory, Wachtershauser is trying to find 
the right metal catalysts that will get his short peptide chains to lengthen 
and reproduce themselves, the ultimate criterion of life. Everyone digging 
around for the origin of life would like to discover the first molecule that 
learned to make copies of itself.

"That's really what the struggle is all about," Wachtershauser says, "and so 
far, it hasn't been found."

 Articles appearing regularly in scientific journals claim to have generated 
self-replicating peptides or RNA strands (SN: 8/10/96, p. 87), but they fail to 
provide a natural source for their compounds or an explanation for what fuels 
them. Brandes, now at the University of Texas Marine Sciences Institute in Port 
Aransas, compares this top-down approach to a caveman coming across a modern 
car and trying to figure out how to make it.

"It would be like taking the engine out of the car, starting it up, and trying 
to see how that engine works," but Carnegie's approach is from the bottom up, 
he says. "What we do is start with the block of iron and try to make a car out 
of that."

 The Carnegie team's next refinement to their iron block is to build a 
laboratory model of a hydrothermal vent. A maze of tubes and flasks will route 
hot, pressurized gases and water through vent minerals to see whether reactions 
that take place inside the gold capsules also happen in a more realistic 
environment. Brandes guesses that one day bottom-up and top-down researchers 
will together forge a complete chain of events-from the simplest raw materials 
to a collection of molecules that qualifies as being alive.

 Yet even if scientists ultimately find a set of steps for the origin of life 
in the laboratory, everyone agrees that it may not replicate what occurred on 
Earth 4 billion years ago.

"I'm optimistic, not that we will ever really know with certainty what happened 
on Earth but that we will have a plausible account to give," Chyba says.

 An account based on hydrothermal forces deep in the sea opens up the 
possibility of life elsewhere in the solar system. While few places may have 
had sunlit ponds, more have evidence of geothermal forces. Prime candidates are 
Mars and Jupiter's ice-covered moon Europa (SN: 11/7/98, p. 296). An upcoming 
mission to Europa will search for a liquid ocean overlying chemical-spewing 
geysers similar to Earth's hydrothermal vents.

 There's an interesting synergy between the experimental results suggesting 
that life originated on Earth's seafloor and speculation about an ocean on 
Europa, Chyba says. "To some extent Europa will provide a test of the 
deep-origins hypothesis."

 From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 2, January 9, 1999, p. 24. Copyright C 1999 
by Science Service.


