Science News Online (1/30/99): Southern twisters: Don't blame La Niña

 January 30, 1999

 Southern twisters: Don't blame La Nina

 By R. Monastersky

 Storms in the southern United States turned vicious this month, spawning 150 
tornadoes and killing 18 people during a time of year when funnel clouds 
normally are a rare sight. Meteorologists are still struggling to explain what 
caused the unprecedented number of January twisters, but they can rule out any 
direct link with the climatic hellcat known as La Nina, a cooling of Pacific 
waters.

 Last year, press reports tied extreme weather-often erroneously-to El Nino, a 
warming of the equatorial Pacific that ended midway through 1998. With the 
Pacific now colder than normal, the question arises whether La Nina should 
shoulder any blame for the severe storms in January, such as the southern 
tornadoes and the 18.6-inch snowfall in Chicago. Last week, a press release 
issued by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) trumpeted: 
"La Nina drives some U.S. winter weather extremes."

 NOAA meteorologists, however, disavow any concrete connection between the 
Pacific conditions and the storms. Joseph T. Schaefer, director of the National 
Weather Service's Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Okla., examined U.S. 
tornado records going back a half century, looking for evidence that January 
tornadoes come more frequently during episodes of La Nina. "From my 49 years of 
data, I find nothing," he says.

 Take Arkansas, for example. Dozens of tornadoes raked the state last week, 
killing seven people. To test for a connection with La Nina, Schaefer searched 
through the database for the months with the most Arkansas tornadoes. Nine of 
the top 11 occurred in normal years, when neither La Nina nor El Nino held sway 
in the Pacific. One of the remaining two months was in a La Nina year, the 
other in an El Nino year.

 Tennessee, also hit by tornadoes this year, showed a similar 
pattern-indicating that the equatorial Pacific had no clear influence on 
tornado frequency.

 Ed O'Lenic, who makes forecasts for NOAA's Climate Prediction Center in Camp 
Springs, Md., says that it is impossible to connect La Nina to any one storm, 
such as the Jan. 2 blizzard in Chicago. He notes, however, that NOAA's 
long-term forecasts were for a general increase in precipitation around the 
Great Lakes and in the Northwest in early winter.

 Forecasters agree that La Nina makes U.S. weather much more variable. The 
colder-than-normal conditions in the equatorial Pacific weaken the jet stream 
that sometimes flows over the southern states and helps keep weather constant. 
Without the strong southern jet, the path of Pacific winds can jump erratically 
as they pass over North America. Researchers are trying to determine whether 
that increases the odds of blizzards.

 Climate models suggest that La Nina will endure at least until June. While 
meteorologists can't say whether to expect more record tornado outbreaks or 
snowfalls, they foresee continuing changeable weather. "I think it's good for 
people to be aware there is a lot of variability and that the potential for 
severe weather still exists," says O'Lenic.


