Science News Online (1/2/99): Good and bad news for migrating monarchs

 January 2, 1999 

 Good and bad news for migrating monarchs

 By S. Simpson

 Each winter the Oyamel forests of central Mexico blaze orange with hundreds of 
millions of monarch butterflies that come to escape colder areas. Their 
stunning wings carry natural chemical tags that are enabling scientists to 
trace the insects to their birthplaces across eastern North America, giving 
clues about where monarch conservation is most needed.

 Leonard I. Wassenaar and Keith A. Hobson of Environment Canada in Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, have used natural chemical tags to study songbird migration (SN: 
12/5/98, p. 356). Their report in the Dec. 22, 1998 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences marks the first time the technique has been applied to 
migrating insects.

"It will allow us to definitively answer questions that we have been just 
nibbling at for decades," says monarch specialist Sandra M. Perez of the 
University of Arizona in Tucson.

 Until now, researchers' primary method for tracking monarch migration has been 
to paste tiny adhesive tags on the butterflies' wings while the insects are up 
north and hope to find the same insects later. This technique revealed the 
monarchs' general migration pattern, but only 125 out of hundreds of thousands 
of tagged butterflies have turned up in Mexico since 1975, when the winter 
colonies were discovered.

"With the [new] technique, every monarch butterfly you see has a 'tag,'" Perez 
says. The chemical tags reflect different concentrations of hydrogen isotopes 
in rainwater across the continent.

 The isotope called deuterium clutches an extra neutron in its nucleus and so 
is heavier than ordinary hydrogen. As a result, water molecules containing 
deuterium tend to fall out of clouds before those bearing hydrogen. For 
example, storm systems that begin over the Gulf of Mexico and work their way 
inland drop more deuterium along the coast than in midcontinent regions.

 The tag is passed along as the water moves from soil to milkweed plants, the 
monarch caterpillar's main food. "You are what you eat, isotopically," 
Wassenaar says. The isotope ratio is constant from the plant to the caterpillar 
and, finally, to the adult butterfly.

 Wassenaar and Hobson matched the isotope tags of 100 monarchs from each of the 
13 winter colonies with those of butterflies captured at the breeding grounds 
the previous summer. The summer origins that the researchers identified 
revealed that each winter colony draws butterflies from all across the breeding 
range, "which is good news for the monarch," Wassenaar says. Logging threatens 
most of the Mexican forest colonies, and researchers had feared that loss of a 
single winter site could strike a fatal blow to an entire breeding population.

 The bad news is that Mexico is not the only country with a 
monarch-conservation problem, says Orley R. Taylor of the University of Kansas 
in Lawrence. At least half of the winter migration stems from the U.S. 
agricultural heartland, between eastern Nebraska and western Pennsylvania. Open 
fields of corn and soybeans are popular spots for milkweed, but the plant may 
soon be wiped out as crops are bioengineered to survive pesticides designed to 
kill all weeds, says Taylor. Loss of the milkweed would threaten the monarch's 
survival.

 From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 1, January 2, 1998, p. 5. Copyright C 1999 by 
Science Service.


