Science News Online (2/20/99): Modus Operandi of an Infamous Drug

 February 20, 1999

 Modus Operandi of an Infamous Drug

 Mutant mice provide clues to how DES wreaked havoc in the womb

 By John Travis

 First, do no harm. Physicians try to adhere religiously to this creed, but 
sometimes the best of intentions go awry.

 In the 1940s, physicians began giving diethylstilbestrol (DES) to pregnant 
women, several million of them in the United States alone. The first synthetic 
version of the hormone estrogen, DES was available as a pill, making it an 
eagerly welcomed drug for the physicians of the time who believed that 
insufficient amounts of estrogen led to a miscarriage. DES grew so popular that 
it was even prescribed for pregnant women not at high risk of a miscarriage and 
for treating conditions such as acne and cancer.

 Although a study in 1953 concluded that DES didn't reduce the miscarriage 
rate, and actually seemed to increase it slightly, physicians continued to give 
the hormone to pregnant women until 1971. That year, another study linked 
several young women's development of a rare cancer of the vagina and cervix to 
their DES exposure while in the womb. Seven months after the study's 
publication, the Food and Drug Administration warned physicians not to 
prescribe DES to pregnant women. Subsequently, hundreds of cases of the cancer 
have been attributed to DES exposure.

 As researchers have followed up on the side effects of the drug, they also 
have found that women exposed as embryos, the so-called DES daughters, may have 
abnormally developed reproductive tracts, causing such problems as infertility 
and miscarriages.

 Although the evidence isn't as definitive, males exposed to DES in the womb 
may not have escaped the drug's wrath, either. Some research has indicated that 
DES sons have a higher-than-normal frequency of reproductive-tract 
abnormalities but no decreased fertility (SN: 5/27/95, p. 324).

 Much like thalidomide, another drug that caused unexpected birth defects when 
given to pregnant women (see ), DES has provided a sobering lesson on the 
importance of thoroughly testing a drug's safety. Yet, despite realizing that 
DES exposes the fetus to an unintended flood of estrogen, scientists have 
remained at a loss to explain exactly how the compound brings about its tragic 
effects.

 In the past decade, however, developmental biologists have made great strides 
in identifying the genes that drive the growth of an embryo. These insights may 
now have solved the mystery of DES. In the November 1998 Nature Genetics, 
scientists present evidence from mouse studies that the synthetic hormone 
suppresses the activity of a gene, called Wnt-7a, that normally plays a vital 
role in the development of the male and female reproductive tracts.

"I think Wnt-7a is probably the primary target of DES," says coauthor David A. 
Sassoon of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.

 While DES is no longer prescribed, DES-like drugs, such as tamoxifen, are now 
used to treat cancers and other illnesses. Moreover, some scientists have 
expressed concern about estrogenlike compounds in the environment (SN: 1/22/94, 
p. 56). Determining DES's modus operandi may be of more than historical 
interest, Sassoon argues.

 Embryonic development is essentially a story of cells telling other cells 
where to go and what roles to take on. Cells communicate these messages by 
secreting proteins, and many of these signals are encoded by a large family of 
genes related to Wnt-7a. In vertebrates, for example, this gene family has 16 
members, notes Sassoon.

 To gauge each gene's embryonic role, researchers have taken to creating mice 
with mutations in Wnt genes. If the gene that was mutated has essential duties 
in development, the mouse often dies as an embryo. If it survives until birth, 
biologists usually can determine the mutated gene's role by looking for 
abnormalities.

 Several years ago, Andrew P. McMahon of Harvard Medical School in Boston and 
his colleagues pursued this so-called gene-knockout strategy to study Wnt-7a. 
The mutant mice survive, but the absence of a working Wnt-7a gene during 
development leads to severe limb malformations, the researchers reported in 
1995. The dorsal and ventral aspects of the limbs are confused. For example, 
hair shows up on the underside of paws.

 A brief remark by McMahon's group captured the attention of Sassoon and his 
colleagues, who had already shown that Wnt-7a is active in the reproductive 
tract of embryonic and adult mice. The report "mentioned, just in passing, that 
the mice were sterile," says Sassoon.

 Intrigued, he approached McMahon about studying the reproductive systems of 
Wnt-7a-knockout mice, a contact that led to the publication of papers by each 
group last year. In the Oct. 15, 1998 Nature, McMahon and his colleague Brian 
A. Parr, now at the University of Colorado at Boulder, describe how the absence 
of Wnt-7a alters the earliest steps in the development of a mouse's 
reproductive tissues.

 Regardless of its sex, a mammalian embryo starts out with the rudiments of 
both the male and female reproductive system. The early embryo, for example, 
has Mullerian and Wolffian ducts. In females, the former develop into the 
oviduct, uterus, cervix, and vagina; in males, the latter give rise to the 
epididymis and vas deferens, tubes that carry sperm from the testes.

 As development proceeds, the embryo establishes its sex, and either the 
Mullerian or Wolffian ducts regress. That's one place where Wnt-7a enters the 
picture. "A male produces a hormone that basically gets rid of the female 
system. The ability to respond to that [hormone] depends upon Wnt-7a," explains 
McMahon.

 In male mice lacking a working copy of the gene, Mullerian ducts persist into 
adulthood as thin tubes paralleling the epididymis and vas deferens. Although 
the male reproductive system seems otherwise normal, the feminine structures 
block the passage of sperm in the vas deferens, causing infertility.

 Both McMahon's group and Sassoon's, which described its results in the August 
1998 Development, also looked at female mice lacking Wnt-7a. The researchers 
found that although the Wolffian ducts regress, the Mullerian ducts don't 
develop normally, leading to dramatic abnormalities in the female reproductive 
system.

 The uterus, for example, doesn't develop the glands that would normally 
secrete substances vital to an embryo's survival. The animals' oviducts-tubes 
that carry eggs to the uterus-are also malformed.

"The oviducts normally look like hollow springs. They're tightly coiled," says 
Sassoon. In female mice lacking Wnt-7a, however, the oviducts were abnormally 
short and made one or no turns instead of the normal seven or eight. Either the 
absence of the uterine glands or the oviducts' abnormality would be sufficient 
to guarantee sterility.

 As Sassoon and his colleagues pondered the developmental changes in the 
Wnt-7a-knockout mice, they looked for reports of similar abnormalities. "We 
kept pulling up papers describing the effects of DES, either in humans or in 
mice. We thought this was probably more than a coincidence," says Sassoon.

 An embryo normally protects itself from its mother's estrogen by producing 
proteins that bind and inactivate the hormone. Unfortunately, the structure of 
DES differs just enough from estrogen that those protective proteins can't 
grasp the drug. Consequently, a pregnant woman exposed to DES blasts her 
developing baby with an onslaught of synthetic hormone.

 Since the maturation of the female reproductive tract occurs in response to 
estrogen, it's not surprising that DES interferes with this process. It has 
long been recognized that DES can turn on or off some genes in cells that 
respond to estrogen. The mystery has been, what genes?

 To test whether the drug works through Wnt-7a, Sassoon and his colleagues gave 
DES daily to mice during days 15 to 18 of pregnancy. They then compared the 
DES-exposed female mouse pups with unexposed pups missing Wnt-7a. The resulting 
reproductive-tract abnormalities in the two groups, such as malformed oviducts 
and missing uterine glands, closely resembled each other, says Sassoon.

 The investigators next determined that uteri of newborn pups exposed to DES in 
the womb had unusually low Wnt-7a activity, although the gene's activity 
returned to normal 5 days after birth. That interference apparently lasted long 
enough for DES to cause major problems in the maturing female reproductive 
system.

"DES turns off Wnt-7a at a critical period of development," concludes Sassoon.

 The investigator cautions that a temporary suppression of Wnt-7a may not be 
the full explanation. The Wnt-7a-knockout females have a smaller-than-normal 
reproductive tract, while that of DES-exposed pups is larger than normal, for 
example.

 Then, there's the cancer issue. DES daughters have an increased risk of 
developing clear-cell carcinoma, a rare cancer of the vagina or cervix. Not 
surprisingly then, many mice that are exposed to DES while they are embryos 
later exhibit precancerous cells in their vaginas, as do most Wnt-7a-knockout 
mice.

 Yet a mouse study last year found that DES granddaughters-the daughters of 
female mice exposed to DES as embryos-also face an increased chance of 
developing cancers of the genital tract even though they are free of any 
reproductive-tract abnormalities.

 Since Sassoon believes DES does not mutate Wnt-7a but only turns it off 
temporarily, he's perplexed that the increased cancer risk is passed on to the 
next generation.

 In addition to testing Wnt-7a's connection to DES, Sassoon is examining the 
role of other Wnt genes in the female reproductive system. He's created mice 
with mutations in Wnt-5a and Wnt-4, the other Wnt genes known to be active in 
the female reproductive tract.

 Like people, mice carry two copies of each Wnt gene. In different mouse 
strains, Sassoon mutated one copy of each. By crossing those strains, he 
created mice with combinations of Wnt mutations. "They come down with disorders 
that look like much more common reproductive pathologies," notes Sassoon, who 
hasn't yet published this research.

 Some people might wonder why researchers continue to investigate the effects 
of DES on pregnancies long after physicians abandoned its use. One motivation, 
argues Sassoon, is a growing concern that estrogenlike agents in the 
environment may alter prenatal development.

 Sassoon also notes that tamoxifen, the most widely prescribed drug to prevent 
breast cancer recurrence (SN: 4/11/98, p. 228), is a DES-like compound that has 
estrogenic activity. There is evidence that tamoxifen raises a woman's risk of 
developing uterine cancer (SN: 11/23/96, p. 335).

 Through understanding the genes that DES affects, Sassoon believes, scientists 
can learn how to create a safer form of tamoxifen. "We could much more 
intelligently design a drug," he says.

 Perhaps the only drug more infamous than DES is thalidomide, a compound that 
caused severe birth defects in thousands of infants when prescribed to pregnant 
women as a sedative and nausea medication in the late 1950s and early 1960s. 
Thalidomide-affected babies were born with stunted legs or arms or even with 
rudimentary flippers in place of hands or feet. Remarkably, as in the case of 
DES, scientists have yet to unravel the details of how thalidomide interferes 
with the growth of an embryo.

 That issue has become more pressing of late, as thalidomide has gotten a new 
lease on life. In recent years, researchers have found that the compound may 
help treat conditions including leprosy, brain cancer, AIDS, and rheumatoid 
arthritis (SN: 12/24&31/94, p. 424).

 Investigators are now seeking safer but equally potent versions of the 
compound. "If we can declaw an analog [of thalidomide] so that it is nontoxic 
to the embryos, we will truly have a wonder drug," says Trent D. Stephens of 
Idaho State University in Pocatello.

 The best way to design a safe analog, however, would be to begin by explaining 
why the original is so devastating. Stephens has a new theory that may do just 
that.

 Over the years, scientists trying to explain how thalidomide causes birth 
defects have put forth more than 2 dozen theories, Stephens says. His own 
contribution, described last year at the International Limb Development and 
Regeneration Conference in Sun Valley, Idaho, marries many of those theories.

 Although the issue remains controversial, most researchers believe that 
thalidomide does not directly mutate DNA. Studies have shown, however, that the 
compound can transiently slip in between nucleotides, the building blocks of 
DNA. For unknown reasons, the drug seems to prefer to move into DNA sequences 
rich in guanine (G) over the other three nucleotides: adenine (A), cytosine 
(C), and thymine (T). Other research has shown that thalidomide can alter the 
activity of genes encoding proteins involved in cell-cell adhesion and others 
that control cell growth.

 Seeking to pull those pieces of data together, Stephens and his colleague 
Bradley J. Filmore looked at how the genes affected by thalidomide might be 
regulated. Every gene has its own promoters, specialized DNA sequences that, 
when activated by particular proteins, help determine a gene's activity.

"We were on a fishing expedition. We were wondering if there was anything 
unique about these promoters," explains Stephens.

 While the promoter sequences for many genes remain unknown, more than 90 
percent of those documented have promoters containing either the nucleotide 
sequence GATA or CCAAT or both, notes Stephens. As he and Filmore studied the 
various genes affected by thalidomide, however, they noticed that many had 
unusual promoters. Instead of containing GATA or CCAAT, their promoters were 
rich in guanines.

"The more we followed this trail, the more amazing it seemed to us," says 
Stephens. Thalidomide's well-known penchant for causing only specific kinds of 
birth defects could stem from its specificity for this small subset of 
promoters, he says.

 The genes scrutinized by Stephens and Filmore as possible thalidomide targets 
participate in a pathway of biochemical signals leading to the growth of new 
blood vessels, a process called angiogenesis. Thalidomide is widely known to 
inhibit angiogenesis in adult humans and animals: Cancer physicians use the 
drug because it deprives tumors of a blood supply.

 In embryos, Stephens hypothesizes, thalidomide attaches to guanine-rich 
promoters and interferes with the activity of genes necessary for angiogenesis. 
As a result, he concludes, the drug "shuts off circulation to developing limbs."

"Inhibition of angiogenesis by thalidomide has never been demonstrated to occur 
in the embryo," counters Diether Neubert of the Free University Berlin in 
Germany. His team has shown that the drug alters the distribution of 
cell-adhesion molecules on monkey embryonic cells.

"We are not in need of more hypotheses," Neubert says. "There are already too 
many. We need good experimental data."

 Generation of such data is easier said than done. Unlike DES, thalidomide 
doesn't cause birth defects in mice, making it difficult to study. Researchers 
must test their theories about the drug in monkeys, rabbits, or chickens.

 Still, resolving this pharmaceutical mystery is vital, says Stephens. He notes 
that thalidomide-affected babies continue to be born in developing countries 
where the drug has continued to be a popular treatment for leprosy.

 Moreover, the continuing confusion over the compound stymies efforts to 
prevent similar tragedies. "Because we don't understand the mechanism of 
thalidomide, we run the risk of a new thalidomide coming on the market at any 
time," says Stephens.


