Science News Online (2/20/99): Dioxin can harm tooth development

 February 20, 1999

 Dioxin can harm tooth development

 By J. Raloff

 In the early 1980s, a Finnish dentist noticed that an unusually large share of 
her young patients had soft, discolored molars. Because the affected teeth had 
emerged bearing structural defects, she suspected that during infancy, when the 
teeth were forming beneath the gums, the children had been exposed to some 
toxic compound.

 The culprit now appears to be breast milk tainted with dioxins, says Satu 
Alaluusua of the University of Helsinki Institute of Dentistry. She explained 
her team's findings in an interview this week.

 Several groups of epidemiologists worldwide have reported a similar 
yellowish-brown discoloration of teeth in children exposed to extremely high 
concentrations of dioxinlike compounds. To probe whether the defects that she 
was observing might reflect a more moderate exposure to the same pollutants, 
Alaluusua began exposing adult rats to TCDD, the most potent dioxin. "We saw a 
similar mottling of teeth," as well as malformations in their mineral 
structure, she told Science News.

 To affect human molars, exposures must begin in early childhood. So, Alaluusua 
tracked down children whose mothers' breast milk had been analyzed 6 years 
earlier in a World Health Organization study. She correlated the incidence of 
the defects in children's newly emerging molars with milk concentrations of 
dioxins and furans, a class of dioxinlike compounds. Overall, 17 of the 102 
children studied bore soft, mottled teeth, which will remain permanently 
vulnerable to cavities.

 In the Jan. 16 Lancet, Alaluusua's team reports that children who had 
encountered the most dioxin in their mother's milk had the highest rate of 
these tooth defects. Breast-milk exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls, another 
group of dioxinlike chemicals, played little if any role.

 The group has also homed in on dioxin's target. The pollutant affects cellular 
receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF), a hormonelike substance that 
contributes to development of many tissues.

 The researchers removed embryonic tooth tissue from normal mice and from those 
lacking active genes for the EGF receptor. After exposure to high 
concentrations of TCDD, only the tissue able to produce EGF receptors matured 
into structures with the telltale defects, they reported in the December 1998 
Laboratory Investigation.

 The Finnish team's new data "are very exciting in a scientific sense-and very 
concerning in a public-health sense-because they demonstrate effects from 
[dioxin] exposures at background levels," says Linda Birnbaum, a toxicologist 
with the Environmental Protection Agency in Research Triangle Park, N.C.

 Indeed, she notes, the average 50 parts per trillion (ppt) dioxin 
concentration-and the maximum of 258 ppt-that the team measured in the fat of 
Finnish women's breast milk are within the range at which dioxin taints fat, 
including that in breast milk, in the U.S. population.

 Moreover, Birnbaum notes, the EGF-receptor link to tooth defects "is perfectly 
plausible" given that a number of studies-including some of her own-have shown 
that dioxin can alter the number of EGF receptors in various developing 
tissues, including the tooth buds of experimental animals.


