Science News Online (1/9/99): Hubble Eyes Signs of Nearby Planets

 January 9, 1999

 Hubble Eyes Signs of Nearby Planets

 By R. Cowen

 About the last thing Brad A. Smith expected to find when he examined the 
region around a young, nearby star was a large-scale replica of one of the 
rings of Saturn.

 Like the planet's icy rings, the band of dust around the star HR 4796A, some 
220 light-years from Earth, is narrow and has sharp edges. And, just as 
Saturn's rings are corralled by the gravity of closely orbiting moons, Smith 
and his colleagues suggest that the stellar dust ring owes its slender shape to 
the guiding influence of one or more massive bodies, most likely fledgling 
planets.

 Although the star has only about twice the mass of the sun, its ring lies 
about 70 astronomical units (AU), or 70 times the Earth-sun distance, from the 
parent star. "That's way out there, and in our solar system, we don't see 
bodies of any significant size beyond the orbits of Neptune and Pluto," says 
Smith, a researcher at the University of Hawaii in Honolulu. Those planets 
orbit 30 to 50 AU from the sun.

 The dust ring, recorded by an infrared camera on the Hubble Space Telescope, 
is one of several new Hubble findings suggesting that planets may be circling 
three youthful, nearby stars. The discoveries were reported this week in 
Austin, Texas, at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society.

 All three stars have for years been known to emit infrared light at a higher 
intensity than can be accounted for by starlight alone. That characteristic 
indicates that the bodies are swaddled by dust, which absorbs visible and 
ultraviolet starlight and reradiates it at longer wavelengths. Planets are 
thought to coalesce from swirling disks of dust, gas, and ice around newborn 
stars.

 The Hubble camera was crucial for the new observations. By using a mask to 
block starlight, it can search stars' surroundings for faint, near-infrared 
light reflected by planets and the disks from which they arise.

 Perhaps the most intriguing of the three findings is a direct image of what 
may prove to be a planet. Eric E. Becklin of the University of California, Los 
Angeles unveiled a picture showing a reddish point of light lying close to a 
star in the TW Hydrae Association. This is the nearest known cluster of young 
stars, roughly 170 light-years from Earth.

 Imaged at three near-infrared wavelengths, the point of light is about 150 AU 
from the star. The observations suggest that the object could be about twice as 
massive as Jupiter.

"There needs to be follow-up work to determine the nature of this object," says 
theorist Alan P. Boss of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.). Last 
June, another team using the same camera imaged a candidate planet near a pair 
of stars (SN: 6/6/98, p. 357).

 In a separate study, Becklin and his colleagues found that a huge disk of dust 
surrounding the star HD 141569 contains a large dark band. Among the handful of 
disks imaged around young, fully developed stars, this is the first to show a 
clear gap. It is roughly the width of the solar system and lies about 250 AU 
from the star, which is 320 light-years from Earth. The disk extends to about 
350 AU.

 Becklin and his colleagues, including Alycia J. Weinberger and Murray D. 
Silverstone, both of UCLA, argue that the void was cleared out by an unseen 
object, most likely a planet, lying in or near the gap. Becklin told Science 
News that his team found no evidence of a companion star or massive brown dwarf 
in the vicinity of the star. This "helps bolster the case" that a planet is 
responsible for clearing the region, says Boss.

 The planet "could be sweeping up the dust and rocks from the disk as it 
travels in its orbit around the star, or the gravity of the planet could knock 
the dust out of one part of the disk," notes Weinberger.

"The most ready explanation is that an embedded planet is gravitationally 
clearing material to either side," agrees Eugene Chiang of the California 
Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

 Alternatively, speculates Becklin, this disk region might look dark simply 
because the material there has a different composition and reflects less light.

 Before taking the Hubble image, Silverstone and his collaborators had studied 
HD 141569 using one of the twin Keck telescopes atop Hawaii's Mauna Kea. 
Observing the disk at longer infrared wavelengths than the Hubble images 
recorded, the telescope detected the glow from the inner, warmer part of the 
disk, out to a radius of about 75 AU.

 The Keck image essentially leaves off where the Hubble image begins, notes 
Weinberger, and the two together may shed light on the size of dust particles 
and their density throughout the disk. Similarly, a Keck image of the disk 
surrounding HR 4796A is helping to reveal the composition and size of the 
particles in that system (SN: 4/25/98, p. 260).

 The three findings pose a puzzle: The planets suggested by the images would 
all be much farther from their parent stars than Pluto lies from the sun. At 
such distances, the raw material for making planets thins dramatically. There 
may simply not be enough dust, gas, and ice at such remote regions to make 
planetary bodies, says Boss.

 In addition, disk material orbiting at great distances from a star moves 
slowly. The collisions required to pack material together to make a planet are 
not as frequent as they are in the inner disk. Thus, it would seem, planets 
could not be made quickly in outlying regions. Yet none of the three stars is 
older than 20 million years, a period that may be too short to make a planet at 
those distances.

 Theorists, says Smith, "will have an interesting time trying to understand how 
you can form planetary bodies at such great distances around stars so young." 
In the meantime, Hubble's near-infrared camera has run out of coolant and has 
ceased operation.

 From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 2, January 9, 1999, p. 20. Copyright C 1999 
by Science Service.


