Science News Online (2/20/99): Martian close-up images tell a watery tale

 February 20, 1999

 Martian close-up images tell a watery tale

 By R. Cowen

 The sharpest images of Mars ever recorded from an orbiting spacecraft suggest 
that two ingredients deemed necessary for life-water and a source of heat-were 
once plentiful on or just beneath the surface of the Red Planet.

 Planetary scientists have known since the 1970s, thanks to images taken by the 
Mariner 9 and Viking Orbiter spacecraft, that dried-up channels crisscross much 
of the Martian surface. Scientists agree that some channels are the result of 
flash floods, but the resolution of these images is too poor to determine 
whether a steady flow of water could have carved any of the features.

 The new pictures provide the first compelling evidence that in some regions 
liquid water flowed on the surface for an extended period, perhaps millions of 
years. The pictures were taken by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft during 
the past year as it descended through the planet's upper atmosphere. Surveyor 
is scheduled to begin its main 2-year mission, compiling a global map of Mars, 
on March 8.

 The narrow, wandering paths of several dry channels seen by Surveyor's camera 
"are much more supportive of sustained erosion, sustained water flow" than of 
floods, says Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif.

 One striking example, he notes, is a 200-meter-wide trough that Surveyor spied 
at the bottom of a canyon called Nanedi Vallis (SN: 2/7/98, p. 84). "It 
certainly looks as though we have a river channel that meandered across a plane 
and [that] the flow was sustained so that the meander got deeper and deeper."

 Carr and his colleagues, including Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science 
Systems in San Diego, describe these and other findings in the Feb. 18 Nature.

 The Surveyor pictures also indicate that the water that once filled these 
channels came from underground, probably frozen, reservoirs rather than rain or 
snow falling from the atmosphere. Precipitation would have created an abundance 
of tiny tributaries as well as larger channels, but Surveyor's camera has found 
a dearth of the small structures.

"It's clear the source [of water] is beneath the surface," comments Maria T. 
Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 Other Surveyor findings may explain how frozen water in underground reservoirs 
could have melted and come to the surface. Using the images to examine in 
unprecedented detail a 4,000-kilometer-long Martian canyon called Valles 
Marineris, Alfred S. McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson and his 
colleagues found that thick layers of material form the canyon's walls.

 The researchers, who include Malin, Carr, and William K. Hartmann of the 
Planetary Science Institute in Tucson, suggest that the layers were mainly 
formed by volcanic lava. If their hypothesis is correct, Mars was much more 
volcanically active during its first billion or so years than scientists have 
thought.

 Frequent and widespread volcanic activity could have melted underground 
deposits of frozen water that then found their way to the surface, notes Steven 
W. Squyres of Cornell University.

 Hartmann and his colleagues also have tentative evidence that some volcanic 
eruptions might still be going on today. Using Surveyor images to count the 
number of small craters, an indicator of how long ago a volcanically active 
region last erupted, Hartmann finds that some places on Mars spewed lava within 
the past 100 million years. He describes the findings both in Nature and the 
March Meteoritics and Planetary Science.

 If volcanism is continuing-even in just a few small regions-it could up the 
odds that some places on Mars have hot springs not far from the surface, 
offering "nice, hot water for microbes," Hartmann says.


