Science News Online (1/9/99): Formaldehyde: Some surprises at home

 January 9, 1999

 Formaldehyde: Some surprises at home

 By J. Raloff

 It's hard to avoid exposure to formaldehyde, a respiratory irritant and 
suspected carcinogen. It protects latex paints from mildew and inhibits 
wrinkles in permanent-press fabrics. It's also a key ingredient in many 
insulating foams, durable automotive resins, and glued-wood construction 
materials.

 A new study finds that although manufacturers have in recent years cut 
formaldehyde emissions from some of its most notorious sources-such as 
particleboard-many common consumer products still release copious amounts. 
Indeed, one of the big surprises was the amount coming from certain floor 
finishes, observes Thomas J. Kelly, a chemist who led the new analysis.

 Under contract to the state of California, Kelly's team at Battelle Memorial 
Institute in Columbus, Ohio, measured 24-hour formaldehyde emissions from 55 
domestic consumer and construction products. While polyurethane floor finishes 
don't emit the toxicant, he found, the more durable acid-cured resin finishes 
do. Until they dry, they can spew up to 1.2 grams per square meter per 
hour-nearly 1,000 times more than bare particleboard.

 Moreover, he notes, refinishing a home's floors with this product could 
saturate other surfaces-walls, furniture, carpeting, even toys-with 
formaldehyde, allowing it to reenter the air long after the floors had dried.

 Wet fingernail hardeners and polishes also proved to be big emitters. A 
3-inch-square coating emitted far more formaldehyde-between 50 and 800 
micrograms-than did an equal area of particleboard or veneer-covered plywood, 
the Battelle scientists report in the Jan. 1 Environmental Science & 
Technology. While this can offer individuals-from fashion-conscious teens to 
professional manicurists-a big slug of the toxicant, nail treatments coat small 
areas and the exposures are short-lived. By contrast, plywood, particleboard 
cabinets, and new plastic-laminate counters not only cover relatively large 
areas but also emit measurable formaldehyde continuously for days to weeks.

 Other major sources of formaldehyde included permanent-press shirts and 
draperies. While a single washing reduced a shirt's formaldehyde emissions by 
60 percent, Kelly notes that draperies might never get washed. Pre-pasted 
wallpaper, while wet, also emitted substantial amounts of the toxicant-nearly 
700 Mg per square meter per hour.

 Kelly's data on the effect of washing permanent-press fabric "is nice 
information that we can pass along," notes Peggy L. Jenkins, who manages the 
Indoor Air Quality Program at California's Air Resources Board in Sacramento. 
The main use of the new data, she says, "will be to improve and revise our 
guidance to the public" regarding what to buy.

 While the recommended exposure limit of 0.5 parts per million in air will not 
change, she says, "we have, with this new information, a little more meat and 
potatoes" on where big exposures may occur. For instance, she says, consumers 
may want to ask more questions about floor finishes or cabinet materials, 
instructing their contractor to use products that emit less formaldehyde.

 From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 2, January 9, 1999, p. 22. Copyright C 1999 
by Science Service.


