Science News Online (3/13/99): Enzyme disables excess amino acid

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 11 (March 13, 1999)

 Enzyme disables excess amino acid

 By N. Seppa

 Phenylalanine, an amino acid that is essential to the body, requires precise 
control. Children who get too little phenylalanine in their diet fail to grow 
properly. Retaining too much can cause brain damage. Most people can dispose of 
any surplus phenylalanine, but those with a genetic disorder called 
phenylketonuria (PKU) lack the enzyme that breaks down the excess.

 Scientists have now engineered bacteria to produce an enzyme that might 
replace the one PKU patients lack. In the March 2 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, researchers report that injections of the enzyme reduced 
blood concentrations of phenylalanine by roughly half in a dozen mice unable to 
break down the amino acid. The scientists then achieved similar results by 
giving the mice the substitute enzyme in food, says study coauthor Charles R. 
Scriver, a geneticist and pediatrician at Montreal Children's Hospital and 
McGill University.

 A half century ago, scientists were thrilled to discover that the neurological 
risks of PKU could be avoided if children adhered to a diet devoid of meat, 
fish, dairy products, breads, nuts, and many other foods. Maintaining such a 
diet is difficult, however, and PKU children also must consume an 
unpleasant-tasting food additive to get adequate protein.

 To develop an alternative approach, the scientists added a yeast gene to 
Escherichia coli bacteria. The E. coli then manufactured an enzyme that breaks 
down phenylalanine in a simpler manner than the process directed by its human 
counterpart.

"How to move forward with clinical development of the enzyme is still a 
question," says study coauthor Robert Heft, a molecular biologist and president 
of IBEX Technologies in Montreal. "The mice data predict a dose which would be 
too high in humans to be commercially feasible." The researchers also don't 
know whether effective concentrations of the enzyme could have harmful side 
effects, he says.

 Moreover, the substitute enzyme "might be seen by the human body as a foreign 
body . . . and might induce immunoreactivity," says Harvey L. Levy of 
Children's Hospital in Boston.

 The genetic disorder affects roughly 1 in 12,000 babies born in North America. 
For 35 years, U.S. newborns have been screened for PKU. Those with the enzyme 
deficiency are put on the special diet. Once PKU patients reach adolescence, 
some go off the diet with few ill effects, Scriver says. However, some adults 
with PKU begin to lose the ability to concentrate well, have trouble planning, 
and may even show short-term memory loss, he adds.


