Science News Online (3/20/99): A Stirring Tale from inside Earth

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 12 (March 20, 1999)

 A Stirring Tale from inside Earth

 By R. Monastersky

 In the quest to solve one of Earth's biggest puzzles, a team of geophysicists 
has proposed a new theory for how heat escapes from the planet's scorching 
depths. The hypothesis, backed up by fresh discoveries, has the potential to 
douse a debate that has burned since the concept of plate tectonics 
revolutionized earth science in the 1960s.

 For decades, researchers have tried to discover exactly how heat leaks upward 
through the great rocky bulk of the planet, called the mantle. Although the 
mantle is solid stone, the intense heat causes the rock to flow slowly.

 Most seismologists, who peer inside the planet by taking advantage of 
earthquake waves, see evidence that mantle rock mixes like boiling water in a 
pot. The hot rock, they say, rises from the bottom of the mantle to the top, 
cools off, and then sinks back down to complete a current of convection.

 Researchers who study the chemistry of lavas, however, argue that the mantle 
resembles a double boiler, with separate upper and lower layers that each have 
their own systems of convection currents. In this case, the rock of the lower 
mantle, below 660 kilometers in depth, would not mix with that of the upper 
mantle.

 In the new hypothesis, a team of researchers agrees with the double boiler 
system, except they picture the division much deeper and bumpier than 
previously thought. "The model reconciles the geochemical observations with the 
seismologic observations that have been difficult to reconcile for so long," 
says lead author Louise H. Kellogg of the University of California, Davis. 
Kellogg worked with Bradford H. Hager and Rob D. van der Hilst of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. They publish their report in the March 
19 Science.

 According to Kellogg and her coworkers, the mantle has separated itself at a 
depth of about 1,600 km. Below that undulating partition lies a 1,300-km-thick 
layer of primitive mantle rock that represents what much of the planet was like 
in its infancy. Rock above the 1,600-km demarcation, however, has gotten stale, 
like old chewing gum. Over the 4.5-billion-year history of Earth, the upper 
half of the mantle has lost much of its allotment of gases and other important 
elements, which have congregated in Earth's crust and atmosphere.

 Kellogg's team used a computer model to simulate double-layer convection, 
which carries heat to the surface. In their experiment, the two layers remain 
separate for billions of years-the geological equivalents of oil and water.

 In the past, researchers have placed the hypothetical boundary at 660 km 
because that is a natural break point where rock gets squeezed into a more 
compact structure. Geochemists supported this concept because lavas suggest 
that the mantle contains a hidden reservoir of pristine rock. Seismic images, 
however, show pieces of ocean crust sinking well past the 660-km depth-leading 
the seismologists to reject the idea of a boundary at that level.

 A deeper separation may prove more palatable. Although sinking ocean crust 
does breach the 660-km level, it meets some type of barrier below 1,600 km, 
according to a separate report in Science by van der Hilst and Hrafnkell 
Karason of MIT. Moreover, analysis of earthquake waves indicates that the 
lowermost mantle contains different rock than the upper two-thirds, they say.

 In a third Science paper, a Japanese and a British researcher report finding a 
thin sheet of rock, which they interpret to be old ocean crust, sitting about 
1,400 to 1,600 km below the Pacific seafloor. Kellogg notes that this depth is 
just above the proposed boundary between the primitive lower mantle and the 
stale mantle rock above. "You might expect to see old crust piled up there," 
she says.

 The new hypothesis has given geoscientists a different target on which to 
focus their attention. "It is an important model that we need to test," says 
Kenneth C. Creager, a seismologist at the University of Washington in Seattle.

 That sentiment is echoed by Albrecht Hofmann of the Max Planck Institute for 
Chemistry in Mainz, Germany. "As a geochemist, I'm quite excited about 
exploring the further consequences of all this."


