Science News Online (2/6/99): DNA's Evolutionary Dilemma

 February 6, 1999

 DNA's Evolutionary Dilemma

 Genetic studies collide with the mystery of human evolution

 By Bruce Bower

 Just a few years ago, genetic researchers assumed the status of a scientific 
Supreme Court in the debate over humanity's prehistoric roots. The coils of 
human DNA appeared to have hardened into a molecular gavel with which these 
scientists could issue a final ruling on how best to explain the evolution of 
modern Homo sapiens.

 During the late 1980s, initial studies of global DNA diversity encouraged a 
vigorous bout of gavel pounding. One after another, investigators concluded 
that modern humans probably arose in Africa around 200,000 years ago and then 
spread elsewhere, replacing Neandertals and any other species in our 
evolutionary past. Analyses of mitochondrial DNA-inherited only through the 
maternal line-in people from different parts of the world traced the origin of 
these genes back to one or a few African women dubbed "mitochondrial Eve."

 Decades of anthropological debate over modern human origins that was based on 
interpretations of measurements and a host of bumps and grooves on ancient 
fossils teetered on the verge of irrelevance.

 However, even some admirers of mitochondrial Eve now say that the jury is out 
on whether state-of-the-art DNA studies can live up to their early billing. 
Accumulating data prove compatible with either of the two main theories of how 
H. sapiens came about.

 The recent African-origin model championed by many genetic researchers relies 
on genetic findings that fit just as easily into a contrasting multiregional 
model. That is, populations of H. sapiens living in different parts of Africa, 
Asia, and Europe interbred enough over at least the past 1 million years to 
evolve collectively as a single species. The various populations around the 
world derived from even older ancestors of H. sapiens in this scenario.

 Practitioners of what has been dubbed anthropological genetics now operate 
with a sense of caution and a hunger for better explanations of how 
evolutionary forces produce genetic diversity among individuals and groups.

"A lot of us have been too eager to assume that a strict out-of-Africa model is 
correct because it's compatible with the genetic data, without considering that 
the data also fit with the multiregional theory," says anthropologist John H. 
Relethford of the State University of New York at Oneonta. "It's time to go 
back to the drawing board on this issue."

 A fundamental conflict between the two current theories-each of which has 
several proposed variations on its theme-lies in their differing assumptions 
about the evolutionary significance of genetic differences among individuals 
and populations, Relethford asserts. DNA analyses appear unable to determine 
which perspective proves superior, he says.

 According to the more common assumption, which supports recent African origins 
for humanity, DNA disparities between modern populations arose as prehistoric 
populations split into distinct regional groups, which then rarely interbred. 
Computer programs retrace this tree-like evolutionary pattern back to a common 
genetic ancestor, based on estimates of the presumed rate at which particular 
DNA regions undergo change.

 Such reconstructions of an evolutionary tree branching from a single ancestor 
have hinged on evidence that sub-Saharan Africans have accumulated more 
variations in their genetic makeup than any other geographic group. According 
to the theory, they therefore have existed as a relatively separate population 
for a longer time. Moreover, African DNA diverges in particularly pronounced 
ways from the genetic material of people living elsewhere in the world, the 
presumed result of a longer period of African evolution.

 Beginning with the first reported branching analysis in 1987, directed by 
Rebecca L. Cann of the University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu, evolutionary 
trees portray all modern H. sapiens populations as descendants of a single 
African population living 100,000 to 200,000 years ago. At some more recent 
time, part of the original African group departed its homeland and trekked into 
Asia. Further splits, migration, and occasional interbreeding between some 
human groups yielded distinctive human populations now found throughout the 
world.

 Only about 10,000 breeding adults comprised the founding block of H. sapiens, 
according to these investigations. That number could not have supported the 
network of interbreeding populations proposed in the multiregional model.

 The alternative perspective on these same genetic data, however, favors the 
multiregional picture of human evolution. It holds that genetic variation 
within and among groups arises from low but consistent levels of interbreeding 
combined with the buildup in regional groups of random changes in the makeup of 
DNA.

 Proponents of this view argue that Africa's greater genetic diversity arose 
because more people inhabited Africa than any other continent during the rise 
of H. sapiens, not because the African population is older. DNA determinations 
of ancient population sizes represent conservative estimates that may turn out 
to be unreliable, these scientists argue.

 The standoff between contrasting genetic perspectives shows no signs of 
resolution, Relethford contends. Attempts to confirm presumed splits of 
prehistoric human populations face particular difficulty, he says. However our 
species originated, it's likely that interbreeding has occurred among dispersed 
human populations during the past 100,000 years. The resulting jumbling of DNA 
traits and patterns has diminished the reliability of reconstructed 
evolutionary trees and estimates of their ages, in Relethford's view.

 Researchers have for decades studied DNA diversity in the composition of genes 
linked to specific blood groups, proteins, enzymes, and immune traits. Only 
about 50 of these classical genetic markers exist, too few for a thorough 
analysis of human genetic history, says anthropological geneticist Joanna L. 
Mountain of Stanford University. Over the past decade, the scientific spotlight 
has shifted from classical markers to mitochondrial DNA.

 This small part of the human genome is packaged outside the nuclei of cells in 
the energy-generating mitochondria.

 It looks particularly promising to researchers because it is passed along 
without the molecular reshuffling that occurs in nuclear DNA each generation. 
Because eggs, but not sperm, carry mitochondria, mitochondrial DNA is passed 
along only from mothers.

 Mitochondrial DNA shows a great deal of individual variability, which has 
buttressed assertions that it can help to trace the evolutionary history of 
human females. Researchers have largely believed that mitochondrial DNA changes 
occur randomly and accumulate at a constant rate in isolated populations, 
making them suitable for dating ancient population splits.

 But mitochondrial DNA may not be so predictable, according to some 
researchers. Sections of its sequence of nucleotides undergo surprisingly rapid 
changes, even within one or a few generations, argues Neil Howell of the 
University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston. Mitochondrial DNA alterations 
may not tick away like hands on a reasonably accurate evolutionary clock, 
Howell maintains.

 Some of these genetic-sequence variations have spread through populations with 
a speed suggesting that they somehow aid the survival of their bearers, he 
adds. If natural selection has reshaped the mitochondrial landscape over 
relatively short spans of time, it raises serious doubts about the accuracy of 
estimated ages for evolutionary trees and sizes of ancient populations.

 Advocates of evolutionary branching, such as Mark Stoneking of the Max Planck 
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, say that feverish 
bursts of genetic change crop up only at certain mitochondrial "hot spots" that 
are not crucial to their findings.

"The best genetic evidence continues to point toward a recent African origin 
for modern humans," Stoneking asserts.

 Yet even outside the mitochondrial realm, molecular evidence gets spun in 
different directions. A prime example concerns a study of nuclear DNA published 
in the September 1997 American Journal of Human Genetics.

 Rosalind M. Harding of John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, England, and her 
colleagues examined a nucleotide sequence including the beta-globin gene, which 
contributes to immune functioning. Since nuclear DNA builds up variations at a 
considerably slower pace than its mitochondrial counterpart, the researchers 
were able to reconstruct an evolutionary tree with much older roots than those 
of mitochondrial trees.

 Analyzing DNA samples from Africa, Asia, and Europe, Harding's group estimated 
that a common ancestor of modern beta-globin gene sequences originated in 
Africa around 800,000 years ago. Asian origins of this DNA region extend back 
more than 200,000 years, according to their analysis.

 This pattern fits best with the multiregional evolution model, the scientists 
say. Modern humans had apparently spread through much of Asia by the time of 
what would have been mitochondrial Eve's debut. Differences in overall 
beta-globin diversity between Africa and Asia are modest at best, reflecting 
the unifying effect of consistent interbreeding, they conclude.

 In contrast, Stoneking argues that Harding's data imply an initial spread of 
H. sapiens from Africa to Asia around 200,000 years ago, perhaps shortly after 
mitochondrial Eve made her mark in Africa. He contends that beta-globin 
sequences in Africa trace back to the time of H.erectus, a species that 
preceded H. sapiens.

 A recent analysis of rapidly changing nuclear DNA segments in Chinese citizens 
lends support to Stoneking's argument (SN: 10/3/98, p. 212). It portrays East 
Asians as evolving from a single population in southeast Asia that had 
previously migrated out of Africa.

 That study and most other genetic explorations suffer a fatal flaw, holds Alan 
R. Templeton, a geneticist at Washington University in St. Louis. Researchers 
typically run tree-building computer programs without first checking whether 
the genetic data conform better to their underlying assumption-that a 
prehistoric split of Africans and non-Africans yielded separate breeding 
populations-or to the alternative possibility that recurrent, low levels of 
interbreeding have forged genetic ties among widespread human groups.

 Genetic surveys and new statistical analyses of DNA trees, reported by 
Templeton in the November 1998 American Anthropologist, indicate that human 
groups have always interbred to some extent. The most frequent genetic 
exchanges, predictably, have occurred among populations in closest proximity, 
he finds. If interbreeding had not occurred in this manner, prehistoric 
migrations would have yielded especially close genetic links between some 
far-flung groups.

 Templeton has devised a statistical technique for picking out geographic 
patterns in the spread of genes throughout the branches of evolutionary trees. 
He says that his method distinguishes between the genetic influences of a 
sudden expansion of a population into new regions-as in the recent 
African-origins model-and those of sustained interbreeding that was most common 
in groups separated by short distances.

 Templeton's reanalysis of data from other researchers on both mitochondrial 
DNA and the paternally inherited Y chromosome shows that genetic differences 
between populations are generally modest, but they are greatest in those groups 
that lived furthest from one another. So, for instance, East African pygmies 
and Melanesians (who live on islands near Australia) look far less alike 
genetically than either group compared with Europeans. Similarities in facial 
characteristics and skin tone between Africans and Melanesians probably 
represent common human adaptations to life in a tropical climate, Templeton 
says.

 In his evolutionary scenario, separate human races with distinctive biological 
traits have never existed.

 Local populations in a few regions might have died out within the past 100,000 
years as interbreeding continued elsewhere, Templeton notes. This may explain 
mitochondrial DNA evidence for Neandertal extinction in Europe by around 30,000 
years ago (SN: 7/19/97, p. 37). The fate of the Neandertals remains unsettled 
until additional prehistoric gene fragments are isolated and analyzed, the St. 
Louis researcher says.

 A statistical analysis directed by Templeton and Michael F. Hammer of the 
University of Arizona in Tucson finds that modern Y-chromosome diversity 
probably arose through a number of prehistoric population movements from Africa 
to Asia, as well as from Asia back into Africa. Males may have moved over long 
distances throughout much of prehistory more often than females, Templeton 
suggests.

 Other data, such as a mitochondrial DNA study directed by Mark T. Seielstad of 
the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston and published in the November 
1998 Nature Genetics, suggest that females have more often moved over short 
distances than males. The tendency of men in hunter-gatherer groups to travel 
outside their native villages in search of brides, whom they then bring back 
home, may partly explain this finding.

 Long- and short-distance movements among interbreeding groups facilitate the 
transfer of genes underlying variable biological traits, Templeton holds. Thus, 
different patterns of skeletal traits in creatures such as Neandertals do not 
necessarily banish them from the human species, in his view.

 Many anthropologists assume, in contrast, that H. sapiens evolved a defining 
suite of skeletal features, even though no consensus exists on what they are. 
Absence of these features in creatures such as Neandertals leads to their 
designation as a separate species.

 Templeton's views on human evolution spark heated debate. But reservations 
about the power of current DNA studies to describe human evolution are not 
uncommon.

 Mountain, who views accumulated genetic evidence as moderately supportive of a 
recent African origin for humanity, still sees a pressing need for improved 
analyses of large DNA samples.

"Far too often, anthropological geneticists draw conclusions about human 
evolutionary history without testing hypotheses or exploring alternate models," 
Mountain remarks. "In some cases, this is because data are insufficient. In 
other cases, the immediate impression generated by the data blinds us to 
alternatives."

 Hammer, who remains undecided on how modern humans evolved, suspects that 
investigators will increasingly experiment with statistical formulas for 
weighing the contributions of natural selection and other factors to DNA 
diversity.

"Over the next 10 years, more complex genetic models will emerge," Hammer says. 
"DNA research has not solved the mystery of human origins."


