Science News Online (3/13/99): Octopus suckers glow in the deep, dark sea

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 11 (March 13, 1999)

 Octopus suckers glow in the deep, dark sea

 By S. Milius

 A red octopus that drifts through deep waters off the eastern United States 
shines in a novel way: Its suckers flash on and off.

 Finding luminescence in any of the known octopus species surprised 
codiscoverer Edith A. Widder of Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution in Fort 
Pierce, Fla. The seas where octopods live sparkle with constellations of 
bioluminescent fish, squid, crustaceans, and other creatures. Yet the only 
octopods previously found to luminesce belong to two or three species in which 
females develop bright rings around their mouths just before mating.

 The light organs that Widder and her colleagues describe in Stauroteuthis 
syrtensis lie in a single row of raised buttons stretching down each arm. The 
bumps look like suckers that evolved the ability to glow, the researchers 
suggest in the March 11 Nature.

 Such a glimpse into the evolutionary history of a bioluminescent structure 
holds special interest because of its rarity, notes Widder. Tracing histories 
of light organs has proved difficult because "there's no fossil record for 
bioluminescence," she laments.

 In 1997, Widder brought a live, foot-long specimen from the Gulf of Maine back 
to a lab. When the researchers turned off the lights, the suckers glowed 
blue-green, emitting the most light at 470 nanometers, a wavelength that 
travels well underwater. "It's kind of a twinkling effect," Widder says.

 Most octopods catch fish or other decent-size prey, but this octopus, oddly 
enough, had been eating mostly tiny crustaceans called copepods. "It's like a 
raccoon living on a diet of mosquitoes," Widder explains.

 She saw no structures to filter copepods from the water, so she speculates 
that glowing suckers might lure them the way porch lights attract moths. 
Shallow-water copepods flock to light, but researchers know less about the 
deep-water counterparts. Glands around the octopus' mouth secrete mucus, which 
might snag bedazzled copepods for dinner.

 Widder points out that many deep-sea creatures hunt with glowing lures. Light 
may be attractive in part because of the nutrient bonanza of luminescent fecal 
matter that drifts to the depths from creatures above. The abundance of 
light-generating microbes in the diet of upper-ocean animals gives this fecal 
rain its gentle glow.

 For about 100 years, scientists have recognized S. syrtensis without realizing 
that it glows, notes cephalopod biologist Michael Vecchione, who heads a 
National Marine Fisheries Service lab in Washington, D.C. Despite the earlier 
reports of glow-in-the-dark octopus lipstick, the new find was startling.

 S. syrtensis "is in a completely different group," Vecchione says. It swims 
with fins and the webbing between its arms, while the other glowing octopods 
motor through the sea by squirting water jets.

 Richard E. Young of the University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu calls 
Widder's discovery "a spectacular find." As one of the authors of a report on 
mouth luminescence, he's long mused that more octopods ought to glow. The 
greatest hope for finding overlooked bioluminescence, he predicts, lies with 
the hard-to-observe, deep-water finned species. There, he says, "we haven't 
looked hard enough."


