Science News Online (2/27/99): Memory cell: Change of the light, delayed

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 9 (February 27, 1999)

 Memory cell: Change of the light, delayed

 By P. Weiss

 It's hard to store a pulse of light. The clumsy techniques available today 
include sending a light signal along a coiled kilometer of optical fiber. A 
compact optical memory chip would make telecommunications networks more 
efficient and optical computers more feasible, information technology experts 
say.

 German researchers report this week creating an optical-memory prototype that 
combines small size, speedy operation, and controllable release of signals. 
This sandwich of semiconductors stores light by transforming it into pairs of 
positive and negative charges and then stepping in like a referee at a fight to 
hold the opposite charges apart.

 The charges accumulate as light signals to be stored dislodge electrons from 
atoms in a thin intermediate semiconductor layer, known as a quantum well (SN: 
4/20/96, p. 247). The layer's properties enable it to confine charges.

 Each photon freeing an electron from the well's crystal structure also creates 
an electron vacancy, known as a hole, which can behave as a mobile positive 
charge. Voltages applied to electrodes steer the electrons and holes into 
separate spots in the well and hold them for potentially useful periods of up 
to tens of microseconds. An earlier version used sound waves to separate the 
charges (SN: 5/24/97, p. 318). When the voltage is shut off, the electrons and 
holes combine, releasing a flash of light.

 Stefan Zimmermann of the University of Munich and his colleagues there and at 
the Munich Technical University in Garching describe their prototype device, 
which stores a single pixel of light, in the Feb. 26 Science.

 To improve the device's characteristics, the researchers say they are changing 
the materials from which it is made so that it can work at room temperature 
instead of the frigid 100 kelvins necessary now. They also anticipate being 
able to shrink it dramatically.

"We never thought it would work," says Jorg P. Kotthaus of the University of 
Munich. "We made it rather large to get a lot of signal out." Rather than its 
present 200 micrometers on a side, the circuitry to store one pixel could 
shrink to less than 2 mm on a side, he predicts.

 Storage times of many microseconds represent a valuable step, says Claude 
Weisbuch of the Ecole Polytechnique in Palaiseau, France. However, he suspects 
that "it will be tricky to make it work at room temperature" because more 
energetic electrons and holes will tend to leak past the voltage barriers.


