Science News Online (2/6/99): Half-asleep birds choose which half dozes

 February 6, 1999

 Half-asleep birds choose which half dozes

 By S. Milius

 Birds that are literally half-asleep-with one brain hemisphere alert and the 
other snoozing-control which side of the brain remains awake, according to a 
new study of sleeping ducks.

 Earlier studies have documented half-brain sleep in a wide range of birds. The 
brain hemispheres take turns sinking into the sleep stage characterized by slow 
brain waves. The eye controlled by the sleeping hemisphere droops shut, while 
the wakeful hemisphere's eye stays open and vigilant. Birds also can sleep with 
both hemispheres resting at once.

 To check whether birds can control half-brain sleeping, Niels C. Rattenborg 
and his colleagues from Indiana State University in Terre Haute filmed a row of 
mallards napping. Decades of studies of bird flocks led researchers to predict 
extra vigilance in the more vulnerable, end-of-the-row sleepers. Sure enough, 
the end birds tended to keep peeled the eye on the side away from their 
buddies. Mallards snuggled into the inner spots showed no preference for gaze 
direction.

 Also, birds dozing at the end of the line resorted to single-hemisphere sleep, 
rather than total relaxation, more often than inner ducks did. Rotating 16 
birds through the positions in a four-duck row, the researchers found outer 
birds half-asleep during some 32 percent of snoozing time versus about 12 
percent for birds in internal spots.

"We believe this is the first evidence for an animal behaviourally controlling 
sleep and wakefulness simultaneously in different regions of the brain," the 
researchers say in the Feb. 4 Nature.

 The results provide the best evidence yet for a long-standing conjecture that 
single-hemisphere sleep evolved as creatures scanned for predators, Rattenborg 
says. The preference for opening an eye on the lookout side could be 
widespread, he predicts. He's seen it in a penguin pair napping side-by-side in 
the zoo and in a pet cockatiel perched by a mirror. The mirror-side eye closed 
as if the reflection were a pal, and the other eye stayed open.

 Useful as half-sleeping might be, it's only been found in birds and such 
aquatic mammals as dolphins, whales, seals, and manatees. Presumably, keeping 
one side of the brain awake allows a sleeping animal to surface occasionally to 
avoid drowning, explains Rattenborg.

 Nigel Ball, clinical director of the Sleep Disorders Center at the Virginia 
Mason Medical Center in Seattle, says the new study "gives us the possibility 
of looking outside the box." Studies of birds may offer unique insights into 
sleep because their lineage parted company from mammals' so long ago.

 Jerome M. Siegel of the University of California, Los Angeles says he wonders 
if bird half-brain sleep "is just the tip of the iceberg." He speculates that a 
closer look at other species might turn up more examples.

 Siegel, however, would be surprised to see the half-brain phenomenon during 
the rapid-eye-movement, or REM, phase of sleep. Birds and many mammals, 
including the primitive platypus, exhibit signs of REM sleep, which in humans 
has been associated with dreaming. So far, no one has found a creature 
half-dreaming.


