Science News Online (2/6/99): New element leaves lightweights behind

 February 6, 1999

 New element leaves lightweights behind

 By P. Weiss

 A long-sought new element has apparently sprung into existence in a Russian 
laboratory. Heavier than any previously known element, it crams an 
unprecedented 114 protons into its nucleus. The real excitement, however, say 
nuclear physicists and chemists, is that it lasted 30 seconds before breaking 
down into lighter elements.

 Bucking the trend toward briefer lives for increasingly heavy nuclei, the new 
element lasts 100,000 times longer than number 112, the last new element found 
(SN: 3/2/96, p. 134). The creators of element 114 believe they have finally set 
foot on the so-called island of stability, a postulated region of atomic 
properties populated by extraordinarily long-lived superheavy nuclei.

"Sure, they've found a new element and that's important, but what's really 
important is the island," says Albert Ghiorso of Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) 
National Laboratory (LBNL).

 For 30 years, theorists have predicted the existence of this island-a kind of 
Shangri-La where exotic elements stick around long enough to allow exhaustive 
studies of their nuclear behavior and chemistry. Researchers anticipate that 
the elements may display unusual properties.

 Scientists from the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna near Moscow 
and Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory collaborated to create the 
new element. In a prolonged experiment that produced just a single atom, the 
Russian scientists bombarded a film of plutonium-244, supplied by Livermore, 
with a beam of calcium-48 atoms for 40 days, says Dubna's Yuri Ts. Oganessian. 
They completed the work at the end of December 1998. A report of the find 
appeared Jan. 19 on Science's online news service.

 The atom signaled its presence by disintegrating into lighter and lighter 
elements, from atomic number 112 to 110 to 108 and so on. Livermore's Kent 
Moody says his team's data analysis, completed Monday, identifies element 114 
"to greater than a 99 percent probability."

 Although the claim has yet to undergo peer review for publication, it's being 
well received in the heavy-element field. "The more we hear, the better it 
sounds," says Kenneth E. Gregorich, head of a LBNL team gearing up to rejoin 
the superheavy-element hunt next fall.

 During more than a half-century of making increasingly proton-laden nuclei, 
scientists have found that such nuclei generally decay sooner than lighter 
ones. Repulsions between the many positively charged protons shatter the 
nucleus.

 However, nuclei also contain uncharged neutrons, which can arrange themselves 
among the protons to make nuclei more durable than would otherwise be expected. 
Theorists have long suspected that element 114 would show remarkable nuclear 
stability.

 Oganessian says he is confident that he and his colleagues have reached the 
shore of the long-sought island. Not only did the purported 114 atom last a 
long time, but certain isotopes in the decay chain, which also had never been 
seen before, had extraordinary life spans. For instance, isotopes of elements 
112 and 108 in the decay chain lasted 15 minutes and 17 minutes, respectively, 
before disintegrating. Isotopes of an element have its allotted number of 
protons but varying numbers of neutrons.

 The difficulty of identifying these novel decay products makes it hard to 
prove unequivocally that element 114 was created, says Sigurd Hofmann of GSI, 
the German center for heavy-ion research in Darmstadt. Further experiments at 
GSI, Dubna, and elsewhere-including perhaps a repeat of the recent Dubna 
experiment-should help settle any doubts about the 114 claim, he says.

 With a beachhead on the island established, Oganessian calls for forays 
inland. "We have to go now for more heavy isotopes," such as 116, he says.


