Science News Online (3/6/99): Simulations nab protein-folding mistakes

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 10 (March 6, 1999)

 Simulations nab protein-folding mistakes

 By I. Peterson

 The human body manufactures thousands of different proteins, which act as 
enzymes, structural elements, or carriers. Each protein starts out as a long 
strand that must fold itself into the proper shape to perform its specific 
function.

 To gain insights into the folding process, researchers have developed 
mathematical models that attempt to capture how a single strand rapidly 
collapses into its correct configuration (SN: 5/9/98, p. 296). New computer 
simulations now reveal how one protein strand can interfere with the folding of 
another.

"This is a step toward successful protein engineering," says computer scientist 
Sorin Istrail of the Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque. "It provides 
our first clue in how to design sequences of laboratory proteins that can 
survive the essential but complicated folding process."

 The results could also help laboratory scientists understand the mechanisms 
underlying protein-folding mistakes, which are implicated in Alzheimer's 
disease (SN: 7/4/98, p. 4) and other maladies.

 Istrail and his collaborators, biologist Jonathan A. King and computer 
scientist Russell Schwartz of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, report 
their findings in an upcoming Journal of Computational Biology.

 Each protein is a string of amino acids spelling out a characteristic 
sequence. Scientists divide the 20 distinct amino acids into two groups 
according to whether they attract or repel water molecules, the main 
constituent of cells. Those interactions drive protein folding, creating 
globular structures in which water-repelling amino acids end up on the inside 
and water-attracting ones on the outside.

 A simple model portrays a protein as a stiff but jointed structure, made of 
two types of beads, that can snap into a few positions at each joint. Because 
of the huge number of different folding possibilities for even a short strand, 
however, simulating the process on a computer has proved difficult.

 Moreover, protein strands in cells have many jostling neighbors, King notes. 
Two partially folded protein molecules may end up sticking together.

 To capture that additional complication, Istrail and his coworkers started 
with a well-studied, jointed-structure model originally developed by Ken Dill 
of the University of California, San Francisco. Taking advantage of Sandia's 
powerful computers (SN: 7/5/97, p. 5), the researchers examined what happens 
when strands move about and bump into each other.

 Although the specific amino acid sequence determines the protein's function, 
the location of water-attracting components appears to be random. By tracking 
two highly simplified protein chains interacting on a grid, Istrail and his 
coworkers showed that this irregular arrangement plays an important role in 
preventing water-repelling units from binding to those of another strand.

 A protein with an ordered distribution of water-attracting units tends to 
aggregate with other proteins to form an inert lump, Istrail says. Random 
positioning appears necessary to keep different strands apart, allowing the 
formation of the correct folds.


