Science News Online (4/10/99): Slow motion sets in when the light dims

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 15 (April 10, 1999)

 Slow motion sets in when the light dims

 By L. Helmuth

 When the lights go down, the world may appear to slow, new research suggests. 
Movement perceived by rods, the cells in the retina that register dim lights, 
looks slower than the same motion detected by the color-sensitive cones.

 Most people see the world through four types of visual-receptor cells. Rods 
sense brightness alone, while the three types of cones register red, green, and 
blue wavelengths of light. "Anytime you can see color, you know you're 
stimulating the cones," says Marty Banks of the University of California, 
Berkeley.

 The researchers, led by Karl R. Gegenfurtner of the Max Planck Institute for 
Biological Cybernetics in Tubingen, Germany, suspected that the rod- and 
cone-based visual systems interpret motion differently. For example, 
Gegenfurtner knew of a color-blind man lacking all three types of cone cells 
who complained of trouble catching a Frisbee.

 In tests on five men with red-green colorblindness, the researchers pitted two 
types of visual-receptor cells against each other, they report in the April 8 
Nature.

 About 2 percent of white men can't distinguish green and red because they are 
missing the cone cells tuned to green light. The researchers manipulated the 
color and brightness of objects on a computer screen to activate either rods or 
red-sensitive cones but never the blue-sensitive cones, Gegenfurtner says.

 The red-green color-blind subjects compared oscillating patterns, one 
stimulating the cones and the other, the rods. They judged the speed of the 
rod-activating pattern to be about 75 percent of the cone-activating pattern's 
speed.

 The rod cells may see the world differently because of the way the retina is 
wired, says Banks. In very low light, only the rod cells are sensitive enough 
to see the dimmest objects. To better pick out faint light signals, which could 
be overshadowed by random nerve firings, the retina sacrifices resolution. It 
averages signals from many different rod cells and gathers rod signals for a 
relatively long time before passing a message further along in the visual 
system.

 In comparison, Banks says, "cones have a direct line through the retina to the 
cortex." Each cone cell in the retina's center sends an unadulterated signal to 
the brain. This high-resolution system-like a computer screen-refreshes 
frequently and responds to movements quickly.

 One potential danger of the rod system's slowed perception, Gegenfurtner says, 
arises during night driving. Although headlights illuminate the road brightly 
enough for the cones to kick in, objects outside the beams may appear to be 
moving more slowly than they are.


