Science News Online (3/27/99): Nuclear Fusion Flares on a Tabletop

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 13 (March 27, 1999)

 Nuclear Fusion Flares on a Tabletop

 By P. Weiss

 The dream of sparking tabletop nuclear fusion has become a reality, promising 
not commercial energy but a promising scientific payoff.

 The feat took place on a lab bench only about 1 meter wide and 3.5 meters 
long. There, scientists zapped clusters of atoms of deuterium, or heavy 
hydrogen, with brief but extremely powerful laser pulses.

 By focusing flickers of energy lasting much less than a trillionth of second 
into an extremely small volume, the laser beam heats atom clusters to tens of 
millions of degrees Celsius, report Todd Ditmire and his colleagues at Lawrence 
Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory.

 The laser pulse can strip atoms of their electrons, creating a cigar-shaped 
speck of hot, ionized gas, or plasma. The superheated clusters explode, bashing 
deuterium ions together with high enough velocity to fuse into helium ions. For 
each helium ion formed, the fusion reaction also spits out a neutron with a 
characteristic energy.

 The experimenters detected emission of approximately 10,000 neutrons with the 
predicted energy per laser pulse. Ditmire described the experiment on March 23 
to a crowded session at the Centennial Meeting of the American Physical Society 
in Atlanta.

"It's a great achievement," comments Gerard A. Mourou of the University of 
Michigan at Ann Arbor. Mourou invented a means to amplify laser pulses to 
extremely high intensities, thus paving the way for lasers such as the one used 
by the Livermore scientists (SN: 2/10/96, p. 95).

 The new fusion scheme is no energy panacea, researchers insist. The laser 
dumps about 10 million times more energy into the plasma than the neutrons 
carry back out. The lost energy goes into heating ions and electrons and 
producing photons that make the plasma glow.

 When might the new technique yield more energy than it consumes? "The answer 
is never," says Ditmire. For a fusion reactor to produce an energy gain, it 
must confine its fuel long enough, usually no less than a few nanoseconds, to 
ignite a self-sustaining thermonuclear burn. The plasma in the tabletop device 
disperses too quickly-after only 200 trillionths of a second.

 Fusion energy powers the sun, the stars, and thermonuclear bombs. Scientists 
have labored since the 1950s to tame fusion reactions for commercial power, but 
practical reactors remain decades away, at best.

 Sustained fusion burn is one of the goals of the stadium-size laser, known as 
the National Ignition Facility, that Livermore is currently building (SN: 
10/19/96, p. 254). Expected to be the world's largest laser, it will hurl a 
mighty bolt of nearly 2 million joules of energy at a fuel capsule. By 
contrast, the tabletop fusion laser puts out just a tenth of a joule.

 Ditmire says, however, that his team's technique will permit new types of 
laser fusion experiments and may lead to compact neutron sources for studying 
materials.


