Science News Online (3/20/99): Why cutting fats may harm the heart

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 12 (March 20, 1999)

 Why cutting fats may harm the heart

 By J. Raloff

 Since dietary fats can play a role in boosting blood-cholesterol 
concentrations and heart-disease risk, does it make sense to short-circuit the 
process by dramatically paring fats from the diet?

 For most men, at least, the answer may prove an emphatic no, according to new 
research conducted at Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National Laboratory (LBNL).

 In most people, genetic programming directs the body to respond to drops in 
total dietary fat by repackaging fatty particles called lipids, the study 
shows. In general, these changes tend to increase risk of cardiovascular 
disease, notes Ronald M. Krauss, who led the research.

 In a pair of earlier studies, his team directed 238 healthy men to spend 
periods of 3 to 6 weeks eating each of two diets: one deriving at least 40 
percent of its calories from fats, and the other with just 20 to 24 percent fat.

 While on the high-fat diet, one-quarter of the volunteers exhibited a 
worrisome blood-lipid profile. Their cholesterol-shuttling, low-density 
lipoproteins (LDLs)-the so-called bad lipoproteins-were unusually small and 
dense. Such small LDLs have been linked to an especially high risk of heart 
disease (SN: 9/21/96, p. 182).

 Even more troubling, when the men with normal-size LDLs ate the low-fat diet, 
a third of them began making the small, dense LDLs. With this change came an 
increase in blood concentrations of triglycerides, another heart-disease 
high-risk factor, and a drop in the cholesterol exiting their blood via 
high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), the good lipoproteins.

 In the most recent work, the LBNL researchers selected 38 men who had proven 
resistant to lipid changes in the previous studies and put them on an even 
lower-fat diet. For 10 days, they ate menus deriving just 10 percent of their 
calories from fat. Once again, a third began making the especially small LDLs, 
Krauss's group reports in the March American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

 These men also increased their triglycerides and decreased HDLs-especially 
HDL2B, which is considered especially beneficial.

 In contrast to the earlier two studies, the men whose lipid profiles changed 
in this test also exhibited an increase in blood concentrations of 
intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs). Though most physicians don't measure 
IDLs, studies that assayed them generally found high levels "to be the 
indicator most strongly connected to heart-disease risk," Krauss notes. "It 
trumps all other standard [lipid] measurements in predicting risk."

 Overall, the LBNL data indicate that at least two-thirds of men carry genes 
for these lipid disturbances, though in most cases the effects only show up on 
a low-fat diet. Krauss suspects that the benefits of exercise and low calorie 
intake may compensate for the increased risk imparted by the adverse lipid 
profile.

 The data may underestimate the genetic predisposition for lipid change, Krauss 
contends, since all the volunteers were of normal weight. With obesity, he 
says, "there's an even higher prevalence of these lipid disturbances to start 
with."

 In fact, he worries that the overweight couch potato-precisely the person 
physicians often target for a low-fat diet-may face the greatest risk of 
expressing these lipid disturbances. Certainly, Krauss says, his data argue 
strongly against a one-size-fits-all approach to advice on fat consumption.

 These data "support what a number of us in the nutrition community have been 
saying-that low-fat diets are not the way to go [to prevent heart disease]," 
says Meir J. Stampfer of the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston.

"The nutrition community has pushed this notion that fat equals bad," Stampfer 
says, "without making distinctions between types of fat." In fact, he explains, 
because it's saturated fats and trans fats (SN: 5/21/94, p. 325) that are bad 
for the heart, "our message to the public should be to replace them with 
polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats"-such as the types in nuts (SN: 
11/21/98, p. 328).


