Science News Online (3/27/99): Solvents' link to birth defects bolstered

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 13 (March 27, 1999)

 Solvents' link to birth defects bolstered

 By N. Seppa

 Since 1985, researchers at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto have 
offered a program called Motherisk for women in their child-bearing years who 
are concerned that they have been exposed to harmful chemicals or radiation.

 Now, potent evidence that Motherisk researchers accumulated over 10 years 
indicates that many women have good cause for worry.

 Pregnant women exposed to organic solvents are indeed much more likely to have 
a deformed baby than unexposed women are, the scientists report in the March 
24/31 Journal of the American Medical Association.

 Between 1986 and 1996, the investigators tracked and recorded the outcomes of 
pregnancies in 125 pregnant women exposed to organic solvents at workplaces 
such as factories, laboratories, graphic design businesses, and print shops. 
The solvents included phenols, xylene, acetone, and trichloroethylene.

 The women were exposed for at least 4 months of their pregnancy, including the 
entire first trimester, says study coauthor Sohail Khattak, a pediatrician and 
clinical pharmacologist at the hospital. The first trimester is a critical time 
during which organs form in a fetus, he explains.

 Khattak and his colleagues also tracked 125 pregnant women who had sought 
advice from Motherisk doctors for what turned out to be harmless exposures to 
chemicals, such as taking acetaminophen during pregnancy. These women were 
matched to the exposed group by age and lifestyle.

 Most of the women in both groups were referred to Motherisk by their doctors, 
but some came in on their own.

 Of 113 live births to the women exposed to the chemicals, 13 babies-12 percent 
of births-had major malformations, such as deafness or a heart defect. Five 
other babies had minor birth defects. Twelve of the pregnancies ended in 
miscarriage or abortion.

 Women in the control group had 115 live births, but only one baby had a major 
birth defect and one had a minor deformity.

 Among healthy mothers such as these, the expected rate for major abnormalities 
stands at 1 to 3 percent.

 One new finding might provide a warning sign. Of the 125 exposed women, 75 had 
complained during pregnancy that organic chemicals were giving them headaches 
or breathing problems. Of the 13 major defects in the exposed group, 12 
occurred in babies born to these women. "We were quite amazed at the degree of 
effect we found," Khattak says.

 The exposed women also had nine premature births, compared with three in the 
control group. This is the first study to measure premature births among women 
exposed to organic solvents, Khattak says.

 Earlier tests in animals had shown that chemicals inhaled by pregnant rodents 
can cross the placental barrier to damage their young. Some studies of human 
mothers hinted that exposure to organic solvents might be to blame for birth 
defects, but others did not.

 Because the Motherisk researchers identified the exposed women early in 
pregnancy, their work avoids the errors and biases of studies that later ask 
mothers to recall their exposures during pregnancy, says Richard K. Miller, an 
obstetrician and gynecologist at the University of Rochester (N.Y.) Medical 
Center.

"This paper from Motherisk is certainly the benchmark for examining the 
relationship between maternal toxic [exposure] and birth defects," he says. Its 
results will change how doctors counsel pregnant women regarding occupational 
risks, especially those that cause symptoms in the women, he predicts.


