Science News Online (3/27/99): Why AIDS?

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 13 (March 27, 1999)

 Why AIDS?

 The mystery of how HIV attacks the immune system

 By Damaris Christensen

 Over the past 15 years, governments and institutions have poured millions of 
dollars into AIDS research. Researchers and doctors have dramatically improved 
treatments for the disease and gained new understanding of how HIV, the virus 
that causes AIDS, infects cells. Nevertheless, scientists still understand 
relatively little about how HIV causes the immune system to collapse, the 
ultimate consequence of infection.

 Most researchers have held that HIV directly kills the immune cells called 
helper T cells, or CD4 cells, eventually exhausting an immune system that is 
frantically making replacements. The latest studies, however, suggest that 
different pathways of CD4 cell disruption may be more important.

 Some researchers now suspect that the virus chokes off the supply of new 
immune cells. Still others are beginning to suggest that HIV changes the 
signals that send immune cells migrating through the body, directing CD4 cells 
away from the blood where they normally circulate and toward sites where they 
may be destroyed.

 The disagreement is more than an academic issue. Understanding how HIV 
triggers immune-cell depletion may eventually enable researchers to block its 
devastating effects. Also, new knowledge could reveal strategies for AIDS 
therapies that go beyond the drugs that patients now take to slow replication 
of HIV.

 Without knowing more about how HIV ultimately destroys the immune system, 
however, it is unclear whether drug treatments alone will be enough to restore 
a person's immune system and perhaps eventually cure the disease.

 Early infection with HIV is marked by symptoms similar to mononucleosis: 
fever, enlarged lymph nodes, rash, muscle aches, and headaches. Within 1 to 3 
weeks, the immune system gets some control over the virus by producing 
antibodies and cells that recognize and kill some of the infected cells.

 HIV reproduces itself quickly, however, and continues to replicate throughout 
the course of infection. Because HIV contains RNA and uses it as a template for 
DNA during reproduction, the agent is classified as a retrovirus. Six months or 
so after infection, HIV reproduction reaches a set point, which varies from 
patient to patient. In this stage of disease, a person is unlikely to notice 
any symptoms. However, the higher the set point, the greater the amount of 
virus carried, and the faster a person is likely to develop AIDS.

 Over the next 8 to 10 years, the virus slowly overwhelms the immune system, 
eventually causing a catastrophic decline in the number of CD4 cells. When the 
concentration of CD4 cells drops below one-quarter the normal concentration, a 
person is said to have AIDS. The ensuing immune deficiency renders the person 
vulnerable to the opportunistic infections that mark the disease, such as 
tuberculosis and the rare cancer known as Kaposi's sarcoma.

 Exactly how HIV eludes the immune system so long and effectively is unclear. 
Researchers suspect that part of the virus's elusiveness lies in its tendency 
to infect the very cells that are activated to fight off the infection. CD4 
cells, the white blood cells that HIV primarily targets, marshal responses from 
two other kinds of immune cells: those that produce antibodies and those that 
destroy infected cells directly.

 Only a small proportion of a person's CD4 cells are typically dividing-posing 
a problem for HIV. The virus can't replicate efficiently without hitching a 
free ride on the protein-making machinery of a T cell that is already 
reproducing. However, when researchers began to measure how much virus infected 
people typically carry, concentrations of HIV were higher than would be 
expected given CD4 cells' reproduction rate.

 In 1995, David D. Ho of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York and 
Alan S. Perelson of Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory calculated that HIV 
infects and destroys several billion CD4 cells each day throughout the course 
of disease.

 That rate of cell destruction would lead to AIDS more quickly than has been 
observed unless the immune system increases CD4 cell production above normal, 
they said. While replenishing the population, rapidly dividing CD4 cells 
present additional targets for the virus.

 The stresses of initiating massive production of new cells in response to 
depletion of CD4 cells must be what eventually triggers the especially marked 
decline in CD4 levels, asserted Ho and Perelson. Just as an ovary can only 
produce so many eggs over a woman's lifetime, so can the immune system 
manufacture only a certain number of new cells, they reasoned.

 This model accounts for several characteristics of HIV treatment, says Ho. 
These include the rapid drop in HIV concentration and the quick rebound in CD4 
cell counts detected in blood samples after a person begins antiretroviral 
therapy and the rapidity with which drug-resistant viruses develop.

 On the other hand, Ho's theory fails to account for the observation that CD4 
cells move from tissues and lymph nodes to the blood soon after antiretroviral 
therapy begins. The model also assumes that the dynamics of CD4 cell turnover 
are similar in both early and late HIV infection, which may not be the case, 
according to Mike McCune of the Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology 
at the University of California, San Francisco.

 If Ho's model is correct, antiretroviral drugs, which slow the destruction of 
helper T cells, reduce the need for production of CD4 cell replacements. A 
study by McCune and his colleagues, however, indicates that antiretroviral 
therapy actually allows the immune system to boost its production of new T 
cells above normal levels. This suggests that HIV acts, in part, by inhibiting 
the production of new CD4 cells, the scientists propose in the January Nature 
Medicine.

 If HIV blocks the production of new helper T cells, then "to treat the 
disease, not only do we need potent antiretroviral drugs to stop the virus from 
spreading and destroying T cells, we may also need additional therapies to 
ensure that T cell production starts anew," says McCune.

 Using a new technique that biochemically labels dividing T cells, including 
CD4 cells, the researchers compared the blood of HIV-positive patients who were 
not yet receiving antiretroviral drugs, HIV-positive patients who had just 
completed a 12-week course of antiretroviral therapy, and volunteers not 
infected with HIV.

 They found much higher concentrations of new CD4 cells in the blood of 
patients who had received antiretroviral therapy than in HIV-positive patients 
yet to receive drugs and in uninfected volunteers. The studies also indicated 
that CD4 cells actually survive longer in HIV-positive patients who had not 
been given antiretroviral drugs than in patients who had been given the drugs. 
These findings suggest that the net gain in CD4 cell count during aggressive 
antiretroviral therapy results from an increase in CD4 production rather than a 
decrease in CD4 destruction, McCune said.

 McCune's study "puts an end to 4 years of exciting debate" and confirms that 
HIV's effect on CD4 cell production is at least as important as its effect on 
CD4 cell destruction, says Giuseppe Pantaleo of the University Hospital of 
Lausanne in Switzerland. Pantaleo, who has used a different technique for 
estimating CD4 cell production, has likewise found that HIV inhibits CD4 cell 
production.

 Further confirmation of the observation that HIV limits the production of new 
CD4 cells came last month from research in the Netherlands. Scientists there 
isolated precursors of CD4 immune cells from blood samples of HIV-infected 
patients and then cultured these cells in the laboratory to see how they 
developed.

 The initial blood samples were taken soon after the patients learned they were 
infected with HIV. Six months later, blood samples taken from patients who went 
on to develop AIDS had lost about 90 percent of their ability to develop new 
CD4 cells compared with the initial sample, according to Frank Miedema of the 
Sanquin Blood Supply Foundation in Amsterdam and his colleagues. In contrast, 
blood from HIV-positive people who had not progressed to AIDS had retained 
about half of its original ability to grow new CD4 cells, he found.

 This suggests that HIV blocks the ability of the immune system to produce new 
CD4 cells, he said last February in Chicago at the Sixth Conference on 
Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.

 Not everyone agrees that Ho's model of immune system exhaustion is on the way 
out. A team of German researchers reported at the same conference that among 13 
HIV-positive patients, the concentration of actively dividing CD4 cells in 
their lymph nodes dropped during 9 to 12 months of therapy. This suggests that 
in the absence of treatment, HIV replication in the lymph nodes causes CD4 
cells to divide more rapidly than normal, says H. J. Stellbrink of the 
University Hospital Eppendorf in Hamburg.

 There's yet a third way that HIV might reduce the number of CD4 cells in the 
blood. The virus might redirect many of these cells to tissues and lymph nodes, 
where they may be destroyed. A paper published in the January Journal of 
Immunology supports the idea that HIV-at least in immunodeficient 
mice-commandeers a natural immune process known as homing, which causes CD4 
cells to flood out of the bloodstream and into the lymph nodes.

 Immune cells, including CD4 cells, constantly patrol the body for invaders and 
move along a daily route from the lymph nodes, through tissues, into the blood, 
and then back to the lymph nodes. In February 1997, virologist Miles W. Cloyd 
of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston and his colleagues 
showed that when HIV binds to any of several types of immune cells, including 
CD4, those cells produce higher than normal amounts of a protein known as CD62L 
and then move directly into the lymph nodes.

"It appears that once HIV-exposed helper cells are triggered to leave the 
blood, they are programmed to self-destruct," says Cloyd, who noted that about 
half of the HIV-infected CD4 cells entering the lymph nodes were destroyed in 
his experiments on mice.

 Cloyd's newly published research confirms that HIV infection triggers the 
molecular homing signal. It also indicates that after being infected with HIV 
and moving into the lymph nodes, CD4 cells are more likely to die than are 
another type of infected T cell called CD8 cells. Cloyd says that this finding 
could explain why the number of CD8 cells does not dramatically decline during 
HIV infection.

 Although Cloyd's theory remains to be tested in humans, he suggests that 
enhanced homing might explain several apparent quirks of HIV infection. For 
instance, homing could underlie the disappearance of immune cells from the 
blood and their accumulation in lymph nodes in HIV-infected people, he says.

 The theory could also explain how so many CD4 cells could die during HIV 
infection although they are not actively dividing and producing the virus. 
According to his model, such HIV-infected cells may self-destruct, says Cloyd.

 As research progresses, the picture of HIV infection seems to become even more 
complicated. McCune suggests that none of these models is exclusive. HIV may 
destroy many CD4 cells, block the production of new cells, and also redirect 
the movement of immune cells throughout the body. "Data gathered during the 
next few years will give us a much better picture about what is happening," he 
says.

 So, are there any clear answers about how HIV causes the drastic drop in CD4 
counts seen in AIDS patients? "It's still an open question," says Anthony 
Fauci, director of the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
in Bethesda, Md.

 The need for more data is pressing. "We need to understand more and more how 
the [immune] system is working so that we can develop different treatment 
approaches," Pantaleo says.


