Science News Online (4/10/99): Shutting off plaque's lifeline of blood

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 15 (April 10, 1999)

 Shutting off plaque's lifeline of blood

 By N. Seppa

 Plaques, the gummy, blood vessel deposits that are central to heart disease, 
are usually considered just artery-clogging lumps. However, plaques often 
contain living cells in need of nutrients. New, minuscule blood vessels appear 
near plaques to provide those supplies.

 A study of mice now shows that drugs known to curb vessel growth seem to 
starve plaques, suggesting a tantalizing way to battle heart disease. The 
compounds are already being tested as weapons against cancer.

 In a report in the April 6 Circulation, researchers describe a study of 47 
mice that were bred to have a humanlike susceptibility to plaque formation. 
Their food mimicked the diet consumed by people in the United States. When the 
mice were 20 weeks old, the researchers pulled 10 out of the group and measured 
the plaque that had accumulated in each animal's aorta, the large artery 
leading out of the heart.

 For the next 16 weeks, some of the remaining mice received alternate-day doses 
of drugs that inhibit new vessel growth. Ten received a protein called 
endostatin, and 15 got a synthetic compound called TNP-470. Twelve other mice 
received inert injections.

 Compared with the mice analyzed earlier in the experiment, all these mice had 
more plaque-three times more in the case of the untreated mice. However, the 
mice getting TNP-470 showed a more modest 60 percent increase, while those 
given endostatin experienced plaque growth of only 28 percent, says study 
coauthor Karen S. Moulton, a cardiologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Children's Hospital, both in Boston.

"It's a very intriguing study," says Jan L. Breslow, a cardiologist at 
Rockefeller University in New York. "It suggests that one can limit the growth 
of large plaques through angiogenesis inhibition."

 Angiogenesis, or new blood vessel growth, is currently an area of intense 
research. Scientists suspect that heart muscle damaged in heart attacks might 
be salvageable if angiogenesis can be harnessed to feed blood to those areas.

 In contrast, other researchers want to stifle blood vessel formation in order 
to cut off nutrient supplies to tumors.

 The explanation proposed for the drugs' effects on plaque is complex. Beyond 
limiting nutrients available to plaque's fat and collagen cells, endostatin and 
TNP-470 may shrink plaque by hampering the activity of roving immune cells 
called macrophages, Moulton says.

 These cells normally react to plaque-caused lesions on a vessel wall by 
bundling up cellular debris in the area, recruiting other cells, and performing 
various housekeeping duties. However, in a blood vessel chronically abused by 
excess cholesterol, residues of cigarette smoke, or high blood pressure, 
macro-phages may do more harm than good, Breslow says. In particular, 
macrophages induce vessel growth that could nourish plaque cells and provide an 
avenue for additional cells that may swell the plaque, Moulton adds.

 The greatest danger of plaques arises when they rupture, attracting platelets 
that can form blood clots. The largest plaques aren't always the ones that 
rupture, so physicians don't know which plaques to watch.

 Thus, a broad preventive approach that thwarts angiogenesis may work, Moulton 
says. "Shutting off the portal of entry of inflammatory cells may slow [plaque 
formation] down," she says.

 Ironically, if angiogenesis-promoting and angiogenesis-inhibiting drugs become 
available for human use, many patients might be candidates for both: one to 
reverse heart-muscle damage and the other to limit plaque growth. Angiogenesis 
stimulants last only a short time, whereas the angiogenesis inhibitors seem to 
work for months, at least in mice. These "different kinetics" may avert the 
conflict, Moulton says.


