Science News Online (4/17/99): Pearl-like bacteria are largest ever found

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 16 (April 17, 1999)

 Pearl-like bacteria are largest ever found

 By J. Travis

 Look closely at the period ending this sentence. Scientists have discovered a 
bacterium similar in size to that punctuation mark, making it the biggest ever 
observed. In terms of cell volume, some copies of the bacterium are more than 
100 times larger than the previous record holder.

"I'm stunned by how big this thing is. This goes orders of magnitude beyond 
what I thought was possible," remarks microbiologist Mitch Sogin of the Marine 
Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Mass.

 Residing in the greenish ooze of ocean sediment off the coast of Namibia, the 
spherical bacteria have diameters ranging from 100 to 750 micrometers. Since 
the bacteria often form strands of a dozen or so cells and glisten white from 
light reflecting off sulfur inside them, scientists named the microbe 
Thiomargarita namibiensis, or sulfur pearl of Namibia.

 The behemoth bacterium was discovered in African sediment samples obtained in 
1997 by Heide Schulz of the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology in 
Bremen, Germany. On a previous visit to the coast of South America, she and her 
colleagues had identified bacteria that oxidized sulfur for energy. The 
scientists then decided to investigate whether similarly sulfur-rich sediments 
off the Namibia coast might harbor the same microbes.

 T. namibiensis was much more abundant than the South American bacterium, the 
researchers report in the April 16 Science. Because of their light-reflecting 
properties and size, the microbes are visible to the naked eye. Schulz's 
coworkers had to be convinced these huge spheres were bacteria. "They didn't 
believe me initially," she laughs.

 Careful studies of the microorganisms eventually confirmed that they are 
indeed bacteria. Analysis of their DNA, for example, indicated that they are 
relatives of the bacteria that Schulz and her colleagues had found earlier. 
This analysis wasn't easy, notes study coauthor Andreas Teske of the Woods Hole 
(Mass.) Oceanographic Institution, because T. namibiensis is so large that 
smaller bacteria colonize the mucus sheath enveloping the microbe. 
Consequently, the team often detected other DNA along with that of T. 
namibiensis.

 The new bacterium steals the size record from Epulopiscium fishelsoni, which 
is found in surgeonfish guts. If an ordinary bacterium were mouse-size, E. 
fishelsoni would be the equivalent of a lion, and T. namibiensis might equal 
the world's largest animal, the blue whale.

 The key to the new microbe's large size, and to its life, is a huge 
fluid-filled sac, or vacuole, that takes up about 98 percent of the bacterium's 
interior. Within this vacuole, the bacterium stores large quantities of 
nitrate, which it uses to oxidize sulfur and garner energy. The amount of 
nitrate in the bacteria's surroundings fluctuates considerably, so the vacuoles 
enable the microbes to endure months of lean times. "They can survive and just 
wait for new nitrate," says Schulz.

 The rest of T. namibiensis' interior consists primarily of sulfur globules 
dispersed throughout a thin layer of cellular fluid, or cytoplasm, that 
surrounds the vacuole. The overall amount of cytoplasm is roughly normal for a 
bacterium, notes Schulz. Researchers have previously suggested that the volume 
of cytoplasm through which a bacterium can efficiently move proteins and other 
molecules limits its size.

 The scientists haven't yet learned how to grow T. namibiensis outside its 
sedimentary environment, and they want to tease out how the bacterium packs in 
so much nitrate. Schulz is also curious about whether the microbe has multiple 
sets of genes, since proteins made by a single set of genes would have to 
travel a considerable distance across the cell.

 Schulz and her colleagues, scheduled to return to Namibia next month, hope to 
uncover new bacterial treasures. "The microbial world is still the least 
explored of all," notes Teske.


