Science News Online (4/24/99): Well-Done Research

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 17 (April 24, 1999)

 Well-Done Research

 New recipes for making seriously browned meats less of a cancer risk

 By Janet Raloff

 Since a 1993 food-poisoning outbreak in the western United States killed four 
people who had eaten restaurant hamburgers tainted with bacteria, federal 
regulators have been on a crusade to make sure everyone cooks meat thoroughly.

 The effort seems to have had an impact. Over the past few years, the number of 
people who choose to eat meat that is not thoroughly browned, inside and out, 
has been falling-at least when it comes to burgers and other ground meats, 
which are especially vulnerable to contamination.

 This focus on food-poisoning risks, however, requires cooks to walk a fine 
line. They must make sure that meat is cooked well enough to destroy bacterial 
hazards but not so much that it forms compounds that can increase cancer risk.

 While many cooks judge heating time by a meat's color, it proves an unreliable 
guide for doneness. Katherine Ralston of the Department of Agriculture cites 
recent research showing that meat frozen prior to cooking appears brown before 
it's hot enough to kill bacteria. Moreover, an acidic meat product like sausage 
can remain pink at germ-killing temperatures.

 The chemistry of the carcinogens produced by grilling, which are known as 
heterocyclic amines (HCAs), is even trickier. A brief searing over a hot flame, 
for instance, can encase a burger or steak with a black, crispy crust without 
introducing any HCAs. Meanwhile, an uncharred steak that had been cooked longer 
at a lower temperature might be heavily laced with the carcinogens. Fat content 
can also affect HCA formation, with leaner meats tending to be more vulnerable.

 Even if cooks know how to grill meats safely, a brief interruption can 
sabotage their effort. A phone call may beckon just when the burgers need 
flipping. The crucial last steps of a side dish may coincide with the meat's 
final stages of cooking. In the minutes it takes to deal with these 
distractions, a burger can go from well-cooked to overdone, rife with HCAs.

 Unfortunately, there's no easy way to gauge whether those carcinogens have 
formed without sending the food to a lab specializing in HCA assays.

 Short of turning vegetarian, what precautions can a diner take?

 Researchers are investigating diverse approaches to quashing HCAs. Some 
laboratories are trying out a variety of preparation styles for meat, such as 
adorning the main course with sauces or marinades and using the microwave to 
precook meat for grilling. Other scientists are considering potential benefits 
for grilled-meat eaters of ale or beer chasers. The results of these 
experiments should prove welcome news to people who savor or, for whatever 
reason, favor well-done meats.

 One novel solution for inhibiting HCAs: Add fruit to meat. Over the past few 
years, food scientist J. Ian Gray and his research team at Michigan State 
University in East Lansing have isolated a number of antioxidants from tart 
cherries (SN: 4/17/99, p. 247). These cherry pigments constitute "the most 
effective antioxidant [for meats] that I have ever seen," Gray says.

 Because antioxidants can suppress HCA formation, Gray's team investigated the 
tart cherries' ability to keep HCAs out of burgers. Substituting ground 
cherries for 11.5 percent of the meat in hamburger reduced the formation of 
PhIP, the principal heterocyclic amine that forms when this meat cooks. The 
cherry burger had about 10 percent of the amount of PhIP in a pure grilled 
hamburger.

 The treated meat has a subtle tartness and "a really mild cherry flavor that 
doesn't detract from the keynotes of the hamburger," Gray says. However, what 
people are most likely to notice, he says, is that "the meat is more succulent 
than you would expect from a hamburger."

 Diners may also notice an improved flavor in leftovers of meat mixed with 
cherries. Cooking ordinarily kick-starts oxidation of a meat's fat and 
cholesterol, which within minutes initiates a process that leads to rancidity. 
These chemical changes not only diminish taste but may pose a health risk (SN: 
5/4/85, p. 278). Though refrigeration or freezing can slow oxidative rancidity, 
neither stops it.

 Cherries' antioxidants are so effective, however, that after 4 days of 
refrigeration, the meat's fatty constituents suffered only 50 to 65 percent as 
much oxidation as fruitfree burgers did, Gray reports. His team described its 
findings in the December 1998 Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.

 The researchers began the work in response to prodding by Michigan butcher Ray 
Pleva, who had spent 11 years developing a line of cherry-laced meats. Although 
Pleva initially incorporated the fruit into his products to boost the market 
for a local commodity (see sidebar, below), cherry growers had related 
anecdotes conferring medicinal powers on the fruit.

 Good as cherries are, Gray says, there is nothing magical about their 
chemistry. Because many tree fruits produce similar pigmented antioxidants, he 
suspects that a home cook could grind up a couple of tart plums, maybe even a 
bunch of grapes, and mix them into ground meat to achieve similar results.

 Other studies by Gray's group have turned up another nutritious HCA inhibitor 
that won't affect taste-vitamin E.

 In preliminary tests, the team recently demonstrated that adding vitamin E to 
meats before cooking reduces HCA formation almost as much as cherries do. 
Treating a pound of ground beef, he notes, could be as simple as mixing in the 
contents of a 40 milligram vitamin E capsule.

 Marinades can also shut down HCA production in meat, according to James S. 
Felton and Mark G. Knize of Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory 
(LLNL). For instance, they bathe chicken overnight in a heavily sugared 
oil-and-vinegar sauce. When the poultry finally is popped over a sizzling fire, 
it develops less than one-tenth as much PhIP as unmarinated chicken does.

 However, Felton notes, "as levels of PhIP go down, methyl IQx [MeIQx] goes 
up." The latter is another carcinogenic HCA.

"The reason we think this happens," he says, "is that the sugar in the marinade 
is a catalyst for the reaction that makes MeIQx." Because PhIP is initially 
present in far larger quantities than MeIQx, even if the marinade leads to a 
doubling in MeIQx, "you still will have cut overall exposure to these HCAs," he 
says.

 At the University of Hawaii's Cancer Research Center in Honolulu, Pratibha V. 
Nerurkar and her colleagues have just completed preliminary tests with three 
other marinades. Soaking steak overnight in a standard teriyaki sauce or a 
turmeric-garlic marinade cut the formation of both PhIP and MeIQx during 
grilling. Depending on the cooking time, those reductions ranged from 40 to 65 
percent.

 The big surprise, Nerurkar says, was the effect of barbecue sauce. Upon 
grilling, steaks marinated in this tomato-based sauce developed two to three 
times more PhIP and three to four times more MeIQx than unmarinated steaks did.

 Neither Felton's nor Nerurkar's research team has deconstructed its marinades 
and tested each ingredient individually to identify which provide the bulk of 
the HCA inhibition. By contrast, John H. Weisburger, an organic chemist and 
director emeritus of the American Health Foundation in Valhalla, N.Y., knows 
exactly why his own meat sauce works. He concocted the recipe with ingredients 
known to short-circuit the chemistry behind the carcinogens' formation.

 HCAs develop in heat-driven reactions between the amino acid creatinine and 
the sugar-based chemicals that give cooked meats their classic, and tasty, 
browned exterior. In 1988, Weisburger coauthored a paper that described how to 
shut down HCA production by tying up the creatinine through its binding to 
either of two other amino acids-L-tryptophan or L-proline.

 Though he patented the amino acid combo as the basis of an HCA-inhibiting 
steak sauce 5 years ago, he only began seriously exploring the prospects of 
marketing "Weisburger's meat sauce" last month.

 If marinades and fruit sauces are unappealing additions to the menu, there 
remains the simplest HCA treatment: precooking meat in the microwave.

 Studies by Felton's group show that microwaving ground-meat patties for 2 
minutes before grilling them can cut HCA in the finished burgers to 10 percent 
of the amount in grilled burgers that were not precooked. The microwave heating 
drives off a good deal of liquid, the data indicate, which removes many of the 
HCAs' raw ingredients.

 Perhaps the most intriguing findings come from a series of new Japanese 
studies on the potency of various libations in defusing HCAs' harmful effects.

 Several years ago, Sakae Arimoto-Kobayashi of Okayama University and her 
colleagues found that some of the pigments in Monascus fungi prevent genetic 
mutations. Because these fungi are used to make red sake, a fermented-rice 
drink, and because the fungi's polyphenolic pigments resemble some found in 
beer, Arimoto-Kobayashi's team decided to explore the effects of such beverages 
on HCAs.

 Bacteria incubated with several HCAs tend to develop the type of mutations 
often used to gauge cancer risk. However, when dilute concentrations of beer, 
sake, or brandy were added to the microbial communities, HCAs were able to 
induce few such mutations, according to a report of the work in the January 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.

 Stout ale proved 10 times more potent than lager at inhibiting mutations due 
to the HCA known as Trp-P-2. Though sake, brandy, and white wine also inhibited 
DNA damage from this HCA, they were only about half as protective as lager-yet 
10 times as effective as whisky. Nonalcoholic beer showed no effect.

 When Arimoto-Kobayashi's team fed Trp-P-2 to mice, the chemical bound to the 
DNA in their livers, forming a structure known as an adduct. Adduct formation 
can be a first step on the path to many cancers.

 However, when the researchers laced the animals' diet with some polyphenols 
that had been extracted from beer, adduct formation dropped dramatically.

 The researchers conclude that alcoholic beverages such as beer may protect 
against some HCAs. However, in the tests using bacteria, even the best-acting 
beers offered no shield against the most prevalent HCAs produced in meat, such 
as PhIP and MeIQx.

 What all of these studies do indicate, Gray maintains, "is that there are a 
lot of things you can do in your home to counteract HCAs." Not only would most 
of these treatments cost little, but some actually make foods tastier and more 
nutritious.

 Meat and cherries-a healthy marriage

 Having grown up in a small orchard, Cindy Pleva has always loved tart 
cherries. When she was 18 years old, the Michigan native became national cherry 
queen. Meeting with many growers, she learned that demand for the fruits of 
their labors was falling.

 Sitting at the dinner table one night, she asked her dad if there wasn't 
something he could do to help her constituency. A butcher for 32 years, he 
began mulling over the request.

 A few months later, Ray Pleva offered up one idea at a local cherry festival 
in Traverse City. His cherry-pecan pork sausages sold like hotcakes and went 
on, later that spring, to grab top honors at a national new-foods exhibition in 
Chicago.

 That was 11 years ago, and Ray Pleva has been mixing cherries into meat ever 
since. He's added the fruit to ground beef, buffalo, and turkey. He's developed 
cherry-laced chili, smoked sausage, bratwurst, meatballs, pork-sausage patties, 
and pizza toppings. His products are on school menus in 17 states, he says 
proudly, and are being distributed to retail stores in the Midwest, California, 
and Washington State.

 Pleva promotes these products as being especially juicy, rich in fiber, and 
lower in fat-and sometimes sodium-than their fruitfree counterparts. 
Nationwide, he notes, sales of his patented cherried meats "will hit close to 5 
million pounds this year."

 And that projection doesn't take into account any boost in consumer enthusiasm 
in response to cherries' anticancer potential.

 How weighty is this cancer risk?

 Diners who see red when their meat and poultry isn't thoroughly browned and 
seasoned with a hint of char might scoff at the notion that their taste 
preference jeopardizes their health. A growing body of data suggests, however, 
that well-done meat, rife with heterocyclic amines (HCAs), poses a substantial, 
preventable cancer threat.

 In rat studies used to model human disease, these meaty compounds have proven 
"a surefire cancer risk," notes John H. Weisburger of the American Health 
Foundation in Valhalla, N.Y. "In my lab, we saw them [induce cancer] in both 
the colon and breast," he says. Researchers elsewhere have found evidence that 
these chemicals may also foster malignancies in the prostate, stomach, and 
pancreas.

 Human data on HCA risks have just begun to emerge. For instance, women who 
routinely eat very well-done meat-with a crispy, blackened crust-face quintuple 
the breast-cancer risk of women who consume their meat rare or medium, 
according to a study last year by scientists at the National Cancer Institute 
(NCI) in Bethesda, Md., and two midwestern universities (SN: 11/28/98, p. 341).

 Toxicologist Kenneth W. Turteltaub at Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National 
Laboratory is part of an international team that has begun trials with patients 
to explore HCAs' relationship to colon cancer.

 The researchers started with methyl IQx (MeIQx). After tagging this HCA with 
radioactive carbon, they packaged a small quantity into capsules-each 
containing an amount equal to that found in five well-done hamburgers. A 
physician then administered one capsule to each of five British patients a few 
hours before surgery for the removal of colon tumors.

 Samples of the cancer and surrounding tissue, excised during surgery, showed 
that the capsule's MeIQx had been activated into a form that binds to DNA, 
creating a potentially carcinogenic aberration known as an adduct.

 Adducts were detected in both the cancerous and healthy colon tissue of the 
study participants. These adducts were chemically identical to those found in 
MeIQx-treated animals that went on to develop colon cancer. In fact, the only 
thing that distinguished the surgery patients' response to the HCA from that of 
the animals, Turteltaub told Science News, is that for a given dose the 
patients made more of the adducts.

 As such, "humans may possibly be at greater relative risk [from HCAs] than 
predicted from rodent-tumor studies," his team suggests in the Feb. 9 
International Journal of Cancer.

 In a follow-up test, another HCA, called PhIP, was given to seven U.S. 
patients 2 or 3 days before colon-cancer surgery. Each got a capsule containing 
an amount of PhIP equal to what has been measured in 6 to 10 ounces of 
well-done chicken or beef. As in the earlier trial, adducts of the ingested 
carcinogen showed up in the colon tissue.

"There is no doubt" that if HCA exposures are high enough, they can cause human 
cancer, concludes Elizabeth G. Snyderwine of NCI. What makes Turteltaub's data 
so important, she says, "is that they show there is a potential for human risk 
from exposures to very low levels"-ones easily encountered in the U.S. diet.


