Science News Online (4/17/99): Astronomers Find Planetary System

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 16 (April 17, 1999)

 Astronomers Find Planetary System

 By R. Cowen

 We are not alone. Astronomers this week reported the first evidence that a 
star similar to the sun has a system of planets circling it.

 By studying variations in the to-and-fro movement of the bright star Upsilon 
Andromedae, just 44 light-years from Earth, two teams of researchers have 
independently deduced that a trio of planets orbits the body. Among the 19 or 
so other nearby, sunlike stars believed to harbor planets, studies have so far 
revealed but a single orbiting body around each.

"This is the one we've been waiting for," says astronomer Stephen P. Maran of 
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., a spokesman for the 
American Astronomical Society. "This clearly shows that there are solar 
systems, not just stars with individual oddball planets."

 The newly discovered planetary system bears little resemblance to our own. Two 
of the three planets are at least twice as massive as Jupiter. The innermost 
one lies within roasting distance of Upsilon Andromedae-about one-eighth the 
distance at which Mercury circles the sun.

 Two groups of astronomers announced the findings at an April 15 press briefing 
in San Francisco. One team includes Peter Nisenson of the Harvard-Smithsonian 
Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass. The other team is led by R. Paul 
Butler of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Epping, Australia, and Geoffrey 
W. Marcy of San Francisco State University and the University of California, 
Berkeley.

 Three years ago, while studying wobbles in the motion of Upsilon Andromedae 
with a spectrograph at the Lick Observatory on Mt. Hamilton, Calif., Butler and 
Marcy detected the gravitational influence of a single, closely orbiting planet 
that whips around the star once every 4.6 days (SN: 7/6/96, p. 11). They noted 
at the time that a single planet could not completely account for the star's 
wobble.

 Tracking the star's motion at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory atop Mt. 
Hopkins, Ariz., another team, including Nisenson, had come to the same 
conclusion. Last summer, with both teams hot on the trail of a second planet, 
the two groups began sharing data. Collectively, they have made some 140 
observations of the star since 1995.

"It's very difficult to find multiple planetary systems since you have to have 
many years of data," says Butler.

 Early this year, both teams concluded that Upsilon Andromedae must have a 
second planet in a much larger and more elongated orbit than the first. This 
planet, at least 4.1 times the mass of Jupiter, circles the star about once 
every 3.5 years at an average distance of 2.5 astronomical units (AU). One AU 
is the separation between Earth and the sun.

 A few weeks ago, the researchers realized that a subtle variation in the 
star's motion remained unexplained. Further analysis revealed that a third 
companion orbits the star every 242 days at an average distance of 0.83 AU.

"By having two independent [data] sets, we're just extremely positive that this 
is all real," Nisenson says.

 The findings, says Alan P. Boss of the Carnegie Institution of Washington 
(D.C.), could quell critics, including himself, who maintain that some of the 
extrasolar planets previously detected are actually failed stars known as brown 
dwarfs. Finding a system of bodies rather than individual objects "is one of 
the hallmarks of planets," he says. "This discovery goes a long way toward 
reassuring us about what has been found so far."


