Science News Online (5/1/99): Plate Tectonics . . . on Mars

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 18 (May 1, 1999)

 Plate Tectonics . . . on Mars

 Magnetic map reveals ancient activity on the Red Planet

 By Ron Cowen

 Slipping, sliding, sinking, rising: Earth's surface is in constant motion. 
Fragmented into giant sheets of solid rock that glide atop a layer of hotter, 
more pliable material, the globe's appearance is forever changing. Where two 
sheets meet, violent activity ensues. When they crash head-on, mountains arise; 
where one sheet dives under another, earthquakes may erupt.

 Scientists first proposed this movement, now known as plate tectonics, in 
1912, but confirmation didn't come until the 1960s. Since then, this model has 
revolutionized understanding of the forces that shape our planet.

 Now astronomers have found evidence that another planet may have undergone a 
similar series of facelifts. New measurements of Mars' magnetic field suggest 
that plate tectonics reigned supreme on the Red Planet-for at least the first 
half billion years or so of its 4.5-billion-year existence.

 The movement of sheets of crust could have been every bit as important on the 
Mars of long ago as it is on Earth today, says Jack E.P. Connerney of NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. In the April 30 Science, 
Connerney, Mario H. Acuna of Goddard, and their colleagues describe magnetic 
activity on Mars observed by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft.

 Planetary scientists have contended for more than 25 years that water was once 
abundant on Mars. Early images had revealed dried-up channels scarring the 
planet's surface.

"If one believes early Mars was wet, then it makes plate tectonics more 
reasonable," says Gerald Schubert of the University of California, Los Angeles. 
"Alternatively, one could turn this around . . . accept plate tectonics, and 
use this as independent support for a lot of water on early Mars."

 On Earth, water serves as a natural lubricant that helps keep the sheets of 
crust in motion. Connerney suggests that water may have played the same role on 
ancient Mars.

 As the movement of plates dredged up rock from the depths of Mars and brought 
it back down again, it could have transported both water and carbon dioxide. 
The recycled carbon dioxide may have generated, or at least helped sustain, a 
dense, carbon-rich atmosphere early in the history of Mars. This blanket of 
greenhouse gas could have warmed the planet. Plate tectonics thus would add 
support to the view that the Red Planet was once a warmer, wetter place with a 
climate hospitable for life.

 An end of plate tectonics on the Red Planet several billion years ago could 
explain an enduring mystery: If the surface of Mars once had an abundant supply 
of water, where did it all go?

 Geologist Norman H. Sleep of Stanford University argues that water continually 
transported to and from the surface as a result of plate tectonics would have 
been trapped in the planet's crust after tectonic activity ceased. Little water 
would have been left on the surface once plate tectonics stopped, he says.

 Five years ago, Sleep proposed that plate tectonics could have created the 
vast lowlands on the northern half of Mars, just as it has formed ocean basins 
on Earth.

 If plate tectonics proves correct, it "explains and unifies the entire 
geological history [of the Red Planet]. It also will provide a second example 
to help understand the physics of plate tectonics on Earth," Sleep says.

 Adds Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, "It's going 
to tell us much more about how the core of the planet dumped its heat." That's 
vital, she says, because heat loss from the planet's interior might explain why 
the ancient planet was warm enough and its atmosphere thick enough for water to 
exist on the surface.

"The thermal state of the interior of the planet is something that you really 
need to understand to get to the early climate history of Mars. It's a very 
critical piece of the puzzle," Zuber says.

 The new findings stem from measurements made by a magnetometer aboard Mars 
Global Surveyor, which has orbited the planet since the fall of 1997. Unlike 
visible-light cameras and X-ray and gamma-ray detectors, which probe at or just 
beneath the surface, a magnetometer senses activity several kilometers below. 
Shortly after it arrived in Mars' vicinity, the spacecraft swooped low enough 
to search for magnetic activity along a narrow band of the planet near the 
north pole.

 Surveyor detected several magnetized patches of terrain, some with fields as 
strong as 400 nanoteslas, or 1.3 percent of Earth's field (SN: 10/18/97, p. 
246). The most likely explanation for the magnetic features, Connerney noted 
then, is that they are relics of a global magnetic field active on Mars long 
ago.

 This past January, as part of a maneuver to trim the craft's elliptical orbit 
into the circular one designed for mapping the planet, Surveyor dipped down 
into Mars' dense upper atmosphere. It got low enough-101 to 110 kilometers 
above the surface-for the magnetometer to map a vast region called Terra 
Sirenum. This highland terrain takes up about one-third of the southern 
hemisphere.

 With those observations, "we won the lottery," says Acuna, leader of the 
international team of scientists that coordinates magnetic studies on Surveyor. 
While passing over several strips of land in Terra Sirenum, Surveyor detected 
buried magnetic fields four times stronger than those it had recorded in the 
northern region.

 The craft, however, found no sign of a magnetic field in the vicinity of 
several huge, ancient craters. These include the 8-km-deep, 4,200-km-wide hole 
in the ground known as Hellas, Acuna and his colleagues note in this week's 
Science.

 Astronomers believe that these craters formed when chunks of debris pelted the 
inner solar system some 3.8 billion years ago. As old as these craters are, the 
global magnetic field that once existed on Mars must have vanished before they 
formed, Acuna asserts.

 Any large impact, he notes, heats rock to temperatures well above 600@C-high 
enough to erase any magnetic field that metallic particles within the rock 
might have acquired. If the Martian field was still strong at the time the 
craters formed, it would have immediately realigned and remagnetized the 
particles as they cooled.

 The observations over Terra Sirenum thus suggest that the magnetic field-as 
well as the turbulent conditions required to generate one-lasted on Mars for 
only a few hundred million years.

"The planet started off very hot and cooled very fast, which you would expect 
for a small object," says Acuna. Mars has half the diameter of Earth.

 Scientists believe that the Martian field arose the same way that Earth's 
still-active field did, through the action of a dynamo generated by the rise 
and fall of molten material deep within a rotating planet.

 Knowledge of the duration and strength of the dynamo may ultimately reveal the 
composition of the Martian core, in particular the relative amounts of iron and 
sulfur it contains. Too little sulfur, and the fluid might congeal too rapidly 
to generate a magnetic field lasting for even a few hundred million years. Too 
much sulfur, and the molten material generating the dynamo would maintain the 
magnetic field even to the present.

"The dynamo tells us what was going on inside of Mars," Acuna notes.

 The measurements also date the Martian crust. Areas in which Surveyor detected 
magnetic fields must be essentially untouched from the earliest days of the 
planet, 4 billion years ago, when the magnetic field was active. In the 
southern highlands, "what we're looking at is the oldest surviving unmodified 
crust of Mars," Acuna says.

 Dating the age of ancient crust and determining how long the magnetic field 
lasted on the Red Planet are but two of the feats accomplished by the 
magnetometer. During its passage over Terra Sirenum, the detector recorded an 
intriguing pattern that could change forever the way planetary scientists view 
the history of Mars, Connerney says.

 As Surveyor flew over Terra Sirenum, the magnetometer acted like a compass 
needle alternately pointing north and south. The instrument indicated that 
Terra Sirenum is divided into several stripes, each about 200 km wide, whose 
residual magnetic fields point in opposite directions. That same pattern, known 
as magnetic striping, led geologists in the 1960s to conclude that plate 
tectonics continually reshapes Earth's surface.

 Connerney's interpretation of the striping hinges upon the observation that a 
dynamo periodically flips the direction of its magnetic field. Earth's magnetic 
field, for example, averages several reversals every million years.

 The stripes of iron-rich rock on Mars have different magnetic orientations, he 
argues, because they solidified at different times. Each stripe represents a 
snapshot of the Martian magnetic field from a different epoch.

 So far, so good. But why should the surface exhibit the striping pattern 
rather than consisting of a jumble of patches with randomly oriented magnetic 
fields?

 To explain the pattern discovered by Surveyor, Connerney introduces the idea 
of plate tectonics. He suggests that striping arose at ancient Martian sites 
where neighboring plates of rock slowly pulled apart, allowing molten material 
from below to rise to the surface and form new crust. If the planet's magnetic 
field had flipped its polarity between the times that the old and the new crust 
solidified, the freshly generated crust would carry a magnetic imprint exactly 
opposite to that of the plates on either side of it.

"This magnetic imprint that we see is similar to the imprint that we see on 
Earth where plate tectonics is making new crust in the ocean," says Connerney. 
"So we think this is certainly a possible explanation for what we see on Mars."

 If anything, the magnetic data collected by Surveyor is more clear-cut than 
comparable measurements made on Earth, Connerney adds. "In all the centuries 
that we've been making magnetic measurements on Earth, we've never produced a 
map quite like this," he says.

 Any magnetic map of Earth's crust, Connerney notes, must contend with our 
planet's still-active global magnetic field. That makes it difficult to 
determine whether a magnetic signal from the crust represents a permanent 
field-akin to a bar magnet embedded in the rock-or a field induced by Earth's 
still-active global magnetic field.

 On Mars today, "there is no global magnetic field," he says. Consequently, 
measurements truly reflect a remnant field rather than an induced one. 
"Clearly, you can do things on Mars that a geophysicist can only dream of doing 
on Earth."

 The younger, northern lowlands of Mars show no evidence of striping, and much 
less of the crust appears to be magnetized, Connerney says. These observations 
suggest that both the Martian magnetic field and plate tectonics had died away 
before volcanic activity melted and resurfaced this vast region of the planet.

 It's possible that the fading of the global magnetic field and plate tectonics 
are intimately linked, Connerney speculates. When the interior lost so much 
heat that it could no longer power the dynamo, it may also have had too little 
energy to drive plate tectonics.

 Schubert says he's skeptical about interpreting the magnetic field 
measurements as evidence of plate tectonics. He says that Connerney and his 
colleagues need to consider other models before concluding that Terra Sirenum 
is composed of elongated sheets of rock that have opposite polarity.

 Moreover, Acuna argues that a process completely independent of plate 
tectonics could explain magnetic striping. He proposes that stresses or 
fractures in the crust may account for the pattern. Breaks in the crust could 
jumble the original magnetic signature and create a new, oppositely directed 
field. The process, he says, is similar to what happens when a bar magnet is 
cut in two. The cut ends generate a north pole and south pole opposite in 
direction to the field of the uncut magnet.

"These hypotheses are going to take a lot of testing," comments Zuber, who 
plans to look for signs of plate tectonic activity in gravity maps compiled 
from Surveyor data. "What I think is going to hold up is that there is evidence 
of a dynamo action really, really early in Mars' history, and then it appeared 
to shut off rapidly," she says.

 If ancient Mars truly did undergo a period of plate tectonic activity, says 
Zuber "then it's a real home run."


