Science News Online (5/1/99): Parasites make frogs grow extra legs

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 18 (May 1, 1999)

 Parasites make frogs grow extra legs

 By S. Milius

 In the great mystery of what's causing deformities among frogs in North 
America, two new research papers make a parasite, once just a minor suspect, 
look a lot more suspicious.

 For the first time, laboratory tests have shown that a parasitic trematode, a 
flatworm, can cause tree frog abnormalities ranging from six extra legs to no 
hind legs at all, say Pieter T.J. Johnson of Claremont (Calif.) McKenna College 
and his colleagues. In the April 30 Science, they finger Ribeiroia as the 
villain in ponds in Santa Clara County, Calif.

"This is the first study that has isolated the cause of deformed frogs," 
Johnson argues. He doesn't expect parasites to be the answer everywhere, 
however.

 In the same issue of Science, another team says that a survey of nearly 400 
frogs with extra legs, mostly tree frogs from the Pacific Northwest, reveals a 
malformation pattern typical of parasite damage. Led by Stanley K. Sessions of 
Hartwick College in Oneonta, N.Y., the researchers maintain that the pattern 
rules out another suspect, a group of chemicals called retinoids.

 Reports of occasional deformed frogs date back centuries, but alarm ignited in 
1995, when Minnesota schoolchildren found deformities in almost half the 
leopard frogs they caught. So far, abnormalities have turned up in 36 amphibian 
species from 42 states. Scientists have been exploring three major suspects: 
pollutants such as retinoids, ultraviolet light, and parasites.

 While doing an undergraduate project in 1996, Johnson focused on deformed Hyla 
regilla frogs in four ponds. Collected eggs developed normally in the lab, so 
he ruled out genetic factors. Water tests detected no obvious pollutants, and 
he noticed that a troubled pond flowed into one with normal animals.

 Checking 35 local ponds, he found that only his 4 had both tree frogs and a 
snail notorious as a flatworm host. In the laboratory, Alaria trematodes caused 
no frog deformities but Ribeiroia did.

 Retinoid researcher David M. Gardiner of the University of California, Irvine 
ranks Johnson's work as "really important because it brings parasites up to the 
level [of the other hypotheses]." Commenting on the Sessions paper, Gardiner 
says that he's not convinced deformity patterns can pinpoint parasite damage, 
however.

 The new work doesn't faze James G. Burkhart from the National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C. He studies 
pollutants in deformity hot spots (SN: 10/11/97, p. 230). Among potential 
causes nationwide, "I've never excluded parasites," he says. "That just happens 
not to be what we have" in Minnesota and Vermont.

 Nor will the parasite work dampen interest in UV and pollutant research at the 
Environmental Protection Agency's Duluth, Minn., office, says Gerald T. Ankley. 
"It would be premature to say that we've solved the problem."


