Science News Online (5/15/99): What's That Smell?

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 20 (May 15, 1999)

 What's That Smell?

 Modern science puts its mark on a rare but ancient body-odor disease

 By Damaris Christensen

 In this model proposed for the enzyme flavin monoxygenase 3 (FMO3), red 
designates mutations known to alter the enzyme's function, some of which cause 
trimethylaminuria. White, yellow, green, and blue indicate structurally 
different areas of the enzyme, and purple represents compounds required for the 
enzyme's action. A different group of researchers developed the structure for 
FMO3 on the cover of this issue. (J. Cashman, Human BioMolecular Research 
Institute, San Diego; E. Adman, University of Washington)

"What have we here? A man or a fish? Dead or alive? He smells like a fish; a 
very ancient and fish-like smell . . ." -William Shakespeare, "The Tempest"

 Shakespeare's description of the socially rejected island dweller, Caliban, 
aptly demonstrates that people have long been aware of a particularly offensive 
smell. Today, body odors are among the most sensitive of topics and figure into 
some of the deadliest insults.

 Inspired by advertising, most people avoid having a socially unacceptable 
smell thanks to frequent showers and deodorants, perfumes, or colognes. 
However, for people with a rare genetic disorder known as fish odor syndrome, 
none of these is enough.

 Since few health professionals are aware of this disease, also called 
trimethylaminuria, people experiencing its characteristic body odor may spend 
years seeking relief. They often acquire a long list of inaccurate diagnoses, 
ranging from poor hygiene to psychiatric problems. These people may withdraw 
from the outside world to avoid ridicule or try to mask their odor with strong 
perfumes and cigarettes. Many of those with the disorder also report symptoms 
of depression.

"People think this disease is a laughing matter, but for the people who have 
it, it is not. This syndrome can be highly destructive to a person's personal 
and social life and to their work and career," says Robert L. Smith, a 
molecular toxicologist at the Imperial College School of Medicine in London who 
recently cochaired the first-ever scientific meeting on trimethylaminuria. Held 
in late March at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., the 
conference gathered from around the globe about 30 researchers studying 
trimethylaminuria-many of them without funding-and a few of the people who have 
been diagnosed with the disorder.

 The first case of trimethylaminuria was described in the medical literature in 
the 1970s, but literary references may go back a thousand years. For example, 
an ancient Hindu tale describes a maiden who "grew to be comely and fair, but a 
fishy odor ever clung to her."

 Although they show no apparent lack of hygiene or obvious medical symptoms, 
most people with the disorder report having foul body odors, bad breath, or a 
bad taste in their mouths. Studies in the last few years have shown that 
trimethylaminuria results from defects in an enzyme that breaks down 
trimethylamine, a byproduct of protein digestion released by bacteria living in 
the gut. This small molecule-the compound that gives fish their fishy 
odor-smells foul or garbagelike at low concentrations and fishy in larger 
amounts.

 People with the disorder can release trimethylamine through breath, sweat, and 
urine. A few have a strong odor all the time, but most others experience a less 
severe smell that fluctuates over time. Researchers speculate that the 
variability of symptoms indicates that a range of genetic mutations can cause 
the disease and that stress and diet play a role in triggering symptoms.

here is no cure for fish odor syndrome, but a special diet can alleviate the 
worst of the odor problems. This low-protein regime restricts the amino acid 
choline, a building block of protein naturally found in high concentrations in 
fish, eggs, beans, and organ meats. Some people also report that limiting 
lecithin, a common food additive that is also naturally found in eggs, 
soybeans, and corn, helps reduce odor.

 Because bacteria in the gut produce most of the trimethylamine in the body, 
some people have found that low doses of antibiotics, which kill off these 
bacteria, temporarily help keep odor down.

 Although only about a hundred cases have been described in the scientific 
literature worldwide, the syndrome may not be as rare as that number suggests. 
Estimates of the disease's prevalence are sketchy at best.

 Odor problems are such a sensitive topic that many people may be wary of 
talking about their symptoms to a doctor, says Harry W. McConnell of King's 
College Hospital in London. "The name [fish odor syndrome] contributes greatly 
to the stigma of this disorder," he says, adding that the name "is misleading 
since the odor is variable."

 Because the disease is practically unknown by any name, it may take years for 
a person with trimethylaminuria to find a doctor who can recognize the problem. 
In a survey given to 22 people who had been identified as having the syndrome, 
McConnell found that it typically took them 5 to 10 years to seek medical care 
after their symptoms appeared. The correct diagnosis then required, on average, 
another 10 years.

 Trimethylaminuria is only occasionally identified during childhood. The 
affected children, however, are likely to become disturbed and even suicidal 
because of the problems their odor causes in schools, says Ertan Mayatepek of 
the University Children's Hospital in Heidelberg, Germany. The odor problems in 
some children seem to disappear as they age, but researchers don't know why.

 Nor do they know why the syndrome seems to be more common in women than in 
men. Scientists suspect that sex hormones exacerbate symptoms. A variety of 
reports say that the disease in women gets worse around puberty, just before 
and during menstrual periods, after taking oral contraceptives, and around 
menopause.

 Finally, some cases of trimethylaminuria may have no genetic component: 
Several patients seem to have developed the disorder after liver or kidney 
disease.

 Scientists discovered the gene implicated in trimethylaminuria in 1997. 
Located on the end of a chromosome, it encodes one of a series of enzymes 
called flavin monooxygenases (FMOs). Researchers suspect that these enzymes' 
most important role is in eliminating environmental toxins from the body. The 
enzyme known as FMO3, for example, helps break down diet-derived 
nitrogen-containing compounds, including trimethylamine, and possibly drugs 
containing nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus.

 The gene for FMO3 can suffer from any of about 10 different mutations. Most 
people showing symptoms of trimethylaminuria have inherited two mutated copies 
of the gene. Scientists suggest that the variety of genetic mutations might 
explain differences in the timing of disease onset and how strong the odor is.

 Environmental factors may also play a role. Some types of bacteria that people 
have in their guts might produce more trimethylaminuria than other types, 
speculates Paul V. Fennessey, a pharmacologist at the University of Colorado 
Health Sciences Center in Denver. Alternatively, if the enzyme that breaks down 
trimethylaminuria is just barely keeping up, sudden increases in the amount of 
trimethylamine eaten or produced in the body could trigger symptoms, he adds.

 Animal studies have provided evidence that a compound known as 
indole-3-carbinol, found in broccoli and other dark green vegetables, blocks 
the function of the enzyme system that breaks down trimethylamine, says David 
E. Williams, a molecular toxicologist at Oregon State University in Corvallis. 
If this holds true in people, avoiding broccoli and other leafy greens, in 
addition to limiting protein intake, might help reduce odor problems, he says.

 Some studies have suggested that people who carry only one copy of a mutated 
gene may be susceptible to transient fish-odor attacks during periods of stress 
or after eating foods that contain large amounts of trimethylamine or its 
chemical precursors, says Stephen C. Mitchell of the Imperial College School of 
Medicine. Doctors can use this observation to identify carriers of the mutated 
gene. When they receive a high dose of choline, people with at least one copy 
of a mutated gene for FMO3 excrete high levels of smelly trimethylamine in 
their urine. This test is also used to diagnose trimethylaminuria.

 Because FMO3's functions in the body are not well understood, doctors don't 
know what symptoms, other than odor, might be linked to trimethylaminuria. 
Researchers suspect that the enzyme breaks down many substances besides 
trimethylamine. For example, various drugs, such as antidepressants, may be 
broken down by FMO3. If the enzyme isn't working properly, people might suffer 
additional side effects from some of these drugs, they suggest. A few people 
with trimethylaminuria at the conference reported that they had taken 
antidepressants, but the drugs did not seem effective and actually worsened 
their odor.

 Animal studies also support the idea that FMOs break down drugs. 
Indole-3-carbinole, which inhibits FMO3 and its relatives, seems to increase 
the effectiveness in mice of the pain medication codeine, Williams reports. 
These findings suggest that the drug is broken down differently when the FMO 
system is not working, he says. Test-tube experiments in his laboratory suggest 
that the enzyme system may also help break down nicotine and the anticancer 
drug tamoxifen.

 The liver, a reservoir of digestive enzymes, produces most of the body's FMOs. 
Production of these proteins has also been detected in midbrain nerve cells, 
skeletal muscle, adrenal and salivary glands, thyroid and lung tissue, and the 
skin. The functions of the enzymes in these various locations remain unknown.

 Although the vast majority of people so far diagnosed with the disorder appear 
to have normal mental and physical abilities, some researchers suspect that the 
enzyme deficiency itself may cause depression and trigger seizures. For 
example, a Pennsylvania teenager with trimethylaminuria and a tendency to 
suffer seizures found that his seizures stopped when he went on a 
protein-restricted diet, says McConnell.

 The unanswered questions about trimethylaminuria seem endless, yet money to 
support studies of the disease is scarce, say researchers. Because the Wellcome 
Trust in England has sponsored several studies of the disease, Britain has the 
dubious distinction of having the most reported cases of fish odor syndrome in 
the world.

 At the recent NIH conference, researchers called for development of a new 
diagnostic test that will be less off-putting-the current assessment procedure 
temporarily makes the symptoms worse. The researchers also saw a need for a 
consortium that would coordinate clinical research so that studies could 
include more than a few participants. The meeting organizers hope that patients 
will form an advocacy group to raise money for research into this rare disease.

"There are two very difficult aspects of this disorder," McConnell says. "One 
is diagnosing it in the first place. The second is treating it, since it isn't 
enough to just give people a list of things they can't eat, which includes most 
of their previous diet." Moreover, the people with the syndrome complain that 
it's difficult to find out which foods contain choline and lecithin.

 Doctors don't expect antibiotics to become the treatment of choice because 
they aren't effective enough to control the disease without a restricted diet. 
Even if they were more effective, regular use of antibiotics would upset the 
digestive system and raise the specter of life-threatening drug-resistant 
infections.

 If mutations in the FMO3 gene are as common as scientists suspect, it might be 
worth developing a screening test to be used at birth, says Eileen Treacy of 
the Montreal Children's Hospital.

 Challenge tests for trimethylaminuria in England indicate that up to 1 percent 
of people worldwide carry at least one copy of a mutated gene for the critical 
enzyme, McConnell reports. Because people must inherit two copies of a mutated 
gene to show symptoms of the disease, 1 in 10,000 people would be expected to 
have the syndrome. Researchers believe that equatorial regions have even higher 
percentages of people carrying the mutated genes, McConnell says.

 Treacy points to the metabolic disorder known as phenylketonuria, or PKU. The 
disease causes mental retardation and nervous system problems in about 1 child 
in 12,000. Because PKU can be treated successfully with diet and drugs, every 
child born in a U.S. hospital is screened for the disease. Trimethylaminuria 
and PKU probably affect roughly similar numbers of children, meaning screening 
for trimethylaminuria is a realistic possibility, she says.

 The ignorance and confusion surrounding trimethylaminuria are perhaps the most 
devastating parts of the disease, says McConnell. "It's absolutely essential to 
get the word out. We have a potentially treatable disorder that is grossly 
underdiagnosed," he insists.

 Sandy Gordon, a New Yorker, quit working because of her odor. Before 
discovering that she had trimethylaminuria, she spent almost $30,000 on tests 
and five exploratory surgeries that her health insurance wouldn't pay for.

"At this point, I don't want a cure. I just want information," says Gordon, who 
has started an informal support group for people with trimethylaminuria. "I 
just want people with this disorder to know they are not crazy."


