Science News Online (5/15/99): Depression, sadness yield brain link

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 20 (May 15, 1999)

 Depression, sadness yield brain link

 By B. Bower

 Major depression includes not only feelings of intense sadness and despair but 
also a wandering, indecisive train of thought. Distinct brain areas involved in 
emotion and attention together foster both depression and ordinary bouts of 
sadness, according to a new study.

 Specific changes in these neural regions accompany recovery from major 
depression, whether achieved with an antidepressant drug or placebo pills, says 
a team of neuroscientists led by Helen S. Mayberg of the Rotman Research 
Institute in Toronto.

"The negative influence of depressed mood on attention is probably due to 
functional connections between these two brain regions," Mayberg says. 
"Successful treatment, including placebo use, alters those connections."

 Mayberg's group first took positron emission tomography (PET) scans of eight 
women resting and after recalling a sad personal experience. The PET scans 
measured blood-flow changes in their brains, an indirect sign of boosts or 
drops in brain-cell activity. None of the women or their family members had 
been diagnosed with mood disorders.

 In a second trial, the researchers took PET scans of eight men before and 
after successful treatment for major depression. Over 6 weeks, four men had 
improved after taking the antidepressant drug fluoxetine (Prozac); the rest had 
rallied in response to pills that they thought might be antidepressants but 
that contained no active ingredients.

 When the women recalled sad experiences, blood-flow surged in a pair of the 
inner brain structures that regulate emotional responses and declined in two 
parts of the brain's outer layer previously linked to attention, the team 
reports in the May American Journal of Psychiatry. The men who had recovered 
from depression showed unusually high activity in the two attention areas and 
low activity in the emotion areas.

 Before recovery, however, the depressed men had exhibited marked overactivity 
in only one of the two emotion-related areas characteristic of brief sadness in 
the women. Further research will examine more closely the processes that occur 
during depression, Mayberg says.

 The findings suggest that a brain circuit incorporating emotion and attention 
"offers a plausible converging point" for antidepressant effects of drugs and 
psychotherapy, remark psychiatrist Charles B. Nemeroff of Emory University 
School of Medicine in Atlanta and his coworkers in an accompanying editorial.

 Researchers haven't yet explored brain function in the substantial minority of 
depressed people who don't benefit from treatment, Mayberg adds.


