Science News Online (5/15/99): Oklahoma Tornado Sets Wind Record

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 20 (May 15, 1999)

 Oklahoma Tornado Sets Wind Record

 By R. Monastersky

 Doppler radar picture of one of the Oklahoma tornadoes on May 3. (Bluestein 
and Pazmany)

 Tornado-chasing scientists in Oklahoma last week measured wind speeds of 318 
miles per hour, the highest ever documented on Earth. These radar observations, 
which still must be verified, also captured the birth of a tornado and will 
help researchers unravel the conditions that spawn such killer storms.

"It's really fascinating watching this tornado come together. That was the 
first time we were positioned so well with the radar to get these data," says 
Joshua Wurman, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Oklahoma in 
Norman. Wurman and his team used two Doppler radars mounted on separate trucks 
to study the tornadoes that ravaged the Oklahoma City area on May 3.

 The Doppler radars, cousins of police radar guns, gauge wind speed by shooting 
pulses of microwaves that reflect off rain, dust, and other objects in the air 
(SN: 6/22/96, p. 388). The new wind speed measurement by one of Wurman's radars 
shatters the previous record of 286 mph, taken during a 1991 tornado by 
atmospheric scientist Howard B. Bluestein of the University of Oklahoma. He had 
used a more primitive Doppler radar.

"If this measurement holds up, it will be a remarkable thing," says Joseph H. 
Golden, a research meteorologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration in Silver Spring, Md. He cautions, though, that "everybody has 
to be careful until people have a chance to sift through these data."

 The Doppler radars measure winds more than 65 feet above the ground, making it 
difficult to compare these data with the Fujita scale, used to assess tornado 
damage to houses and other objects on the ground, says Wurman. The strongest 
documented tornadoes, designated F-5, carry frame houses considerable 
distances, send automobiles flying, and strip the bark off trees.

 The late Tetsuya Theodore Fujita, who designed the scale, estimated that F-5 
tornadoes have wind speeds of 261 to 318 mph just above the surface. 
Meteorologists, however, consider these numbers only rough guides. "The F scale 
has never been well calibrated, particularly at the F-4 and F-5 damage 
categories," says Golden.

 Last week's record winds will help scientists probe the speed limits of the 
atmosphere, where friction and other forces put the brakes on flowing air, says 
Wurman. "There have always been questions about how high wind speeds could get."

 Before recording the top wind speed, Wurman's team captured the birth of this 
violent tornado, which eventually passed through Oklahoma City. The researchers 
observed the storm for 8 minutes before the tornado's birth and then documented 
the first 6 minutes of its life.

 Tornadoes develop when winds high above the ground flow at a different speed 
than winds near the surface, causing the air to roll along a horizontal axis, 
like the wheels of a car. If a thunderstorm is brewing at the same time, 
updrafts and downdrafts can tilt the rolling winds so that they spin around a 
vertical axis, setting a broad region of the storm slowly rotating. 
Meteorologists call such a storm a mesocyclone.

"What's not well understood is how the mesocyclone then spawns a tornado," says 
Wurman.

 The data collected last week are expected to shed some light on that process 
and others, as different teams analyze their gigabytes of measurements. 
Bluestein and his coworkers studied some of the same Oklahoma storms using a 
Doppler radar with much higher resolution, designed by Andrew L. Pazmany of the 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst. "These are the highest-resolution 
images anyone's ever gotten inside a tornado," says Bluestein.


