Science News Online (5/1/99): Living-Cell Dialysis Works on Dogs

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 18 (May 1, 1999)

 Living-Cell Dialysis Works on Dogs

 By N. Seppa

 For patients with kidney failure, dialysis machines can sustain life for a 
while but they can't save it. While these devices remove many toxins from the 
blood, their membranous filters don't catch the tiniest impurities. Nor do the 
machines produce hormones and enzymes, an essential task of normal kidneys. 
That's why a middle-age person with chronic renal failure has less than a 50-50 
chance of living more than 5 years on dialysis.

 Using a machine that sounds as if it belongs in a science fiction novel, 
researchers in Michigan have devised a blood-cleansing technique that 
incorporates living kidney tissue. Their study of the device's use on dogs, 
reported in the May Nature Biotechnology, opens up the possibility that such 
machines might someday aid people.

 To test the new dialysis machine, scientists removed the kidneys from 12 dogs. 
Six dogs then received traditional dialysis. The rest were treated with the new 
filtration system, which has live kidney cells from pigs growing in a chamber 
of the machine. Over a 24-hour period, blood tests showed the new method 
provided the dogs with higher-quality blood than did routine dialysis.

 Kidneys filter out toxins and debris in the blood, a process that dialysis 
duplicates fairly well. Dialysis, however, isn't as adept at controlling 
electrolytes in the body, particularly calcium, phosphorus, and potassium ions. 
These ions can accumulate and alter a patient's electrolytic balance, says 
study coauthor William F. Weitzel, a nephrologist at the University of Michigan 
in Ann Arbor.

 By taking up the ions, the living kidney cells in the new machine may help 
stabilize electrolytic balance and thus metabolism. In particular, the cells 
controlled potassium well, Weitzel says.

 The pig cells in the new machine, which are nourished by the blood from the 
dogs' bodies, also yielded signs of restoring other kidney functions.

 Vitamin D concentrations in the dogs on the new bio-artificial dialysis were 
significantly higher than in the other dogs, as were concentrations of 
glutathione, an antioxidant compound that plays a role in the immune system. 
The bio-artificial dialysis machine also removed ammonia from the blood more 
efficiently than did routine dialysis, but not quite as effectively as living 
kidneys, Weitzel says.

 The results indicate that the pig cells are producing the hormones and enzymes 
that carry out these essential kidney activities-even in the harsh environment 
within the artificial device. Some of the cells even multiplied.

"It's really pretty exciting that these cells . . . would maintain a complex 
function like that," Weitzel says.

 These advances aren't great enough in themselves to change dialysis procedures 
in hospitals today, he notes. The ultimate goal is to do away with dialysis 
machines. "One can envision an implantable device," Weitzel says, "[but] we're 
a ways away from that."

 Nonetheless, the work "is very exciting," says David M. Briscoe, a pediatric 
nephrologist at Harvard Medical School and Children's Hospital in Boston. This 
report is the first to suggest that a device using live kidney cells can 
replace renal function in an animal, he says. However, "it's likely that it 
will be some time before we will see a fully functional tissue-engineered 
kidney," he concludes.

"This work is a beautiful example of sophisticated targeted research," says 
Clark K. Colton of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the same issue 
of Nature Biotechnology. "The system appears ready for human testing."

 Indeed, Weitzel and his colleagues are now considering which patients might 
gain the most benefit from the new technology. Patients currently on dialysis 
whose other organs start to fail or who develop septic shock-an abundance of 
bacterial toxins in the blood-face a high risk of death. The Michigan 
researchers are currently testing the new dialysis treatment on dogs with 
septic shock to see if the living kidney cells can allay its effects more 
effectively than the standard techniques.


