Science News Online (5/22/99): Common cold virus is foiled by a decoy

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 21 (May 22, 1999)

 Common cold virus is foiled by a decoy

 By N. Seppa

 No one is claiming victory yet, but scientists have won a skirmish in the war 
against the common cold. By giving a drug that mimics a molecule that cold 
viruses use to invade cells, researchers have reduced cold symptoms in some 
people and prevented colds in others.

 A cure for the common cold has been so elusive that it has become a 
20th-century symbol of futility. As funding for cold research dropped sharply 
in the past decade, many researchers gave up on finding a successful treatment. 
Nonetheless, colds continue to be more than an annoyance. They can lead to ear 
infections in children, aggravate asthma attacks, and spawn sinus infections.

 For 15 years, scientists have known that the rhinovirus, which causes roughly 
half of all colds, latches onto cells at a surface molecule called ICAM-1. This 
molecule provides the virus with a means to enter the cell. Once inside, 
rhinovirus commandeers the cell's machinery and replicates itself.

 To turn this exploitation to peoples' advantage, scientists at Boehringer 
Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals in Ridgefield, Conn., devised a truncated version of 
ICAM-1. The virus latches onto this decoy, called tremacamra, reducing the 
likelihood of infecting a cell.

 After the approach succeeded in chimpanzees scientists tried it on 177 
volunteers aged 18 to 60. Each received nose drops containing rhinovirus and 
remained isolated in a hotel room for 8 days to limit contact with other 
viruses.

 Among the 81 people who also received tremacamra-in capsules or a nose 
spray-six times a day for 7 days, less than half developed a cold, the 
researchers report in the May 19 Journal of the American Medical Association 
(JAMA).

 Of 96 people getting an inert substance while exposed to the same virus, 
two-thirds came down with a cold within a week, says coauthor Frederick G. 
Hayden of the University of Virginia School of Medicine in Charlottesville. 
During the test, volunteers and researchers didn't know which treatments were 
placebos.

 Some participants were exposed to the virus shortly before getting the drug; 
some, 12 hours afterward. It didn't matter greatly. During the first week after 
exposure, people getting a placebo recorded roughly double the severity of cold 
symptoms-such as chills, cough, headache, and sore throat-as the people in the 
treated group did. Participants also collected their mucus-laden tissues in 
sealed containers, which revealed that untreated participants produced about 
twice as much mucus as those getting tremacamra did.

 Side effects of the medication were limited to nasal irritation in some 
participants.

 Tests on the participants' mucus discharge revealed less interleukin-8, an 
immune-system protein, in the treated group. Interleukin-8 rushes to the site 
of rhinovirus infections as a helper, but it actually can lead to some cold 
symptoms, such as the inflammation associated with sore throats. Reduction in 
interleukin-8 lessened such inflammation and indicated that the virus was 
replicating less extensively, Hayden says.

 Of course, the study doesn't precisely mirror reality. These people took 
medication within a day of being exposed to the virus. Normally, a person 
doesn't know a cold virus has struck until symptoms arise, which can take 
several days.

 While the study offers hope, "it remains to be seen whether tremacamra will 
have effects when given after symptoms have started, particularly in naturally 
occurring colds," says Kenneth McIntosh of Children's Hospital in Boston, also 
writing in JAMA. "Despite the encouraging findings," he concludes, "it is clear 
that the cure for the common cold is not yet in hand."


