Science News Online (5/8/99): Edible Compound Mimics Insulin

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 19 (May 8, 1999)

 Edible Compound Mimics Insulin

 By N. Seppa

 An obscure compound plucked from a central African fungus works like insulin 
to boost glucose metabolism, tests on mice show. Unlike insulin, however, the 
compound can stand up to the onslaught of digestive juices present in the mouth 
and stomach, and might therefore serve as an edible drug.

 Several oral diabetes drugs are on the market already, but they all risk side 
effects. If the new chemical fares as well in human tests as it has in mice, it 
holds the potential for replacing these drugs or even insulin injections in 
some uses.

 That's a big "if," of course. The substance is still untested in primates.

 Nonetheless, the U.S. and European researchers who discovered it have high 
hopes for the chemical, which for now is simply named L-783,281. The scientists 
report their findings in the May 7 Science.

 The compound stood out among more than 50,000 substances tested because it 
reacted to a molecule on the surface of cells called an insulin receptor. The 
receptor in this case, called tyrosine kinase, acts as a metabolic switch. When 
insulin attaches to it, the molecule ignites a chain reaction within a cell 
that starts the processing of glucose that is circulating in the blood.

 However, some obese people and many diabetes patients have insulin resistance, 
in which insulin and its receptors become estranged and fail to bind, thwarting 
glucose processing. This produces high blood sugar.

 Additional insulin can help, but some diabetes patients need more and more as 
their cells become increasingly resis-tant. To find a replacement signaler that 
would start the chain reaction, the researchers engineered Chinese hamster 
ovary cells to have human insulin receptors. The scientists noted that 
L-783,281 mimicked insulin by stirring these cells to process glucose in 
laboratory dishes. It was 50 to 100 percent as effective as insulin, depending 
on the concentration of L-783,281 used.

 Next, they fed the compound to 32 insulin-resistant mice. "We achieved glucose 
lowering comparable to that elicited by insulin injection," says study coauthor 
Bei Zhang, a biologist at Merck Research Laboratories in Rahway, N.J. In a 
series of tests ranging from a few hours to several days, mice getting 
L-783,281 experienced falling blood-glucose concentrations, whereas mice fed an 
inert substitute had little decline. Cells in the treated mice apparently took 
up the glucose to use as fuel, she says.

 Because the new compound isn't a protein like insulin, it survives the 
mammalian digestive tract, Zhang says. Moreover, to increase glucose 
metabolism, L-783,281 uses a mechanism distinct from those of the four classes 
of oral diabetes drugs already on the market. Therefore, the researchers might 
be able to combine it with them, she says.

 The oral drugs have side effects, such as weight gain or low blood sugar. 
Whether the new compound will avoid such problems is still unknown, she says.

 The fungus harboring L-783,281 came from the leaf of a plant in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire. Researchers have grown more of the fungus in 
Merck's laboratory in Spain. While the plant remains unidentified, the 
scientists have the fungus, which is what matters, says Zhang.

 Drug development is highly competitive; Merck isn't divulging its next step. 
Zhang says only that the company is pursuing "various different approaches."

 In fact, companies are screening thousands of compounds these days, looking 
for potential diabetes treatments in molecules that are impervious to digestive 
juices, says endocrinologist Derek LeRoith of the National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases in Bethesda, Md. LeRoith, who called 
the study "an excellent paper," suspects Merck might try to modify this 
chemical. "This is not the compound that may finally be used in [a human] 
trial," he surmises. "They may get their chemists to alter it slightly, improve 
on it."


