Science News Online (5/29/99): Heavy exposure to solvent linked to cancer

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 22 (May 29, 1999)

 Heavy exposure to solvent linked to cancer

 By N. Seppa

 The chemical solvent trichloroethylene has a bad reputation these days. The 
popular nonfiction book A Civil Action (1995, Jonathan Harr, Random House) and 
its movie version relate how residents of a Massachusetts town came to blame a 
set of leukemia cases on trichloroethylene and other chemicals in the town's 
water supply.

 In Europe, scientists know trichloroethylene well. During studies of various 
cancers, they have analyzed patients' exposure to the solvent. While the work 
hasn't yet produced hard proof that the chemical causes malignancies, German 
researchers now report strong evidence linking excessive trichloroethy-lene 
exposure to cancer via a specific gene mutation.

 For decades, metal-processing workers in Germany used trichloroethylene as a 
degreaser-breathing its fumes in poorly ventilated rooms, washing floors with 
it, even scrubbing their hands and arms with the chemical. To gauge the cancer 
risk these practices imparted, scientists scrutinized a gene called von 
Hippel-Lindau (VHL), which normally suppresses the disease.

 Mutations in this gene cropped up in 33 of 44 kidney cancer patients who had 
been exposed to trichloroethylene in the workplace, researchers report in the 
May 19 Journal of the National Cancer Institute. In general, about half of 
kidney cancer patients have a mutated VHL, says coauthor Hiltrud Brauch of the 
Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology in Stuttgart.

 The intensity of exposure to trichloroethylene varied among the former factory 
workers, and those getting heavier doses of the solvent over many years were 
more likely to have multiple VHL mutations. Of the 17 cancer patients with the 
greatest solvent exposures, 11 had two or more mutations in VHL.

 The VHL gene is a string of hundreds of nucleotides, the components of DNA. At 
nucleotide 454, the scientists identified a potential weak link in the 
molecular chain. In 13 of the trichloroethylene-exposed cancer patients, a 
defect showed up at this precise location. In contrast, none of 107 people with 
kidney cancer who had not been exposed to trichloroethylene and none of 97 
healthy volunteers had a mutation at nucleotide 454. Of 14 patients with 
multiple VHL mutations, 9 had a defect at the 454 spot.

"I think this is a very important, exciting study," says W. Marston Linehan, a 
urologist at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. While researchers 
suspected a link between trichloroethylene and kidney cancer, "there was no 
molecular basis for it until this study," he says.

 However, the study data don't establish whether such a mutation is merely a 
marker of trichloroethylene overexposure or instead a risk factor for kidney 
cancer, says toxicologist Laura C. Green of Cambridge Environmental, a 
consulting firm in Massachusetts. Further tests on animals may clarify this 
point, she says.

 Also, the study concentrates on gross overexposure to the chemical and so 
contributes little to the debate behind A Civil Action. The German workers 
encountered trichloroethylene doses that "are thousands of times greater" than 
the amounts people typically come across in contaminated air or drinking water, 
Green says.

 The researchers have produced "a good paper," says toxicologist Steven R. 
Tannenbaum of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. However, he cautions 
that the work on VHL mutations, and particularly the 454 nucleotide site, is 
far from conclusive. He notes that the majority of the heavily exposed workers 
with kidney cancer had an intact 454 site.

 The cancer tracked in this study, clear-cell renal carcinoma, accounts for 
roughly 85 percent of kidney cancer cases, Linehan says. Kidney cancer itself 
ranks 13th in frequency among malignancies in the United States. It is 
diagnosed in roughly 27,000 people annually and accounts for about 12,000 
deaths every year.


