Science News Online (5/8/99): Pollutant waits to smite salmon at sea

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 19 (May 8, 1999)

 Pollutant waits to smite salmon at sea

 By J. Raloff

 Atlantic salmon (Art MacKay, St. Andrews, NB)

 Canadian scientists have identified the likely culprit behind some historic, 
regional declines in Atlantic salmon. The researchers find that a 
near-ubiquitous water pollutant can render young, migrating fish unable to 
survive a life at sea.

 Heavy, late-spring spraying of forests with a pesticide laced with nonylphenol 
during the 1970s and '80s was the clue that led the biologists to unmask that 
chemical's role in the transitory decline of salmon in East Canada. Though 
these sprays have ended, concentrations of nonylphenols in forest runoff then 
were comparable to those in the effluent of some pulp mills, industrial 
facilities, and sewage-treatment plants today. Downstream of such areas, the 
scientists argue, salmon and other migratory fish may still be at risk.

 Nonylphenols are surfactants used in products from pesticides to dishwashing 
detergents, cosmetics, plastics, and spermicides. Because waste-treatment 
plants don't remove nonylphenols well, these chemicals can build up in 
downstream waters (SN: 1/8/94, p. 24).

 When British studies linked ambient nonylphenol pollution to reproductive 
problems in fish (SN: 2/26/94, p. 142), Wayne L. Fairchild of Canada's 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans in Moncton, New Brunswick, became concerned. 
He recalled that an insecticide used on local forests for more than a decade 
had contained large amounts of nonylphenols. They helped aminocarb, the oily 
active ingredient in Matacil 1.8D, dissolve in water for easier spraying.

 Runoff of the pesticide during rains loaded the spawning and nursery waters of 
Atlantic salmon with nonylphenols. Moreover, this aerial spraying had tended to 
coincide with the final stages of smoltification-the fish's transformation for 
life at sea.

 To probe for effects of forest spraying, Fairchild and his colleagues surveyed 
more than a decade of river-by-river data on fish. They overlaid these numbers 
with archival data on local aerial spraying with Matacil 1.8D or either of two 
nonylphenol-free pesticides. One contained the same active ingredient, 
aminocarb, as Matacil 1.8D does.

 Most of the lowest adult salmon counts between 1973 and 1990 occurred in 
rivers where smolts would earlier have encountered runoff of Matacil 1.8D, 
Fairchild's group found. In 9 of 19 cases of Matacil 1.8D spraying for which 
they had good data, salmon returns were lower than they were within the 5 years 
earlier and 5 years later, they report in the May Environmental Health 
Perspectives. No population declines were associated with the other two 
pesticides.

 The researchers have now exposed smolts in the laboratory to various 
nonylphenol concentrations, including some typical of Canadian rivers during 
the 1970s. The fish remained healthy-until they entered salt water, at which 
point they exhibited a failure-to-thrive syndrome.

"They looked like they were starving," Fairchild told Science News. Within 2 
months, he notes, 20 to 30 percent died. Untreated smolts adjusted normally to 
salt water and fattened up.

 Steffen S. Madsen, a fish ecophysiologist at Odense University in Denmark, is 
not surprised, based on his own experiments.

 To move from fresh water to the sea, a fish must undergo major hormonal 
changes that adapt it for pumping out excess salt. A female preparing to spawn 
in fresh water must undergo the opposite change. Since estrogen triggers her 
adaptation, Madsen and a colleague decided to test how smolts would respond to 
estrogen or nonylphenol, an estrogen mimic.

 In the lab, they periodically injected salmon smolts with estrogen or 
nonylphenol over 30 days, and at various points placed them in seawater for 24 
hours. Salt in the fish's blood skyrocketed during the day-long trials, unlike 
salt in untreated smolts. "Our preliminary evidence indicates that natural and 
environ- mental estrogens screw up the pituitary," Madsen says. The gland 
responds by making prolactin, a hormone that drives freshwater adaptation.

 Judging by Fairchild's data, Madsen now suspects that any fish that migrates 
between fresh and salt water may be similarly vulnerable to high concentrations 
of pollutants that mimic estrogen.


