Science News Online (5/29/99): Simple Minds, Smart Choices

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 22 (May 29, 1999)

 Simple Minds, Smart Choices

 For sweet decisions, mix a dash of knowledge with a cup of ignorance

 By Bruce Bower

 Simple decision strategies make a killing in the stock market, according to a 
German researcher.

 During a Major League baseball game, nobody needs a seventh-inning stretch 
more than the catcher. Not only does he play in an uncomfortable crouch swathed 
in protective gear, but he makes critical decisions at the frenzied pace of an 
air-traffic controller.

 Before each delivery, the catcher flashes a hand signal to the pitcher 
indicating the best pitch to throw. Imagine that a strong batter faces a count 
of three balls and two strikes, with runners on first and third. What should 
the hurler serve up, a fastball high and inside, a slider low and away, or a 
change-up over the heart of the plate? By the way, Mark McGwire's up next.

 Former Major League catcher Tim McCarver didn't wrack his brain over such 
quandaries. "You have to put down a sign quickly," he told an interviewer in 
the March 28 New York Times Magazine. "[T]he first one is going to be the right 
one." For most baseball decisions, he adds, "I think you can train yourself to 
be right quicker than in five seconds."

 It's unclear whether McCarver's pared-down approach to decision making is 
always a hit. However, a growing number of behavioral scientists in a variety 
of disciplines now embrace a similar perspective, often called bounded 
rationality. Here, bounded refers to inherent limits on rational thought, 
depending on the organism and its environment. Decision strategies that hinge 
on mere bits of well-chosen information about one's surroundings pack a 
surprisingly powerful wallop, especially when time and knowledge are in short 
supply, according to the bounded-rationality view.

 In fact, new evidence suggests that for choosing one's actions in many 
real-world contexts, these bare-bones tactics work at least as well as complex 
statistical formulas that consider voluminous data. Studies also suggest that 
simple strategies wring insight out of shifting environments with much greater 
ease than fancy probability equations do.

 This is good news for animals trying to survive on an often unforgiving 
planet. Harried decision makers throughout the animal kingdom lack the mental 
tools to zip through intricate probability calculations but boast enough brain 
power to discover and exploit simple guides.

 Models of what is called rational judgment in cognitive science, economics, 
biology, and other fields have traditionally held that animals strive to reach 
the best possible, or optimal, judgments by statistically weighing and 
comparing all information relevant to a task. This scenario largely ignores 
time pressures. Even if the full solution eludes their grasp, this view states, 
creatures look for ways to edge closer to optimality.

 As an alternative to optimality, bounded rationality has lurked in the 
academic background since its description 40 years ago by psychologist Herbert 
Simon of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. Simon argued that it's 
usually too difficult for a person to calculate an optimal strategy. Moreover, 
he held, in many situations no single best solution exists. Instead, the mind's 
limitations dictate that people use heuristics, or simple rules of thumb 
derived from experience, to exploit consistent information patterns in their 
surroundings.

"There's now a convergence of thinking across a number of fields on the 
importance of heuristics and bounded rationality," says Thomas D. Seeley, a 
behavioral ecologist at Cornell University. "All sorts of animals take 
advantage of the structure of the environments that they live in to simplify 
their decisions."

 Seeley participated in a scientific workshop on bounded rationality held in 
March at the Free University in Berlin.

 Researchers at the Berlin meeting agreed that animals often reach critical 
decisions by relying on uncomplicated shortcuts. In joint position papers 
written at the end of the workshop, they concluded that bounded rationality may 
help clarify how emotions, consensus-building cues in small groups, and 
cultural norms simplify human reasoning-for better and for worse.

 The Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition at the Max Planck Institute for 
Human Development in Berlin has launched one of the most ambitious projects yet 
to explore the impact of bounded rationality on human judgment. Scientists at 
the German facility, headed by psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer, discuss their 
latest findings in Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (1999, Oxford 
University Press).

 Gigerenzer's group focuses on what it calls "fast and frugal" formulas for 
decision making. These guidelines not only work with limited knowledge about 
the task and environment at hand but actually benefit from partial ignorance.

 In a previous study, Gigerenzer and coworker Daniel G. Goldstein asked a 
computer program to choose the more populous German city in each of many pairs. 
The program selected correctly more often when it was equipped with a 
fast-and-frugal strategy for evaluating cues to city size than when it used 
statistical methods that analyzed all available information (SN: 7/13/96, p. 
24).

 The simple heuristic, dubbed "take the best," first noted whether the computer 
program recognized one city but not the other. If so, the recognized city was 
treated as larger. If both or neither city was recognized, the program then 
considered a list of other cues one at a time. It began with strong cues to 
size, such as the city being a state capital, and ended with weaker ones, such 
as the city having a university. The first cue on which a pair of cities 
differed triggered a size verdict.

 Accuracy peaked when the computer program recognized about half the cities. In 
that situation, pairs often consisted of one recognized and one unfamiliar 
city. Knowledge and ignorance thus worked together to quicken and improve size 
determinations.

 Gigerenzer and his coworkers have now applied recognition-based judgments to a 
much wilder realm-the stock market. Their humble strategy again showed its 
muscle, at least during a rising, or bull, market.

 The researchers surveyed 480 people on their recognition of some companies on 
the New York Stock Exchange (the 500 firms indexed by Standard and Poor's) and 
298 companies on several German stock exchanges. Volunteers fell into one of 
four groups: pedestrians in downtown Chicago, pedestrians in Munich, finance or 
economics graduate students at the University of Chicago, and comparable 
graduate students at the University of Munich.

 Two primary investment portfolios were constructed for each group based on 
companies in its home country recognized by at least 90 percent of the group's 
members and the 10 most-recognized firms in the country foreign to the group. 
Portfolio performance was monitored for 6 months, beginning on Dec. 13, 1996.

 Portfolios of highly recognized stocks performed far better than portfolios of 
unrecognized stocks that were also assembled for each group. Investment 
portfolios based on recognition in most cases also yielded higher returns than 
common measures of overall market performance in both countries.

 Ignorance seemed to work in a portfolio's favor, the researchers say. People 
making international picks did better than the graduate student or pedestrians 
choosing native companies. Furthermore, while the pedestrian groups recognized 
only a small proportion of the international stocks, their top-10 international 
portfolios outperformed both portfolios of randomly selected stocks and the 
markets.

 Putting his money where his heuristic is, Gigerenzer invested the equivalent 
of more than $30,000 in the German stocks most familiar to German pedestrians. 
He raked in a 47 percent return over the course of the study, beating the 
market index by about 13 percent.

 Gigerenzer also asked the German graduate students simply to recommend a 
portfolio of stocks. They tended to pick less-recognized German stocks, and 
their choices usually lost money.

 In further research, Gigerenzer plans to examine whether recognition-based 
portfolios outperform managed funds and other tactics in a declining, or bear, 
market. It's possible that the recognition heuristic simply picks the biggest 
firms, which may feed disproportionately off market upswings and suffer the 
biggest hits during economic downturns.

 Beyond a blind reliance on recognition, the take-the-best heuristic and a pair 
of even plainer tactics squeeze a surprising amount of predictive accuracy out 
of available decision-making cues, according to Gigerenzer's group. The two 
simpler strategies consist of relying on the first randomly chosen cue that 
discriminates between a pair of choices or beginning with the cue that yielded 
the previous correct choice and then, if necessary, picking cues at random.

 In computer simulations, these fast-and-frugal strategies jousted with several 
sophisticated mathematical formulas in making predictions about 20 real-world 
situations. Competing approaches estimated, for example, which of two Chicago 
public high schools-presented in a series of pairs from a total of 57 
schools-had a higher drop-out rate based on a set of cues of varying 
usefulness. Each computerized tactic learned to make choices using a partial 
set of these cues and then rendered further verdicts using the remaining cues.

 Statistical formulas such as multiple regression often outperformed the 
fast-and-frugal competitors during the training period. In the later trials, 
the two simplest heuristics did about as well as multiple regression. But the 
take-the-best heuristic, showing its greater flexibility, triumphed over 
multiple regression. Also, that heuristic came within one percentage point of 
the accuracy of so-called Bayesian models, which even more slowly and 
exhaustively compute an event's probability.

 The take-the-best method works particularly well in information-scarce 
environments where a few cues, each on its own, act as reliable decision 
guides, Gigerenzer theorizes.

 Another simple heuristic, studied by Max Planck Institute psychologist Peter 
M. Todd and several colleagues, shows promise as a framework for categorizing 
objects. The researchers call it "categorization by elimination."

 This strategy puts in order a limited number of categorization cues according 
to how well they work. It then uses these cues one by one to narrow down a set 
of choices, stopping as soon as only one remains.

 In one study, categorization by elimination worked about as well as two 
information-crunching approaches. The researchers instructed pairs of 
volunteers, each in a separate room, to manipulate virtual bugs that interact 
on a computer screen. Each person was told to make his or her bug display 
pursuit or evasion, fighting together, courting or being courted, and play.

 The computer was then used to categorize the volunteers' intentions by 
consulting up to seven bug-motion cues-including forward speed of each bug and 
relative distance between bugs. It considered the cues one at a time, beginning 
with those deemed most informative by the investigators. They compared this 
simulation with one that employed a pair of statistical methods that combined 
information from all seven motion cues.

 The simple heuristic usually considered only three or four motion cues before 
ruling on bugs' behavioral aims. Yet its 57 percent accuracy rate nearly 
matched the 60 percent rate achieved by the statistical approaches.

 Psychologist Ward Edwards of the University of Southern California in Los 
Angeles, an advocate of Bayesian tools to assist judgment, calls the latest 
findings "impressive and remarkable." Still, Edwards expresses uncertainty over 
the applicability of such simple tactics to many of life's thorny problems.

 The extent to which fast-and-frugal tactics work in various environments is 
unknown, cautions Baruch Fischhoff, a Carnegie Mellon psychologist who studies 
decision making. "It's hard to tell how people naturally frame their 
decisions," he remarks.

 While bounded rationality struggles for respect in fields such as psychology, 
artificial intelligence, and economics, it has largely replaced the optimality 
assessments long favored by investigators of animal behavior in natural 
habitats, Seeley says.

 The Cornell scientist's own work on collective decisions by honeybees offers a 
case in point. Up to several hundred scouts in a honeybee hive visit 
prospective new nest sites and then return to perform a group dance that 
culminates in the selection of a superior site.

 Rather than hashing out the pros and cons of each piece of real estate, the 
scouts abide by a few dancing rules to reach a consensus that sends the swarm 
to a suitable new home, Seeley holds.

 In research described at the Berlin workshop, Seeley finds that individual 
scouts dance longer and in a more frenzied manner after visiting better sites 
(such as a large, thick-walled tree cavity situated high above the ground). 
Scouts who visit mediocre and poor sites quit dancing sooner. Hours later, some 
of the quitters resume gyrating, this time copying the dance of scouts who 
visited the site that the group eventually chooses.

"It seems that the cognitive tools used by individual bees are surprisingly 
simple, especially compared with the complex information processing performed 
by the swarm as a whole," Seeley says. "In this case, collective wisdom arises 
from the poorly informed masses."

 Seeley plans to investigate how honeybee scouts determine the dance-worthiness 
of prospective sites.

 In the meantime, baseball catchers and honeybees are not the only ones who 
like to keep their decision-making tactics short and sweet. Gigerenzer recounts 
an anecdote about two eminent philosophers, one of whom was vacillating over 
whether to accept a job at a rival university. His comrade advised him to do 
what he always wrote about-optimize his choice by using every bit of 
potentially useful information to weigh the pluses and minuses of the new 
position.

 The first philosopher responded acidly, "Come on, this is serious."


