Science News Online (6/12/99): Altered Antibody Boosts Transplants

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 24 (June 12, 1999)

 Altered Antibody Boosts Transplants

 By N. Seppa

 The immune system takes a dim view of transplants. Any tissue or blood that 
doesn't come from an identical twin counts as foreign matter to be destroyed. 
Treatment with immune-suppressing drugs can counteract such rejection, but it 
leaves the individual vulnerable to cancer or other ills. Even with drug 
treatment, many patients reject transplants.

 At the core of this reaction is a molecule called CD154. It signals T 
cells-the immune system's shock troops-to spring into action against 
transplants. Two studies in rhesus monkeys now show that a drug called hu5C8 
can waylay this attack without shutting down the rest of the immune system. The 
antibody binds to CD154, blocking the chain reaction that would have led to 
overzealous manufacture of T cells.

 In a study described in the June Nature Medicine, scientists gave nine rhesus 
monkeys kidney transplants from unrelated donors and also intravenous doses of 
hu5C8, which is made by Biogen in Cambridge, Mass. Previous studies showed that 
this genetically engineered version of a human antibody might block T cell 
activation (SN: 8/9/97, p. 84).

 One of the nine treated monkeys died of unrelated causes, but the other eight 
are thriving with their transplanted kidneys. Five of these animals completed 
their 5-month regime of antibody treatment about a year ago, says study 
coauthor Allan D. Kirk, a transplant surgeon at the Naval Medical Research 
Center in Bethesda, Md.

 Four other monkeys, which received a transplant but not the antibody, rejected 
the transplanted kidneys within 8 days. Eleven monkeys getting a combination of 
the antibody and standard immune-suppressing drugs showed mixed results-some 
rejected the organs, others didn't.

 In a separate study, researchers removed the pancreases of six rhesus monkeys 
and then gave them hu5C8 along with new pancreatic islet cells from unrelated 
donors. The transplanted cells, placed in the monkeys' livers, weren't 
rejected, says study coauthor Norma S. Kenyon, a transplant immunologist at the 
University of Miami School of Medicine. Two monkeys that didn't receive the 
antibody rejected islet cells.

 This study, to be published this summer in the Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, raises hopes for diabetes patients. Islet cells normally 
make the hormone insulin, and the transplanted cells started producing it 
immediately. The experiment suggests a means to reverse type 1, or 
juvenile-onset, diabetes, a condition in which islet cells are destroyed. "I 
don't want to raise false hopes, but I think this is a very big step forward," 
Kenyon says.

 In a study of baboons to be published soon in Diabetes, Kenyon and her 
colleagues show that hu5C8 also reversed rejection in four baboons that had 
earlier received islet-cell transplants.

"This is an exciting drug," says Mitchell L. Henry, a surgeon at Ohio State 
University in Columbus. He's impressed that two types of organ transplants 
succeeded.

 In all these experiments, the antibody's precise role remains a mystery.

"Our immune system didn't evolve [just] to keep us from getting transplants. It 
is aimed at infectious pathogens," says endocrinologist David M. Harlan of the 
Naval Medical Research Center in Bethesda, Md., who participated in all three 
studies, as did Kirk. Transplant rejection may simply be a case of mistaken 
identity, and CD154 may somehow remedy the problem.

 Evolution may have provided compounds that act as shutoff switches each time T 
cells are produced to mount an attack, Harlan suggests. The antibody hu5C8 may 
somehow tap into that mechanism, he says.

 This model could explain why suppression drugs hampered hu5C8's effectiveness 
in the kidney-transplant experiment. The drugs could be keeping T cells from 
processing a shutoff signal, Kirk says.

"The lesson is that we must choose our signals carefully, not simply block them 
all," says Polly Matzinger of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases in Bethesda, Md., writing in Nature Medicine.


