Science News Online (6/19/99): Raloxifene imparts anticancer benefit

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 25 (June 19, 1999)

 Raloxifene imparts anticancer benefit

 By N. Seppa

 When the osteoporosis drug raloxifene came on the market last year, it offered 
women a way to strengthen their bones yet avoid the breast-cancer risk 
associated with estrogen-replacement therapy. Now, researchers report that 
raloxifene may actually prevent breast cancer in many women.

 As part of a worldwide study to gauge raloxifene's effects on osteoporosis, 
scientists gave the drug to two-thirds of a group of 7,705 postmenopausal women 
with the brittle-bone disease. The other participants received an inert 
substance. Neither the scientists nor the study participants knew which pills 
contained the medication.

 All participants also took calcium and vitamin D supplements daily and 
received regular mammograms or breast ultrasound examinations in addition to 
bone measurements.

 During the 40-month study, 27 of the 2,576 women receiving the inert pills 
developed breast cancer, while only 13 of the 5,129 women taking raloxifene 
were diagnosed with the malignancy. In other words, breast-cancer incidence 
with the drug was only one-fourth as great as without it, the researchers 
report in the June 16 Journal of the American Medical Association.

"It's a landmark study," says Michael B. Sporn, a pharmacologist at Dartmouth 
Medical School in Hanover, N.H.

 The drug seems to stifle invasive breast cancer, in which estrogen induces 
uncontrolled cell growth, says study coauthor Steven R. Cummings, an internist 
and epidemiologist at the University of California, San Francisco. In about 
two-thirds of breast cancers in postmenopausal women, the hormone fuels a 
tumor's growth, he says.

 Estrogen circulating in the blood attaches to one of two estrogen-receptor 
molecules in cells. The receptors then activate specific genes, inducing a 
chain reaction of protein production that can lead to cell growth. Such a 
flurry of activity initially poses little risk, but repeated exposure to 
estrogen over a long period of time "is too much of a good thing," says Leo 
Plouffe, a research physician at Eli Lilly and Co. in Indianapolis, which makes 
raloxifene.

"If you consistently promote the growth of certain cells [with estrogen], the 
cells might transform themselves into cancer cells," he says. Or, if cancer is 
already present, the estrogen stimulus might abet the disease.

 Raloxifene works by occupying the estrogen receptors, Cummings says. When the 
drug thus blocks the receptor on a cancerous cell, estrogen cannot bind and 
apparently the cell dies off, he says.

 In its role as a bone-growth promoter, however, raloxifene mimics rather than 
blocks estrogen's effects. Precisely how raloxifene can play one role in one 
cell and another elsewhere remains unclear, Cummings says.

 Raloxifene may provide yet another benefit: Women receiving the drug in this 
study didn't show the increased incidence of uterine cancer that previous 
research has associated with both estrogen and the anti-breast-cancer drug 
tamoxifen.


