Science News Online (6/12/99): Prehistoric bacteria revived from buried salt

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 24 (June 12, 1999)

 Prehistoric bacteria revived from buried salt

 By J. Travis

 Spore formed by an allegedly ancient Bacillus bacterium. (Photo: Rosenzweig 
and Vreeland)

 Hundreds of millions of years ago, before dinosaurs roamed the planet, an 
ocean rippled where the sun now bakes a New Mexico desert. As that seawater 
evaporated, its salt crystallized, sometimes trapping pockets of brine.

 Covered by sediments over the years, those salt deposits currently sit half a 
mile below the desert floor. Microbiologists who have procured samples of the 
salt crystals and carefully tapped into the pockets, called inclusions, now 
claim to have isolated and revived bacteria that were last active 250 million 
years ago.

 If true, the finding may shed light onto issues such as how life on earth 
evolved, where signs of life-past or current-on Mars might be found, and how 
long life-forms can survive.

"These organisms could very well be 250 million years old," says Raul J. Cano 
of California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo. Four years ago, 
Cano's research group reported isolating living bacteria from the guts of dead 
insects entrapped in amber for up to 125 million years (SN: 5/20/95, p. 308).

 That work, however, continues to draw skepticism from some scientists, who 
dismiss the idea that organisms can survive for eons. The new claims of ancient 
bacteria by William D. Rosenzweig and Russell H. Vreeland will likely provoke 
similar reactions. The two researchers, from West Chester (Penn.) University, 
head a group that for many years has been developing techniques to isolate 
bacteria from salt deposits without risking outside contamination.

 Working in air-filtered laboratory facilities used previously for handling 
viruses such as HIV but not bacteria, the investigators sterilize the surfaces 
of their salt crystals with hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. They then 
carefully drill into pockets within the crystals, withdraw the brine inside, 
and try to cultivate bacteria from the liquid. For the recent experiments, they 
procured crystals from the ancient salt deposits within the Waste Isolation 
Pilot Plant, a controversial underground holding facility for low-grade nuclear 
waste near Carlsbad, N.M. (SN: 11/1/97, p. 277).

 At last week's meeting in Chicago of the American Society for Microbiology 
(ASM), the research team reported hitting pay dirt.

 From brine in several different salt crystals, the scientists have grown novel 
spherical bacteria belonging to the genus of spore-forming microbes called 
Bacillus. Laboratory studies have shown that the bacteria can indeed form 
spores, which may explain their survival for hundreds of millions of years.

 The researchers have identified an even odder microbe from the site, although 
they aren't as confident of its age. They cultivated the rod-shaped organism 
directly from dissolved salt crystals rather than from an inclusion.

 The molecular contents of the second microbe's membrane suggest that it 
belongs among the archaea, the so-called third branch of life (SN: 8/24/96, p. 
116). This reddish microorganism needs salt to maintain its cell membrane. 
Other salt-dependent archaea, called halobacteria, reside in such places as the 
Dead Sea and the Great Salt Lake.

 Curiously, the newly isolated microbe derives energy only from molecules with 
a small number of carbon atoms, such as glycerol, acetate, and pyruvate. It has 
no use for more complex nutrients, such as glucose or amino acids. "It grows 
really well, but only on a limited diet," says Vreeland.

 This simple metabolism, the researchers speculate, may reflect that of the 
ancient microorganisms first inhabiting the planet. The scientists have so far 
been unable to match the microbe's DNA to that of known creatures. "It's 
screaming how old it is," says Rosenzweig.

 Yet proving the age of bacteria found in ancient salt deposits is no easy 
task. One major concern centers on whether the fluid-filled inclusions formed 
when the original salt deposited or later, when heat, vibrations, or other 
events caused recrystallization.

 By drilling a channel (arrow) into pockets of ancient seawater trapped in salt 
crystals such as this one, scientists found bacteria that may be 250 million 
years old. (Photo: Rosenzweig and Vreeland)

"You have to be absolutely certain that the piece of salt . . . is 250 million 
years old and not just 100,000 years old or 20 years old," notes William D. 
Grant of the University of Leicester in England, who also examines ancient salt 
deposits for bacteria. He recommends that the researchers date the inclusions 
by analyzing the elements in the fluid they contain.

 Vreeland counters that the New Mexico salt formation is one of the best-dated 
and most thoroughly studied and that his team worked with geologists to develop 
rigorous criteria for identifying original inclusions. From 220 kilograms of 
salt taken from the site, only 20 to 30 crystals, totaling less than 100 grams, 
met their requirements, he notes.

 No matter how strict the precautions, some scientists dismiss all claims of 
ancient bacteria as modern contamination. "People are just going to laugh if 
you get Bacillus out of salt because Bacillus is everywhere," admits Grant.

 Indeed, in the 1960s, a researcher named Heinz J. Dombrowski claimed to have 
revived Bacillus and other bacteria from salt deposits more than 500 million 
years old. Other scientists ridiculed him. "He was probably right, but he was 
ahead of his time," Grant now reflects.

 Since then, microbiologists may have become more willing to accept claims of 
microbes lasting for eons since they have already identified organisms that 
thrive despite massive radiation, extremely cold and hot temperatures, and long 
periods without water. "A lot of paradigms about what life can and cannot do 
are coming apart now," notes Richard B. Hoover of NASA's Marshall Space Flight 
Center in Huntsville, Ala.

 If the salt-derived microbes are hundreds of millions of years old, comparing 
their DNA with that of modern organisms should prove illuminating. "You can 
actually look at evolution on a molecular basis and do molecular paleontology. 
You're not dealing with just bones, but with genes," says Hoover.

 NASA's interest in ancient salt deposits arises because Mars and Jupiter's 
moon Europa once had oceans and may have similar salt formations (SN: 11/1/97, 
p. 284). Missions searching for signs of extraterrestrial life might therefore 
target those deposits.

 Meanwhile, the debate over ancient bacteria will persist. "There's going to 
continue to be healthy skepticism," says Melanie R. Mormile of the Pacific 
Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Wash., who herself described 
97,000-year-old salt-derived microbes at the ASM meeting, Whenever anyone 
claims they have revived organisms that are millions of years old, she says, 
"you've got to sit back and go, 'Wow, that's incredible. How can that be?' "


