Science News Online (6/12/99): Fibonacci at Random

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 24 (June 12, 1999)

 Fibonacci at Random

 Uncovering a new mathematical constant

 By Ivars Peterson

 It all started out with imaginary rabbits.

 In a book completed in the year 1202, mathematician Leonardo of Pisa (also 
known as Fibonacci) posed the following problem: How many pairs of rabbits will 
be produced in a year, beginning with a single pair, if every month each pair 
bears a new pair that becomes productive from the second month on?

 The total number of pairs, month by month, forms the sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, and so on. Each new term is the sum of the previous two 
terms. This set of numbers is now called the Fibonacci sequence.

 Fibonacci's immortal rabbit problem. A red rectangle designates a newborn 
pair, which doesn't produce offspring until the second month.

 Fibonacci numbers come up surprisingly often in nature, from the number of 
petals in various flowers to the number of scales along a spiral row in a pine 
cone. They also arise in computer science, especially in sorting or organizing 
data.

 Amazingly, the ratios of successive terms of the Fibonacci sequence get closer 
and closer to a specific number, often called the golden ratio. It can be 
calculated as (1 + O5)/2, or 1.6180339887.... For instance, the ratio 55/34 is 
1.617647..., and the next ratio, 89/55, is 1.6181818....

 Now, computer scientist Divakar Viswanath of the Mathematical Sciences 
Research Institute in Berkeley, Calif., has taken a fresh look at Fibonacci 
numbers and unexpectedly discovered a new mathematical constant: the number 
1.13198824.... He describes his result in a paper to be published in 
Mathematics of Computation.

 Viswanath's research represents an intriguing gateway to heavy-duty 
mathematics, says mathematician Keith Devlin of Saint Mary's College of 
California in Moraga. It relies on powerful mathematical techniques that also 
are used, for instance, to elucidate the behavior of disordered materials.

 Viswanath wondered what would happen to the Fibonacci sequence if he 
introduced an element of randomness.

 Here's one way to proceed: Start with the numbers 1 and 1, as in the original 
Fibonacci sequence. To get the next term, flip a coin to decide whether to add 
the last two terms or subtract the last term from the previous term.

 Suppose that heads means add and tails means subtract. Tossing heads would 
result in adding 1 to 1 to get 2, and tossing tails would lead to subtracting 1 
from 1 to get 0. According to this scheme, the successive coin tosses H H T T T 
H, for example, would generate the sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, ^-1, 4, ^-5, ^-1.

 It's easy to write a short computer program to generate these random Fibonacci 
sequences, notes Lloyd N. Trefethen of the University of Oxford in England. 
Looking for patterns and trends among such sequences of numbers can be a 
fascinating pastime, he says.

 Indeed, infinitely many sequences follow Viswanath's rule. A few have special 
characteristics. If the coin always comes up heads, for instance, the result is 
the original Fibonacci sequence. Other strings of coin tosses can produce a 
repeating pattern, such as 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, and so on.

 Nonetheless, such special cases are sufficiently rare among all possible 
sequences that mathematicians ignore them.

 The standard Fibonacci sequence has an intriguing property. The hundredth 
Fibonacci number, for example, is roughly equal to the hundredth power of the 
golden ratio.

 Despite significant fluctuations, the absolute values of the first 1,000 terms 
of a typical, computer-generated random Fibonacci sequence show a clear trend 
to larger values, fitting a pattern of exponential growth (dashed line). 
(Viswanath)

 By examining typical random Fibonacci sequences based on coin tosses, 
Viswanath uncovered a similar pattern. He ignored the minus signs, thereby 
taking the absolute value of the terms. He found that the hundredth term in 
such a sequence, for example, is approximately equal to the hundredth power of 
the number 1.13198824.... In fact, the higher the term, the closer its value 
gets to the appropriate power of 1.13198824....

 Despite the element of chance and the resulting large fluctuations in value 
that characterize a random Fibonacci sequence, the absolute values of the 
numbers, on average, increase at a well-defined exponential rate.

 It's not obvious that this should happen, Viswanath observes. Random Fibonacci 
sequences might have leveled off to a constant absolute value because of the 
subtractions, for example, but they actually escalate exponentially.

 Providing a rigorous proof of the result was a tricky business. To get the 
answer he required, Viswanath had to delve into several different areas of 
mathematics, including the intricacies of geometric forms known as fractals, 
and finish with a computer calculation.

 Viswanath's achievement "showed persistence and imagination of a very high 
order," Trefethen remarks.

 Now, Devlin adds, "mathematics has a new constant." No one has yet identified 
any link between this particular number and other known constants, such as the 
golden ratio.

 Surprisingly, Viswanath's constant provides one answer to a mathematical 
puzzle that arose several decades ago from the work of Hillel Furstenberg, now 
at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, and Harry Kesten of Cornell University.

 In a different mathematical context involving so-called random matrix 
multiplication, Furstenberg and Kesten had proved that in number sequences 
generated by certain types of processes having an element of randomness, the 
value of the nth term of the sequence gets closer to the nth power of some 
fixed number. However, they provided no hint of what that fixed number might be 
for any particular sequence.

 Because random Fibonacci sequences fit into this category of sequences, 
Viswanath's new constant represents an accessible example of these fixed 
numbers.

"It is a beautiful result with a variety of interesting aspects," Trefethen 
says. It's a nice illustration, for example, of how a random process can lead 
to a deterministic result when the numbers involved get very large.

 Moreover, although Viswanath's result by itself has no obvious applications, 
it serves as an introduction to the sophisticated type of mathematics developed 
by Furstenberg, Kesten, and others. That mathematical machinery has proved 
valuable in accounting for properties of disordered materials, particularly how 
repeated random movements can lead to orderly behavior, Devlin says.

 Such mathematics underlies explanations of why glass is transparent and how an 
electric current can still pass in an orderly fashion through a semiconductor 
laced with randomly positioned impurities.

 Viswanath's original work was done at Cornell University, under Trefethen's 
supervision. Trefethen and Oxford's Mark Embree have recently studied slightly 
modified versions of the random Fibonacci sequence. If, for example, one 
combines the last known term with half the previous term, adding or subtracting 
according to the toss of a coin, the sequence's numbers decrease at a certain 
rate, displaying exponential decay.

 By using fractions other than one-half, it's possible to find fractions for 
which one gets exponential decay, exponential growth, or merely equilibrium. 
"All this quickly gets under your skin when you start trying it on the 
computer," Trefethen says, adding that it becomes an addictive pastime.

 There's still plenty of room for mathematical exploration and experimentation 
in a problem that began centuries ago as a decidedly unrealistic model of a 
population of rabbits.


