Science News Online (6/19/99): Atlantis of the iguanas found in Pacific

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 25 (June 19, 1999)

 Atlantis of the iguanas found in Pacific

 By R. Monastersky

 Call it Darwin's version of sunken treasure. A team of German scientists has 
discovered ancient predecessors of the Galapagos Islands now resting more than 
1,000 meters below the ocean surface off the west coast of Costa Rica. The 
drowned islands may help biologists explain the biological riches of the modern 
Galapagos, where the father of evolutionary theory gained his most important 
insights.

 The find "shows that the Galapagos archipelago existed in its present [form] 
since at least 14.5 million year ago. That is important for evolutionary 
studies," says Reinhard Werner of Geomar in Kiel, Germany, whose team reported 
the discovery this month in Geology.

 The Galapagos is a collection of volcanic islands about 1,000 kilometers west 
of South America. The islands sit above a so-called hot spot in Earth's 
interior, where a stream of blistering rock rises from the mantle and melts its 
way through the crust to form volcanoes.

 These mountains don't stay put, however, because they are riding on top of 
mobile tectonic plates-the pieces of Earth's broken outer shell. Over millions 
of years, the older of the Galapagos islands migrate toward Central and South 
America while newer ones rise up over the hot spot. The oldest of the existing 
Galapagos islands dates back only 3 million years, a relatively short geologic 
span.

 To trace the history of the Galapagos, Werner and his colleagues dredged up 
samples of rocks along the Pacific coast of Costa Rica. On the Cocos Ridge and 
other submerged mountains, they found volcanic rocks with a mix of elements 
similar to those found in the present Galapagos-evidence that the near-shore 
seamounts had formed over the same rising plume of hot rock.

 The German team found these rocks on mountain peaks currently 1,000 to 3,000 m 
below the surface. In the past, however, these volcanoes had reached above sea 
level, according to the researchers.

 The geologists found rounded rocks welded together, structures that form only 
when blobs of liquid lava shoot into the air and harden on the way down. The 
rocks have also lost most of their sulfur, a process that doesn't occur deep 
underwater, says Werner. Furthermore, one of the submerged volcanoes, the 
Quepos Plateau, has a flat top reminiscent of old islands, which rain and waves 
have worn down.

 By dating radioactive elements in the underwater mountains, the German 
researchers determined that these volcanoes formed 14.5 million years ago. As 
the islands drifted away from the Galapagos hot spot, the seafloor on which 
they rode slowly sank and the peaks of these older volcanoes withdrew beneath 
the waves, Werner and his colleagues propose.

 Geologists had previously found an isolated Galapagos seamount that would have 
been an island 9 million years ago. The new work has revealed the remnants of 
an entire archipelago reaching back significantly earlier, says Werner.

 The extra 5 million years may help explain the evolution of Galapagos iguanas, 
says Hampton L. Carson, a geneticist at the University of Hawaii at Manoa in 
Honolulu. Land and marine iguanas on the islands appear to have descended from 
a single species that floated over from South America on branches and other 
debris. Studies of the two living species suggest that they split apart 15 
million to 20 million years ago, so there must have been Galapagos islands that 
far back. Heirs of those early settlers would have gone on to populate the 
newer volcanoes as they formed.

"The present Galapagos Islands are just a snapshot of a long-term process that 
has been producing islands in that region for over 15 million years," says 
Robert A. Duncan of Oregon State University in Corvallis, who has studied the 
Galapagos hot spot. Some available evidence may even push the record of former 
Galapagos islands back to the days of the dinosaurs, as much as 90 million 
years ago, he says.


