Science News Online (6/19/99): Galaxy study challenges cosmic-age estimate

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 25 (June 19, 1999)

 Galaxy study challenges cosmic-age estimate

 By R. Cowen

 Diagram depicts masers (small dots) in a rotating disk at the core of NGC 
4258. (Herrnstein et al.)

 Talk about a problem of astronomical proportions.

 Last month, researchers announced that they had determined the age of the 
universe to unprecedented accuracy (SN: 5/29/99, p. 340). Now, a report 
suggests that a cosmic yardstick used to calculate that age may be shorter than 
assumed. This could shrink the age of the cosmos by 2 billion years.

 The most recent study relies on the Very Long Baseline Array, 10 radio 
telescopes that span North America. Using this network, researchers have 
directly measured the distance to the galaxy NGC 4258-independent of any 
yardstick. "It's hard to go wrong when you're just doing high-school algebra to 
calculate a distance," says James R. Herrnstein of the National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory in Socorro, N.M.

 His team's estimate, 23.5 million light-years, is the most precise ever 
measured for a remote galaxy, asserts Herrnstein. That distance is accurate to 
within 7 percent, he reported June 1 at a meeting in Chicago of the American 
Astronomical Society.

 Another team, however, using the yardstick, puts the distance at 26 million to 
28 million light-years. For that measurement, Eyal Maoz of NASA's Ames Research 
Center in Mountain View, Calif., and his colleagues, including Wendy L. 
Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories in Pasadena, Calif., used the Hubble 
Space Telescope to observe about 24 of the stars known as Cepheid variables. 
Each star's intrinsic brightness is proportional to the rate at which it 
pulsates. To determine distance, astronomers compare a Cepheid's innate 
brightness with its appearance in the sky.

 NGC 4258 is the first galaxy for which the two methods have been compared, and 
it's too early to say which will prove correct, Freedman says. But if the error 
lies with the widely used Cepheid method, the universe may be 15 to 20 percent 
younger than the 12 billion and 13.5 billion years reported May 25 by Freedman. 
Those estimates, based on Cepheids and three other distance indicators, are 
accurate within 10 percent, she says.

 Calculating the true brightness of a Cepheid depends ultimately on the 
distance to one of our galaxy's closest neighbors, the Large Magellanic Cloud. 
Uncertainty in that distance is the largest source of error in the age 
calculated by Freedman's group. Recent estimates have come up with a distance 
15 to 20 percent less than the one that the team used.

 In contrast, the radio telescope-derived distance to NGC 4258 depends 
primarily on geometry. At the core of this galaxy lies a disk of gas, seen 
edge-on, whirling around a suspected black hole. The gas includes water masers, 
clouds of water vapor that emit intense radio waves. Herrnstein's team tracked 
30 of these brilliant blobs over a 3-year period to measure how far they 
traveled across the sky, carried by the disk's rotation.

 Like a distant airplane that crawls across the sky, the 30 masers barely seem 
to move, despite a speed of 3.2 million kilometers per hour, calculated from 
measurements of other masers in the galaxy. Comparing this speed with the 
observed change in position, the team calculated a distance that they call "the 
golden meterstick in the glass case.

"Whether that gold will turn out to be brass remains to be seen. The analysis 
assumes that the masers move in sync with the rest of the gas in the disk. This 
seems likely because each blob appears to be moving at the same rate, 
Herrnstein says. Even if the masers move in elliptical orbits, rather than in 
circles, as the team supposed, a discrepancy with the Cepheid distance still 
holds, he adds.

 David A. Neufeld of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, who studies water 
masers, notes that the measurements amount to "a one-trick pony," since few 
galaxies are known to contain masers and even fewer can also be easily observed 
from Earth. Nonetheless, he says, astronomers must explain the difference 
between the radio and Cepheid measurements before they can assume that they 
have accurately determined the age of the cosmos.

 Freedman says the debate may continue until 2005, when the Space 
Interferometry Mission measures the distance to the Large Magellanic Cloud.


