Science News Online (6/19/99): Good-bye to a Greenhouse Gas

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 25 (June 19, 1999)

 Good-bye to a Greenhouse Gas

 Dumping carbon dioxide underground or in the oceans could slow global warming

 By Richard Monastersky

 In the first deep-sea experiment of its kind, researchers pumped liquid carbon 
dioxide into a beaker 3.6 kilometers below the ocean surface. The carbon 
dioxide expanded and spilled out. A thin layer of icelike hydrate forms a 
coating around the carbon dioxide. (Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute)

 Last year off the coast of central California, a robotic submarine pumped a 
thin stream of liquid carbon dioxide onto the seafloor, more than 3.6 
kilometers below the ocean surface. Instead of mixing with the water, the fluid 
formed marble-sized balls that bounced on the silty bottom and jiggled like 
clear Jell-O in slow motion. A grenadier fish, sleek and curious, idled by and 
considered the blobs rolling downhill toward the Pacific's abyssal depths.

"The fish just looked. It seemed like it was trying to decide whether to eat 
the experiment," says ocean chemist Peter G. Brewer, who led the project from a 
ship overhead.

 In the next few years, residents of the deep ocean will have ample opportunity 
to consider this strange, new addition to their environment. Researchers from 
the United States, Japan, Norway, and Canada are planning to inject 50 to 100 
tons of liquid carbon dioxide into the ocean off the coast of Kona, Hawaii, in 
2001. Their aim is to study the possibility of dumping this greenhouse gas into 
the dark reaches of the sea-a tactic designed to slow the atmospheric buildup 
of carbon dioxide and thereby reduce the threat of climate change.

 The Hawaiian experiment will deep-six just a pittance of the 27 billion tons 
of carbon dioxide (containing 7.4 billion tons of carbon) that human activities 
emit into the atmosphere each year. Yet the ocean test rides a new wave of 
thinking about the most notorious greenhouse gas. As countries scramble to find 
ways of reducing their heat-trapping pollution, scientists are combing the 
planet to locate suitable disposal sites for carbon dioxide. The storage 
options include brine-filled aquifers, deep coal seams, depleted oil 
formations, and the ocean bottom.

 In late April, Sen. Frank Murkowski (R-Alaska) and nine cosponsors introduced 
a bill that would establish a long-term research program to develop this 
strategy, called carbon sequestration. Earlier the same month, the Department 
of Energy issued a 223-page report on the state of the science underlying 
carbon sequestration.

 As a goal, DOE proposes that nations develop the potential to dispose of up to 
3.7 billion tons of carbon dioxide annually by the year 2025 and 15 billion 
tons by 2050-targets that would set the world on course to stabilize 
atmospheric concentrations of this gas. Toward that objective, the department 
dramatically increased its funding for sequestration research from $1.6 million 
last year to $13 million in fiscal year 1999, with $29 million proposed for FY 
2000.

 At the same time, energy officials are campaigning to boost interest in this 
approach. In a speech last month before representatives of the coal industry, 
Energy Secretary Bill Richardson called carbon sequestration "one of the best 
options for reducing the buildup of greenhouse gases, not only in this country 
but in China, India, and elsewhere. It is the only climate-change option that 
won't require a wholesale changeover in our energy infrastructure."

 Yet some scientists and environmentalists view this approach as fundamentally 
misguided-akin to hiding a lumpy problem by shoving it under a rug. Critics 
charge that pumping carbon dioxide into the oceans or geologic formations could 
harm poorly understood ecosystems and threaten human safety, both now and for 
generations to come.

 The concept behind this contentious approach surfaced in 1977 in the 
imagination of Italian energy specialist E. Marchetti. He proposed a two-step 
process for getting rid of carbon dioxide. First, separate that gas from the 
rest of the pollution belching out of power plants. Then, pump the carbon 
dioxide into the ocean off the coast of Gibraltar, where dense Mediterranean 
waters spill into the Atlantic. The sinking current of salty Mediterranean 
water would sweep the carbon dioxide into the deep sea and keep it out of the 
atmosphere.

 In 1984, Meyer Steinberg of Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, N.Y., and 
his colleagues assessed the economics of Marchetti's approach. "What we found 
was that it would double the cost of power," says Steinberg.

 Given that dire forecast, the sequestration concept captured little attention. 
Researchers instead focused on other ways to reduce carbon dioxide pollution, 
such as increasing energy efficiency and developing alternative power sources 
that emit little or no greenhouse gases.

 In recent years, some energy experts have grown convinced that these more 
prosaic approaches will not, on their own, enable nations to reach the 
emissions limits they agreed to in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997. "There's really no 
short-term or mid-term good alternative to fossil fuels, at least on the scale 
that would be needed to cut back fossil fuels. And if you believe that, then 
[sequestration] is the only other real alternative to address climate change," 
says Howard J. Herzog of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), who 
has studied carbon disposal since the early 1990s.

 Today, the term sequestration encompasses a broad variety of options, all of 
which store carbon dioxide somewhere other than the atmosphere. In its recent 
report, DOE even considered techniques such as planting trees and fertilizing 
the oceans, approaches that cause plants and bacteria to absorb 
greater-than-normal amounts of carbon dioxide (SN: 9/30/95, p. 220).

 For the energy industry, however, the long-term focus remains on finding ways 
to continue using an inherently cheap and dirty source of fuel without adding 
pollution to the air. Few companies today are willing to take on the extra 
expense of separating and sequestering carbon dioxide, but researchers are 
working on techniques to boost the efficiency of the process and lessen its 
cost (see below).

 A platform in the North Sea injects liquid carbon dioxide into rocks far below 
the ocean floor. (Oyvind Hagen, Statoil)

 On an artificial island in the middle of the North Sea, engineers with 
Norway's state-owned oil company, Statoil, form the vanguard in the field of 
sequestration.

 Since 1996, Statoil and its partners have been pumping natural gas out of a 
geologic formation called the Sleipner field. The deposit, although prodigious, 
has a crucial flaw. Natural gas from the Sleipner West field contains 9 percent 
carbon dioxide, almost four times the amount allowed by exportation rules.

 Normally, production companies would separate the carbon dioxide and then vent 
it into the air. Statoil, however, pumps the carbon dioxide down into an 
aquifer 1,000 meters below the seafloor. The company disposes of 1 million tons 
of the gas each year this way. That amount would boost Norway's carbon dioxide 
emissions by 3 percent if released into the air.

 Statoil undertook this costly operation to avoid paying a tax on carbon 
dioxide emissions, says Olav Kaarstad of Statoil's research center in 
Trondheim. The facility for separating and injecting carbon dioxide cost $80 
million to install, but the carbon tax would amount to $50 million a year.

 For years, many petroleum companies have been injecting carbon dioxide into 
oil formations to boost output. This technique differs from the Sleipner 
project, however, because the carbon dioxide leaks back out with the oil, 
rather than remaining locked underground.

"Sleipner is the only operation of its kind in the world. It is the only place 
where [sequestration] is done because of climate-change concerns," says 
Kaarstad.

 This month, Statoil and a consortium of other companies begin probing the 
aquifer with seismic waves to track how quickly the carbon dioxide is moving in 
the formation. Statoil plans to carry on with its carbon dioxide disposal for 
the next 2 decades, eventually putting some 20 million tons of the gas into the 
aquifer.

 Across the Atlantic in the Canadian province of Alberta, engineers are 
conducting an experiment to see whether they can get rid of carbon dioxide at a 
profit. The Alberta Research Council is injecting carbon dioxide into a coal 
deposit 1,300 meters underground, too deep to make mining worthwhile. Despite 
its depth, the deposit has economic potential because it also contains 
significant quantities of trapped natural gas, which companies can remove 
through a well.

 Pumping carbon dioxide down into a coal bed causes it to release the pent-up 
natural gas, says William D. Gunter of the Alberta Research Council in 
Edmonton. Last year, Gunter and his colleagues injected a stream of nearly pure 
carbon dioxide into a coal bed with positive results. This year, they plan to 
use a much more dilute stream of carbon dioxide, closer in composition to the 
mix of gases that comes out of smokestacks.

"The basic target is to see how pure the carbon dioxide has to be," says 
Gunter. If the process will work with a relatively dilute stream, then 
companies may be able to increase natural gas recovery by pumping in the 
exhaust gases from a power plant, with little extra expense. The injected 
carbon dioxide seeps into the coal and should remain imprisoned there, says 
Gunter.

 In the United States, coal deposits of this sort have the potential to store 
37 billion tons of carbon dioxide, six times the nation's total annual 
emissions. A much greater capacity may exist in deep briny aquifers, which 
could hold nearly 500 billion tons, according to the most optimistic assessment 
quoted in the recent DOE report.

 The International Energy Agency estimates that aquifers worldwide could 
perhaps accommodate more than 20 times the U.S. figure, enough to store 350 
years' worth of global emissions at present rates.

 The United States has numerous deep saline aquifers (blue areas), which may 
make suitable places to store carbon dioxide. Other potential sites include 
oil, gas, and coal deposits. One crucial question is whether carbon dioxide 
will stay locked up in these deposits for many centuries. (Department of Energy)

 The oceans have an even greater ability to sequester carbon dioxide-vast 
enough, in theory, to outlast all the coal, oil, and natural gas available on 
the planet. Scientists have proposed that liquid carbon dioxide, when injected 
into the deep sea, would settle as lakes in depressions on the seafloor.

 The results of the experiment off the coast of California last year suggest 
that a thin layer of icelike hydrate would develop on top of lakes if they were 
situated below depths of 4,500 meters, the investigators report in the May 7 
Science. This skin would slow down the rate at which carbon dioxide dissolves 
into the seawater.

"The ocean looks like it could take that material quite well, if you know what 
you're doing," says Brewer of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in 
Moss Landing, Calif.

 Although the oceans have almost unlimited capacity to absorb carbon dioxide, 
it remains unclear how marine life will react to such an intrusion. "At 
present, we do not have enough information to estimate how much carbon can be 
sequestered without perturbing marine ecosystem structure and function," says 
the DOE report.

 The deep-water experiment off Hawaii marks the first step in gathering that 
data, says project manager Stephen M. Masutani of the University of Hawaii at 
Manoa in Honolulu. Researchers will measure how the carbon dioxide spreads from 
the end of the pipe and how quickly it dissolves into the water.

"The predictions indicate that if you put the carbon dioxide deep enough in the 
ocean, 1,000 m or greater, the carbon dioxide will stay there for centuries," 
says Masutani. Water from that depth does not readily mix with the surface 
layers, he says.

 Critics of the ocean-disposal idea argue, however, that the added carbon 
dioxide will acidify the deep ocean and could harm the complex web of animals 
and microbes there.

"We really don't have any idea what it would do to those ecosystems," says 
oceanographer Sallie W. Chisholm of MIT, adding that no ecological studies are 
planned as yet. "It would take years of study and tons of money to even begin 
to understand what the influence might be," notes Chisholm, who contributed to 
the DOE report.

 Environmental concerns have caused some sequestration advocates, such as 
Steinberg, to give up on the idea of ocean storage in favor of pumping carbon 
dioxide into geologic formations. Yet even these sites have their potential 
hazards, says Wim C. Turkenburg of Utrecht University in the Netherlands, a 
country currently considering whether to go forward with a project to pump 
carbon dioxide into an aquifer.

"If it is stored in an aquifer," asks Turkenburg, "will it be there decades 
from now? If there is a crack, if there is an earthquake, what might happen? 
Carbon dioxide is a heavy gas, so if it comes up from the underground, then you 
will have a layer of carbon dioxide close to the ground. That is, of course, 
not so good if you want to have oxygen for breathing.

"A volcanic lake in Cameroon provided a natural illustration of this scenario 
in 1986, when a bubble of carbon dioxide escaped from the water and killed 
1,700 people.

 Supporters of carbon sequestration counter that they are only beginning to 
study the various options. "We need to do more research to assure ourselves we 
are not doing something that will substitute one problem for another," says 
Herzog. "Secondly, we want to make sure it's effective, that the carbon dioxide 
will stay there and have the benefit of reducing atmospheric concentrations."

 He points out, however, that the current situation is creating its own 
environmental problems by warming the climate. What's more, the oceans are 
already sopping up a net 7 billion tons of the carbon dioxide emitted by human 
activities each year. The gas seeps from the air directly into the surface 
waters around the world and is gradually making the upper ocean more acidic. 
Scientists recently reported that the shifting chemistry has already started to 
stunt the growth of coral reefs (SN: 4/3/99, p. 214).

 By pumping carbon dioxide directly into the deep sea, nations could reduce the 
amount inadvertently entering the sunlit waters near the surface, where much of 
marine life makes its home. Though anathema to environmentalists, this kind of 
trade-off may seem more promising in the future as the effects of 
greenhouse-gas pollution grow more obvious, say sequestration advocates.

"There's no soft landing here," says Herzog. "There's no perfect solution. And 
it's going to involve some hard choices eventually."

 The quest to clean up fossil fuels

 Carbon dioxide is the uninvited guest that shows up whenever coal, oil, or 
natural gas burn. To keep this interloper out of the environment, engineers are 
exploring strategies to lock up the carbon before it can do any harm.

 In the past, sequestration strategies have focused on pulling carbon dioxide 
out of the stream of gases made by burning fossil fuels. In one standard 
technique, the exhaust bubbles up through an amine solvent, which absorbs the 
carbon dioxide and lets other gases escape.

 A newer concept would strip the carbon out of the fossil fuel before 
combustion, leaving behind an enriched hydrocarbon that could be further 
transformed into hydrogen. Power plants would burn the hydrogen, like they do 
natural gas, or hydrogen could provide electrical energy through highly 
efficient fuel cells.

 The advantage of this approach is that it would permit countries to continue 
using fossil fuels-even coal, the dirtiest and most abundant one. "This is a 
coal strategy as well as an oil and gas one. We think coal is the long-term 
fuel for the second half of the 21st century," says Robert H. Socolow of 
Princeton University.

 The possibility of divorcing fossil fuels from their pollution may help make 
emissions limitations more palatable for the energy industry, the harshest 
critic of international efforts to curb carbon dioxide pollution, concluded 
Harvard's E.A. Parson and D.W. Keith in the Nov. 6, 1998 Science.

 At present, separating carbon from fossil fuels or combustion gases is the 
most expensive part of any sequestration strategy. Even at its most efficient, 
the separation process adds roughly 50 percent to the cost of producing 
electric power, says Meyer Steinberg of Brookhaven National Laboratory in 
Upton, N.Y.

 Using zeolite crystals, membranes, and other substances, researchers are now 
trying to develop more efficient methods of pulling carbon out of fossil fuels. 
Eventually, industries might be able to find some use for this extracted 
material, perhaps as solid carbon to use in the walls of 21st-century houses.


