Science News Online (7/10/99): A Vaccine for Alzheimer's Disease?

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 156, Number 2 (July 10, 1999)

 A Vaccine for Alzheimer's Disease?

 By J. Travis

 Stunning, unexpected results from experiments with mice have given scientists 
cautious optimism that simple injections can prevent or slow the development of 
Alzheimer's disease. Such therapy might even reverse some of the brain damage 
in people already afflicted with the devastating disorder.

 Scientists at Elan Pharmaceuticals in South San Francisco, Calif., injected 
mice with beta-amyloid, the very protein fragment suspected of causing 
Alzheimer's disease. This immunization, they found, generated antibodies that 
prevented the accumulation of beta-amyloid within the mouse brain and even 
cleared existing amyloid deposits, known as plaques.

"This is the first time that anyone has stopped the development of amyloid 
plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer's," says Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad of the 
National Institute on Aging in Bethesda, Md. "This is a major step forward. 
Conceivably, you could immunize people against Alzheimer's disease."

"It's wild and amazing," agrees Sangram S. Sisodia of the University of Chicago.

 Several years ago, Elan's Dale Schenk wondered whether the immune system could 
be aroused to clear the amyloid deposits seen in the brains of people with 
Alzheimer's. To test Schenk's idea, Elan scientists turned to genetically 
engineered mice that develop large numbers of plaques because they harbor a 
mutant version of the human gene for the protein that forms beta-amyloid. The 
researchers began injecting these mutant mice with human beta-amyloid and an 
immune-stimulating agent called an adjuvant.

 Starting at 6 weeks of age, the mice received the injections once a month for 
nearly a year. At the end of the immunization, the scientists examined the 
rodents' brains and found that seven out of nine had virtually no amyloid 
deposits. Both of the two remaining mice had significantly less beta-amyloid 
than untreated animals, Schenk's team reports in the July 8 Nature. The treated 
mice also lacked other brain alterations associated with amyloid deposits, such 
as misshapen nerve connections.

 Taken aback by their findings, the investigators then gave a similar series of 
injections to 11-month-old mice that had already developed amyloid plaques. The 
shots prevented additional amyloid deposits and even triggered clearance of 
some existing plaques, the scientists found.

 The immunizations create large amounts of antibodies that bind to 
beta-amyloid, prompting Schenk to speculate that some of the antibodies 
circulating in the blood sneak into the brain and latch onto any plaques. That 
may alert the brain's immune cells, microglia and monocytes, to clear the 
beta-amyloid.

"It's as if the microglia and monocytes are garbagemen and the antibodies act 
as signposts stuck on the garbage," says Schenk. He notes that Elan has found 
beta-amyloid inside those immune cells in the brains of treated mice.

 The immunization strategy may resolve the great debate in Alzheimer's disease 
research. Most neuroscientists believe that the accumulation of beta-amyloid 
within the brain somehow causes the cell death and resulting memory impairment 
seen in people with the illness. Other investigators suggest accumulations of a 
protein called tau are the real villains in Alzheimer's disease.

 If the beta-amyloid shots prevent plaques in people as well as mice, "we're 
going to test the amyloid hypothesis very thoroughly," says Schenk.

 While the benefits of a vaccine for Alzheimer's are obvious, it's less clear 
whether the immunization strategy will serve people already impaired. "Even if 
you get rid of the amyloid deposits, what will happen to the patients? Will 
they level off or actually get better?" asks Sisodia. Eliminating amyloid 
deposits may not prevent accumulation of the tau protein, he notes.

 Still, Sisodia marvels at Elan's novel strategy. Almost all scientists would 
have dismissed the immunization approach, he notes, because of the "dogma" that 
the so-called blood-brain barrier keeps circulating antibodies out of the brain.

 The immunization tactic may also prove useful for the other diseases in which 
amyloids accumulate in the brain or elsewhere, notes Peter H. St. George-Hyslop 
of the University of Toronto. The approach might even tackle Huntington's and 
Parkinson's diseases, both of which involve abnormal brain aggregations of 
other proteins, he speculates.

 While the mice given the beta-amyloid injections suffered no obvious ill 
effects, scientists caution that the shots could trigger an autoimmune response 
to the beta-amyloid precursor protein, which is present throughout the body.

 By the end of the year, Schenk and his colleagues plan to begin testing the 
immunization approach on people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease. 
Their initial goal is to confirm the strategy's safety, but they'll also 
monitor the people for cognitive improvement or slower-than-normal decline. 
Elan would then like to quickly launch a prevention trial in people known to 
have a high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.

"If it does work, it would stand as one of the great scientific success stories 
of all time," says Morrison-Bogorad.


