Science News Online (6/26/99): Cows' milk, diabetes connection bolstered

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 26 (June 26, 1999)

 Cows' milk, diabetes connection bolstered

 By N. Seppa

 Many studies have linked cows' milk consumed by babies to subsequent diabetes, 
but some researchers still doubt that it causes the disease. The association is 
based on animal experiments, they note, or indirect evidence (SN: 10/19/96, p. 
249), such as studies in which parents of diabetic children try to recollect 
when their babies first started drinking milk-based formula.

 Now, Finnish researchers have avoided the vagaries of poor recall by studying 
children from birth. In so doing, they have added to the case against cows' 
milk.

 By monitoring babies in diabetes-prone families, the scientists find that 
infants getting formula that includes cows' milk are more likely later to 
develop the immune reactions associated with juvenile-onset, or type I, 
diabetes than are babies getting a substitute. The scientists reported the 
findings this week in San Diego at the 59th Annual Scientific Sessions of the 
American Diabetes Association.

 The researchers tracked, until age 8 months, 173 newborns in Finland who had a 
close relative with type I diabetes. To augment their mothers' milk, half of 
these babies received milk-based formula and the rest got a formula in which 
the cows' milk proteins had been broken into fragments called peptides. The two 
formulas taste and smell the same, so parents and researchers didn't know which 
one a baby was drinking.

 Babies' immune systems largely ignore cows' milk proteins that have been 
chopped up. However, contact with one intact protein in cows' milk, bovine 
insulin, may set off a destructive process, suggest immunologist Outi Vaarala 
and her colleagues at the University of Helsinki. The immune system would 
attack pancreas islet cells that make human insulin, which resembles bovine 
insulin, and would produce antibodies.

 At 2 years of age, 10 of 89 children getting cows' milk formula had formed 
antibodies associated with type I diabetes. However, only 3 of 84 babies 
receiving the treated milk showed these antibodies, says Hans K. Akerblom, a 
pediatrician at the University of Helsinki.

 These autoimmune antibodies, or autoantibodies, are made by immune B cells and 
appear to dispose of damaged pancreatic islet cells, says Hans-Michael Dosch, 
an immunologist at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto. The antibodies 
indicate that bovine insulin might be spurring an immune system T-cell reaction 
against the child's own islet cells, he says. Insulin regulates sugar 
metabolism in the body.

 Research had already determined that having one type of autoantibody to 
insulin indicates that a baby has roughly a 4 in 10 chance of contracting type 
I diabetes within the next decade, says study coauthor Suvi M. Virtanen, a 
nutritional epidemiologist at the University of Tampere in Finland. Having more 
types of these autoantibodies is a sign of greater risk; having three imparts 
an 80 to 90 percent likelihood of getting type I diabetes. In this study, 3 of 
the 10 children in the cows' milk group who had diabetes-related autoantibodies 
showed one type of such antibody, and the rest had two or more.

 The precise cause of diabetes remains unclear. The children in the study were 
genetically predisposed to it, but most will never get the disease. Something 
in the environment or diet may trigger it.

 Some researchers suggest that changing a predisposed child's diet might derail 
the disease. However, the proteins and calcium in cows' milk impart great 
benefits, Akerblom says. "None of this [research] is strong enough ... to start 
changing habits about how mothers raise children," he warns.

 Dosch agrees but notes that the evidence against cows' milk is piling up. As 
an example, he cites research from Puerto Rico. There, fewer than 5 percent of 
mothers breast-feed their children. Instead, nearly all use formula made from 
cows' milk. Meanwhile, type I diabetes incidence in Puerto Rico is roughly 10 
times the rate seen in Cuba, where breast-feeding is nearly universal.

 Such findings suggest that the problem may be cows' milk ingested in the first 
few months of life. After all, Dosch says, "we are the only species that drinks 
another species' milk. It's a weird thing. We have not evolved to be exposed to 
[bovine insulin] protein."


