Science News Online (6/5/99): Waterways Carry Antibiotic Resistance

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 23 (June 5, 1999)

 Waterways Carry Antibiotic Resistance

 By J. Raloff

 Wild birds harbor and may transmit drug resistance.

 Bacteria that have developed immunity to antibiotic drugs pose a large and 
growing threat to the success of modern medicine. Three studies now find that 
U.S. rivers have become a major reservoir of such microbes.

 Reported at the American Society for Microbiology (ASM) meeting this week in 
Chicago, the studies demonstrate that antibiotic resistance is literally 
streaming across the nation.

 Ronald J. Ash of Washburn University in Topeka, Kan., sampled waterborne 
bacteria from 15 U.S. rivers, including the Mississippi, the Ohio, and the 
Colorado. He tested the microbes' resistance to ampicillin, a synthetic 
penicillin.

 At each of the 21 sites examined, ampicillin failed to kill between 5 and 50 
percent of the bacteria. Though most of these bacteria are not types usually 
linked to disease, Ash notes that any bacterium can transfer its 
drug-resistance genes to pathogenic organisms in either the environment or a 
host.

 Finding antibiotic-resistant bacteria in rivers is hardly novel. "What has not 
been appreciated is the extent of contamination," Ash says.

 Because he found resistant bacteria both near major cities and in remote 
areas, Ash says, "I can't say that I see any patterns." In fact, he expected 
the water near New Orleans, at the end of the Mississippi, to be loaded with 
resistant bacteria, but they weren't particularly plentiful there.

 Antibiotic resistance is widespread but also unpredictable in the Rio Grande, 
finds Keith L. Sternes of Sul Ross State University in Alpine, Texas. He 
focused on enterococcus bacteria resistant to vancomycin. This drug is often a 
last line of defense against potentially lethal infections, such as those 
caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria that have become immune to the 
penicillin family of drugs (SN: 4/24/99, p. 268).

 Sternes tested water from the Rio Grande River's headwaters in Colorado down 
to Presidio, Texas, at intervals of 50 miles or less. Though resistance was 
most prevalent downstream of El Paso-detected in up to 30 percent of the 
bacteria there-it was not always highest adjacent to big cities or ranches.

 John Bennett of Clarke College in Dubuque, Iowa, found plenty of 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria-including pathogenic Escherichia coli and 
Salmonella-while testing 95 percent of the permanent streams in rural Dubuque 
County. He zeroed in on resistance to tetracycline, a drug widely used for 
livestock and people.

 In some waters, just 1 percent of the bacteria proved immune to tetracycline. 
In others, 30 to 40 percent resisted the drug. Moreover, Bennett found that 
greater than 80 percent of the tetracycline-resistant bacteria examined were 
also immune to one to six additional antibiotics.

 Tainted water probably explains the resistant bacteria in wild Canada geese 
living year-round in Chicago's suburbs, says Monica L. Tischler of Benedictine 
University in Lisle, Ill. From goose feces, she isolated 179 types of bacteria, 
many of which showed strong resistance to streptomycin, erythromycin, 
vancomycin, tetracycline, and penicillin-family drugs. Resistance rates ranged 
from 2 to 100 percent, depending on the microbe and antibiotic tested.

"The surprise was that we found any resistance," says Tischler. With little 
human contact or direct access to farms, these birds "should have had 
absolutely no exposure to antibiotics, unless it's through their environment," 
she says.

"The most important source of environmental, antibiotic-resistant bacteria is 
domestic animals," says Richard Novick of New York University Medical Center. 
Farmers often feed livestock low doses of antibiotics to boost growth (SN: 
7/18/98, p. 39). Inevitably, some bacteria in the animals, in manure-tainted 
fields, and in local waters evolve to coexist with the drug. Such resistant 
bacteria also develop in people taking antibiotics, he notes.

 This resistance, which undermines the effectiveness of drugs, "is a reflection 
of our heavy antibiotics use," indeed overuse, says ASM President Stuart B. 
Levy of the Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance at Tufts 
University in Boston. That the resistance has spilled over into wild animals, 
such as geese, should "provoke a cry" to use antibiotics more judiciously, says 
Levy.


