Science News Online (6/5/99): Canola could provide a new fat on the farm

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 23 (June 5, 1999)

 Canola could provide a new fat on the farm

 By C. Wu

 New technology turns canola plants into factories for a saturated fat used in 
margarine, chocolate, and baked goods. (Canola Information Service)

 Healthier margarine is on its way. Researchers at Calgene in Davis, Calif., 
have genetically engineered canola plants to make large amounts of a saturated 
fat called stearic acid. A solid at room temperature, stearic acid is used to 
make margarine, chocolate, baked goods, and many other foods.

 Food manufacturers need saturated fat to keep margarine solid at room 
temperature, and stearic acid is the only one in use that doesn't raise blood 
cholesterol concentrations (SN: 12/24&31/94, p. 442). Canola oil naturally 
contains just 1 percent stearic acid.

 To create more of this fat, manufacturers chemically process unsaturated plant 
oils-hence the words "partially hydrogenated vegetable oil" on many ingredient 
lists. This process also produces large amounts of unsaturated, trans fatty 
acids, which studies have linked to high blood cholesterol concentrations and 
heart disease (SN: 8/10/96, p. 87).

 The Calgene researchers set out to genetically engineer canola to make 
abundant stearic acid, so manufacturers can avoid producing trans fatty acids.

 Ling Yuan, now at Maxygen in Redwood City, Calif., and his colleagues Marc T. 
Facciotti of the University of California, Berkeley and Paul B. Bertain of 
Calgene report their findings in the June Nature Biotechnology. The researchers 
built upon earlier work by another Calgene group led by Jean C. Kridl. From a 
tropical plant called mangosteen, whose seeds contain large amounts of stearic 
acid, she and her coworkers isolated an enzyme that helps make the fatty acid.

 Inserting the gene for this enzyme, one of a family known as thioesterases, 
into canola boosted stearic acid production. "But it wasn't that high," says 
Yuan.

 His group then created mutant genes and tested which of their enzymes were 
most active in making stearic acid. They found several with a "dramatic 
increase in activity," says Yuan. Canola plants into which the team had 
introduced the best of these genes produce oil with almost 40 percent stearic 
acid.

 The enzymes allow stearic acid to accumulate in the plant by interrupting the 
biosynthesis of oleic acid, which makes up most of the fat in commercial canola 
oil. Oleic acid, a monounsaturated fat, consists of an 18-carbon chain 
containing one double bond. Stearic acid also has 18 carbons but no double 
bonds.

 During the biosynthesis of these two fatty acids, a protein supports the 
growing carbon chain as various thioesterases lengthen it. When the chain 
reaches 18 atoms, an enzyme called desaturase puts in the double bond to form 
oleic acid (SN: 5/31/97, p. 335). However, the thioesterase derived from 
mangosteen releases stearic acid before desaturase can turn it into oleic acid, 
explains Yuan.

"The technology is terrific," says John Shanklin, a lipid biochemist at 
Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, N.Y. "It not only works in the test 
tube, but it works in the plant, and that's an important step.

"The new paradigm is to figure out the activity you want, create an enzyme, and 
then put that in the plant," he says. "You're not constrained by the 
availability of enzymes in nature."

 The engineered canola will need further development before becoming a salable 
product. "In order to achieve really useful varieties, it requires a breeder to 
do classical genetic breeding," says Yuan. "What we do is just the beginning."


