Science News Online (7/10/99): The Bitter End

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 156, Number 2 (July 10, 1999)

 The Bitter End

 Enticing agricultural pests to their last repast

 By Janet Raloff

 Cucumber leaves speckled with dye-laced melon juice. (Ann Sidor/IBL/USDA-ARS)

 Though it looks like any ordinary watermelon-and smells deliciously sweet-this 
mutant is no picnic treat. Its juicy red fruit is overwhelmingly bitter. Even a 
small nibble provokes an intense gagging reflex and imparts an aftertaste that 
lingers for close to an hour-unless you're an adult corn rootworm, also known 
as a cucumber beetle.

 The juice of this mutant melon "tastes like a hot-fudge sundae to rootworms," 
explains Albert DeMilo, a chemist at the U.S. Department of Agriculture's 
Beltsville (Md.) Agricultural Research Center (BARC).

 A student of this insect's taste preferences, DeMilo is helping concoct 
tempting flavorings for pesticides that smite the rootworm, which costs U.S. 
farmers up to $1 billion annually.

 Growers currently fight this scourge by lacing the soil with as much as 30 
million pounds of poisons a year. Corn rootworm larvae are the target for 
roughly half of all insecticides applied to U.S. crops grown in rows. Though 
using some of the most toxic compounds in agriculture's arsenal, this chemical 
warfare has not routed the pest. In fact, rootworms have in many areas evolved 
a tolerance to some of these strong poisons.

 Enter the BARC scientists, with their armloads of melons, gourds, and other 
natural products. Instead of targeting the larvae, which feed on the anchoring 
roots of corn and the rinds of melons, these researchers are developing a mean 
cuisine for the adults, beetles that feed on leaves and corn silk. The idea is 
to knock out most of the beetles before they can plant their eggs-and next 
year's blight-in the ground. If the researchers succeed, farmers won't have to 
continue spreading chemicals onto the soil, a practice that risks contaminating 
groundwater and killing off a host of beneficial insects and worms.

 Under the direction of entomologist Robert F. Schroder at BARC's Insect 
Biocontrol Laboratory, the researchers have been cooking up poison-laced 
recipes for the beetle's discriminating palate. His team wants to make a 
smorgasbord of pesticide treats so deliriously irresistible that the beetles 
will gorge.

 Judging by the results of preliminary taste tests, the insects indeed find the 
scientists' bitter cuisine to-die-for.

 Soil-dwelling larval rootworms (center of inset) eat the roots of corn, 
eventually causing damage called goosenecking. Robbed of their anchoring roots, 
severely affected corn will simply fall down. (Purdue University, Dept. of 
Entomology; USDA-ARS)

 Like most other melons, squashes, cucumbers, and gourds, the watermelon that 
Schroder and his colleagues have enlisted in their war contains a chemical 
called cucurbitacin. Compared with grocery store watermelons, the mutant melon 
that they use has dramatically more of this compound, which belongs to a family 
of perhaps 15 bitter chemicals known as steroid terpenes. These compounds, 
which many insects and vertebrates find unpalatable, evolved as natural 
pesticides.

 The rootworm's unusual appetite for cucurbitacin apparently developed as a 
canny evolutionary ploy to appropriate the plants' defense. A bird needs to 
taste only one of these bitter insects-and promptly vomit it up-to learn an 
indelible lesson. With such an incentive, rootworms are passionate for the 
bitter chemical. Once entomologists realized this, they began investigating 
cucurbitacin-rich flavorings for rootworm poisons.

 In 1993, the Environmental Protection Agency approved the first bitter mixture 
for crop spraying. Carbaryl, a carbamate pesticide, is flavored with 
cucurbitacin-rich buffalo-gourd powder. Marketed under the trade names Slam, 
primarily for corn, and Adios, for other crops, it remains the only embittered 
rootworm pesticide that is commercially available.

 When blended with water and dispersed from a plane, the pesticide forms small 
droplets that dot the leaves of plants, beckoning beetles to their last meal. 
Aerial application of the cucurbitacin-baited pesticide allows farmers to 
reserve the poison for use only after the pest has invaded.

 Today, however, most farmers apply unflavored carbaryl or other toxic 
pesticides to the soil without first determining whether rootworm larvae are 
present. Explains Larry Chandler of USDA's Northern Grain Insects Research 
Laboratory in Brookings, S.D., roughly half of the soil insecticides applied to 
combat rootworms probably are unnecessary. "The farmer uses them as insurance," 
he says, and as a preemptive strike.

 Applying soil insecticides at planting-literally, as the tractor is laying 
down seed-adds no more than $10 per acre, says Chandler. Aerial application of 
Slam, by contrast, costs about $15 per treated acre-and another $3 to $7 per 
acre for the services of a beetle scout, who periodically surveys fields for 
signs of rootworms.

 Farmers find it unnerving to leave newly planted fields untreated, says 
Chandler. So selling them on Slam has been difficult. Far fewer than half of 
corn growers in his region have been willing to adopt this strategy-despite 
some potential advantages.

 For instance, in some years the scout doesn't find many beetles on plants, so 
spraying isn't needed. When it is required, about 5 percent as much Slam on the 
leaves can achieve the same kill rate as poisons applied to the soil. 
Furthermore, the embittered poison threatens little collateral damage to 
friendly insects-from ladybugs to parasitic wasps-that help growers by 
naturally attacking many pests.

 Chandler has commissioned studies to pin down the precise cost differences 
between use of soil pesticides and aerial spraying with Slam. They will examine 
regional factors that affect the economics of farming. "Economics is going to 
drive many of the decisions that determine whether this is ever going to fly 
big-time," he predicts.

 Adult rootworms will fight for the right to eat dye-laced melon juice. The 
resulting red bugs (inset) die quickly upon exposure to sunlight. (Ann 
Sidor/IBL/USDA-ARS)

 Schroder's group thinks it has an even more tempting and environmentally 
friendly alternative-one whose merits may sway more farmers to try cucurbitacin 
baits for adult rootworms. Their recipe starts with the beetle-pleasing juice 
of the mutant melons. The poison additive they've picked is phloxine B, a 
photoactive chemical also known as red dye #28.

 This commercial colorant tints a number of cosmetics, such as lipsticks, and 
drugs, such as Pepto Bismal. It also has provided some of the pesticidal wallop 
in an experimental brew intended to kill Mediterranean and Mexican fruit flies 
(SN: 4/15/95, p. 237).

 Dispersed from a plane, the dye-laced melon juice stains crop leaves with tiny 
carmine dots. When the rootworm beetle encounters them, it stops to feed on a 
treat considerably more enticing than the plant it had intended to eat. As it 
gorges on dot after dot, the bug's body acquires a deepening blush.

 Exposure to sunlight unleashes toxic chemical reactions in the now crimson 
bug. "We're not sure what happens," Schroder acknowledges. His best guess is 
that the light triggers oxidation reactions that damage tissues throughout the 
pest's body. In field trials, 5 minutes of sunlight killed red-dyed beetles.

 As with Slam, Schroder notes, "only the targeted rootworms should be tempted 
to eat the pesticide." Beneficial insects, which avoid the bitter taste, can 
visit sprayed fields with impunity. The dyed juice should prove no risk to 
people's health, he adds. The additive already colors products humans ingest, 
and the cucurbitacin concentrations are extremely low-less than 1 gram per acre.

 Since early spring, USDA has had a group of farmers ready to try the baited 
dye on their fields, but they must wait for EPA approval. Schroder says, "We've 
got the juice, the planes are ready-even the sprayers are lined up."

 What's the holdup? EPA has required toxicity data to determine any potential 
danger for workers who handle and spray the photoactive dye in sunlight. The 
USDA had hoped to use data submitted by the company that is trying to 
commercialize the red dye to kill fruit flies. However, those data have turned 
out to be inadequate, acknowledges Phyllis A. Martin, a microbiologist working 
at BARC.

"There were deficiencies in the [dye's] registration application," agrees EPA 
spokeswoman Ellen Kramer, "and they have not been addressed yet."

 If the dye-toxicity studies must be repeated, field trials with the melon 
juice may have to wait a season or be conducted using a more conventional 
pesticide, such as carbaryl, as the poison.

 Meanwhile, cucumber growers in North Carolina are anxious to try the 
experimental red-dyed melon concentrate, asserts entomologist Bill Jester of 
the North Carolina State University Cooperative Extension Service in Kinston. 
Their motivation, he says, is concern for honey bees. With parasite infections 
having killed so many bee colonies in recent years (SN: 6/29/96, p. 406), 
growers have become very protective of those pollinators that remain and are 
keen to test insecticides that would minimize ancillary damage to honey bees, 
he says.

 Farmers need a broad arsenal of weapons so they can tailor the attacks on 
rootworms according to the crop, conditions, and the insects' resistance to 
pesticides.

 Both Slam and Adios rely on carbaryl to kill adult rootworms. "We know that we 
probably need to develop some alternative active ingredients," says Morris 
Gaskins of Micro Flo Co., the products' Memphis-based manufacturer. Moreover, 
Gaskins notes that the company is seeking alternatives to buffalo-gourd root as 
its source of cucurbitacin. "We have found several varieties of cucumbers that 
have extremely high concentrations of these compounds and are much easier to 
grow," he says.

 Schroder's group is also investigating an alternative source of cucurbitacin: 
the root of a wild Brazilian plant called taiuia. Schroder and USDA ecologist 
Guillermo Cabrera Walsh, based in Buenos Aires, independently encountered South 
American corn growers who were extolling taiuia's ability to lure rootworm 
beetles away from their crops. Local farmers sliced the cassava-like root, 
soaked it overnight in insecticide, then set it out in the fields as bait.

 Cabrera Walsh's experiments with taiuia indicate that this plant actually 
"draws cucumber beetles away from the corn-often from quite a distance." He 
even sprays extracts of it on cloth as a bait to collect live beetles for 
study. In contrast, insects have to contact the cucurbitacin in buffalo gourd 
and the bitter melon before they feed on it.

"In theory, [all] the cucurbitacin molecules are too heavy to become airborne," 
Cabrera Walsh says. This suggests that some other agent in the root may be the 
airborne lure that rings a dinner bell for the pest. "So, we are trying to 
investigate that-because an attractant, if it were a different substance [than 
the bitter compound]-could be important" as an adjunct to any future pesticides.

 Indeed, if it worked well enough, a bait in traps between crop rows might 
obviate the need to actually treat plants directly.

 The important thing to remember, Chandler cautions, is that no matter how well 
it works, no insecticide is likely to eradicate a pest. "The best we can hope 
for is to control it" at a cost that doesn't prove prohibitive, he says.

 For corn and other crops, the bitter medicines under development offer not 
only a partial cure to their rootworm ills, but one having a minimum of 
environmental side effects.

 Rootworms: A U.S. export?

 When half-inch-long adult beetles can't find a bitter meal, they will dine on 
corn silk, shown here, or other crops. (Tom Hlavaty USDA-ARS)

 Until 1992, corn rootworms were a distinctly American phenomenon. Then, the 
scourge took a Balkan vacation-and found the venue so hospitable that it stayed.

 Because the first beetles outside the Americas were sighted in corn fields 
just outside an airport in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, it appears that the insect 
hitched a jet ride, notes entomologist C. Richard Edwards of Purdue University 
in West Lafayette, Ind. It probably began its air travel in the Midwest. 
Indeed, the rootworm infesting Belgrade fields is identical to the pest, known 
as the western corn rootworm, plaguing crops in Iowa, Illinois, and Indiana. 
This variety bears the name Diabrotica virgifera virgifera. Elsewhere in the 
United States, related Diabrotica species often dominate.

 Shortly after the initial Belgrade sighting, Yugoslav officials put out an 
international call for help. Neither the United States nor United Nations came 
through with assistance, Edwards notes, owing to their sanctions against the 
nation for its actions in Bosnia. As coordinator of the regional 
rootworm-management program for Illinois and Indiana, Edwards unofficially 
offered his expertise.

 For the past 4 years, he has been mapping the insect's advance. By 1996, it 
had spread to Hungary, Romania, and Croatia. Since then, scouts have spied it 
in Bulgaria, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Italy. The insect currently 
stands poised to invade Spain, France, Germany, and Portugal, Edwards says.

 Rootworm infestations have become severe in only 8 percent of the affected 
area-all of it in Yugoslavia. There, corn yields have fallen by at least 20 
percent, typically 36 bushels per acre, which is similar to what farmers in the 
U.S. corn belt experience. Unlike their U.S. counterparts, many of the Yugoslav 
farmers cannot afford to fight the blight, he says.

 On sabbatical last year with the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization, 
Edwards helped launch a permanent European monitoring program for the insect. 
He also initiated a model aerial-control program using Slam, the only 
commercial bitter-baited insecticide.

 In many ways, Edwards says, the bitter bait is well suited for these small 
farmers. A single plane can hit many fields at once, ensuring areawide control 
of the bug.

 Having already dispersed over almost 46,000 square miles, an area the size of 
Pennsylvania, this blight represents "the most important introduction of an 
agricultural-crop pest into Europe since the Colorado potato beetle's arrival 
there in 1876," says Edwards.

 Different pest, similar tactic

 A corn earworm moth feeds on the nectar of a Gaura plant, a night-blooming 
relative of evening primrose. This insect costs U.S. farmers $2 billion 
annually. USDA scientists in College Station, Texas, are working to harness 
chemicals responsible for this flower's perfumed scent to attract the 
earworm-also known as the cotton bollworm, tomato fruit worm, and sorghum head 
worm-to pesticides. As with the lethal treats being designed for rootworms, 
trace quantities of the earworm poisons would be dissolved in a liquid tailored 
to the pest's palate. That will probably be sugars, explains Juan Lopez Jr., an 
entomologist who's been working on the project for 8 years. (Lopez/ARS)


