Science News Online (6/26/99): Lead and bad diet give a kick in the teeth

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 26 (June 26, 1999)

 Lead and bad diet give a kick in the teeth

 By S. Carpenter

 For decades, the prevalence of childhood cavities has plummeted, thanks mostly 
to fluoridated water. But for some children, especially in northeastern U.S. 
cities and among the most economically disadvantaged, tooth decay remains 
common. A new study implicates lead as a likely cavity culprit.

 The finding adds to a series of health problems for which lead may be to 
blame, including anemia and impaired mental development. Two other studies, 
also released this week, suggest that shortages of calcium and vitamin C may 
put children who are already at the greatest risk for lead exposure in double 
jeopardy.

 In the cavity study, Mark E. Moss of the University of Rochester (N.Y.) 
Medical Center and his colleagues analyzed data from a nationally 
representative sample of 24,901 children, part of the Third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III).

 Most of the children's blood contained only a few micrograms of lead per 
deciliter, and the current federal guideline for blood-lead concentrations is 
10 mg per deciliter. For children ages 5 to 17, an increased lead burden of 5 
mg per deciliter of blood corresponded to an 80 percent jump in cavities, Moss 
and his team report in the June 23/30 Journal of the American Medical 
Association (JAMA). They estimate that cavities of 2.7 million U.S. youngsters 
result from lead, about 10 percent of all cases in that age group.

"We've been thinking about tooth decay in a way that's almost like blaming the 
victim-if your children have tooth decay, it's because you don't brush their 
teeth right, or maybe their snacking habits are bad," Moss says. "This study 
says that maybe it's beyond that. Maybe children who are exposed to lead need 
extra precautions, such as more fluoride or better hygiene habits, than the 
average."

 Previous studies on people hinted at a link between lead and cavities but were 
inconclusive. William H. Bowen, who heads another research group at the 
University of Rochester, comments that the new study bolsters that research, as 
well as his group's finding that lead exposure causes cavities in rat pups (SN: 
9/6/97, p. 149). "When you put the whole package together, you've got an 
extraordinarily convincing story," he says.

 The new study doesn't prove that lead causes cavities, Moss notes. Further 
research will examine whether, as Bowen's rat research suggests, lead stunts 
development of the glands that produce saliva, which protects teeth from 
harmful acid and bacteria. Alternatively, lead might hinder enamel growth, 
perhaps by blocking fluoride's activity.

 Children acquire lead primarily from two sources: lead-based paint, which is 
common in homes built before the mid-1970s, and contaminated soil, a remnant of 
leaded gasoline exhaust. Because eliminating lead from the environment would be 
expensive, if not impossible, John D. Bogden of the University of Medicine and 
Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark, suggests that the best hope for averting 
lead poisoning in children may be the reduction of lead absorption in their 
gastrointestinal tract. This can be achieved by boosting the calcium in their 
diets.

 In the June Environmental Health Perspectives, however, Bogden and his 
coworkers report insufficient calcium intake among children living in areas 
where lead exposure is high. Of the children whose blood concentrations of lead 
had been measured, almost half exceeded the federal guideline.

 Bogden's team found that the diet of 31 percent of 175 children ages 1 to 3 
years regularly fell below the federally recommended intake of 500 milligrams 
of calcium per day. Moreover, 59 percent of 139 children 4 to 8 years old took 
in less than the recommended 800 mg daily. In both age groups, calcium in the 
diets of about 7 percent of children fell far below the requirement for good 
health. These children took in less than 200 mg calcium per day.

"It's depressing," Bowen comments. "It's another health burden for the people 
who are least able to bear it."

 However, Bogden's group also found many children whose calcium intake was well 
above the recommended level. "With attention to including dairy foods in the 
diet, it's very doable," he says.

 A third study, also in the June 23/30 JAMA and using NHANES III data, finds a 
link in both children and adults between decreased blood concentrations of lead 
and increased concentrations of ascorbic acid, or vitamin C. If the finding 
holds up, increasing vitamin C intake could be "a reasonable, cost-effective 
way to control lead levels in the population," says author Joel A. Simon of the 
University of California, San Francisco.

 Even if lead hampers the absorption of vitamin C, rather than the vitamin 
flushing out lead, "the bottom line is the same," Simon asserts. People at high 
risk for lead toxicity should eat more fruits and vegetables and consider 
taking a vitamin C supplement, he says.

 In an accompanying editorial, Thomas D. Matte of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention in Atlanta warns that a dietary fix shouldn't replace 
efforts to purge lead from the environment. Even if a nutritional strategy 
works, he asserts, "reliance on such an intervention places most of the burden 
for prevention on those most affected and least responsible for the underlying 
environmental causes of lead toxicity."


