Science News Online (6/26/99): Old Glory, New Glory

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 26 (June 26, 1999)

 Old Glory, New Glory

 The Star-Spangled Banner gets some tender loving care

 By Corinna Wu

 From a custom-made gantry, conservators examined and vacuumed the 
Star-Spangled Banner last December after taking it down from its display at the 
Smithsonian's National Museum of American History. They later rolled up the 
flag and moved it to a specially built lab for more-detailed work. (Jeff 
Tinsley, Smithsonian)

 In 1814, as a young nation embroiled in a war with Great Britain, the United 
States needed a symbol to rally around. It found one courtesy of a Washington 
lawyer named Francis Scott Key.

 Key boarded a British ship flying a truce flag in Baltimore's harbor to 
negotiate the release of a prisoner. When the enemy fleet around him began 
raining cannonballs on Baltimore's Fort McHenry, Key was detained on the ship, 
unable to do anything but anxiously watch the perilous fight until the dawn of 
Sept. 14, 1814.

 The British warships finally retreated, their attack unsuccessful. As the 
legend goes, Key peered through a spyglass and saw, in the distance, a huge 
American flag flying over the battered but still-standing fort. The sight 
inspired him to pen the patriotic poem that-set to the tune of a British 
drinking song-eventually became the United States' national anthem.

 One hundred and eighty-five years later, that famous flag is still around, but 
the stripes aren't quite so long, and the stars aren't as bright. Originally 
measuring 30 by 42 feet, about the size of half a tennis court, the flag today 
is truncated; it's missing the last 8 feet across its stripes. Also, one star 
has mysteriously disappeared. The woolen fibers have become fragile from 
exposure to moisture and light. Holes and rust spots mar the fabric.

 Now, the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History in 
Washington, D.C., the flag's home for the past 35 years, is using modern-even 
space-age-technology to ensure that the banner may be proudly hailed for 
centuries to come.

 The museum has begun an $18 million, 3-year project to preserve the 
Star-Spangled Banner. In late May, art conservators partially unfurled the flag 
onto a specially constructed 32-by-66-foot table, where, wearing surgical 
scrubs, they will delicately clean and mend it.

 The project is the largest textile-preservation effort ever undertaken by a 
museum. "Our goal is to stabilize the flag, not make it look like new," says 
Suzanne Thomassen-Krauss, the project's chief conservator. Through the 
examination she's leading, one of unprecedented detail, the museum not only 
hopes to save the flag from further deterioration but also to learn more about 
its past. Moreover, the experience gained could help scientists protect other 
historical textiles from the ravages of time.

 Lt. Col. George Armistead, the commander of Fort McHenry, in 1813, 
commissioned a Baltimore flag maker named Mary Pickersgill and her 13-year-old 
daughter Caroline to sew the flag that came to be known as the Star-Spangled 
Banner. It cost the military $405.90.

 After the battle that Key witnessed, Armistead probably just took the banner 
home with him, says Lonn Wood Taylor, the museum's historian for the 
conservation project. The flag was passed down in the Armistead family until 
1907, when Eben Appleton, Armistead's grandson, loaned it to the Smithsonian 
Institution in Washington.

 Appleton made the flag a permanent gift in 1912, but before it was displayed, 
the Smithsonian hired a Boston flag restorer named Amelia Fowler to apply her 
patented sewing technique to the banner. She and a team of seamstresses removed 
an old canvas backing that had been sewn on in 1873 and stitched on a new linen 
backing, using thread dyed to match the stars, stripes, and blue field.

 By stitching through the fabric, Fowler and her assistants put a dense network 
of linen thread on the front of the flag, says Taylor. The colors of those 
threads have faded, producing a dingy look. Structurally, they're troublesome 
too.

"Linen was a good choice, since it's durable and there's not much elongation," 
he says. "The inconsistency of the stitching, however, becomes a problem over 
time." The heavy backing, because it pulls on some areas of the flag more than 
others, may have weakened the fabric, so conservators have decided to remove it.

 A foot-square patch of red where the conservators have snipped the stitches 
looks much brighter than the rest of the stripe surrounding it. Unrolling the 
flag as they go, the museum workers plan to clip every one of the estimated 1.7 
million stitches that hold on the linen backing. Given that there are 12 to 14 
stitches per square inch and that conservators can snip "3 square feet on a 
good day, 1 square foot on a bad day," says Taylor, that effort alone will take 
at least a year.

 The linen backing will then be history, but the conservators have yet to 
decide what kind of backing or support for the flag they will use. In fact, 
they are taking advantage of the snipping period to plan many details of the 
project's later stages.

 The undertaking's main objective is to stop the flag's deterioration. The fact 
that the Star-Spangled Banner stayed in private hands for so long and was 
displayed only on patriotic occasions probably saved it from completely falling 
to pieces, historians speculate. However, the Armisteads did indulge requests 
from War of 1812 widows who wanted to bury their husbands with a piece of the 
flag, a practice known as "souveniring," says Thomassen-Krauss. Consequently, 
the banner is shorter than it was originally.

 The Smithsonian displayed the flag in its Arts and Industries Building until 
1964, when it moved the banner to its current home across the National Mall in 
Washington. There, the flag hung in the entrance hall, exposed to pollution 
blowing in from the street, dirt coming off millions of visitors, and oily 
grime floating up from machinery such as escalators. In 1982, the museum gently 
vacuumed the surface to remove surface particles, but the flag clearly needed 
more extensive care.

 Flag restorer Amelia Fowler led a team of seamstresses in attaching a linen 
backing to the Star-Spangled Banner in 1914. They made an estimated 1.7 million 
stitches-all of which will be removed during the current preservation project. 
(Smithsonian)

 In 1996, a group of 50 experts convened at the museum and hatched a plan to 
preserve the Star-Spangled Banner. A crucial first step was to assess the 
damage in detail.

"It's hard to know with an artifact this size what the condition is beyond the 
level you can see with the eye," says Thomassen-Krauss. "It's easy to say that 
it's just made of cotton and wool, but [after years of environmental stress] 
every fiber is different."

 Art historians have long used infrared imaging of small samples to 
authenticate pigments of paintings (SN: 3/13/99, p. 166). Thomassen-Krauss 
turned to this technique, both its conventional form and a technology that 
scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., had 
developed to examine distant planets.

 Wool is a protein like hair. When moist wool gets a dose of sunlight and 
oxygen, the fibers essentially get split ends, Thomassen-Krauss says.

 To assess the damage to the flag, wool researchers Ian Weatherall and Fenella 
France of Dunedin, New Zealand took small fiber samples for analysis by 
infrared spectrometry, electron microscopy, mechanical testing, and 
determination of amino acid content.

 Furthermore, the New Zealand researchers have teamed up with scientists at the 
USDA's Eastern Regional Research Center in Wyndmoor, Pa., to conduct a lab 
study to learn more about how light weakens wool. Conservators can use such 
information to better preserve wool artifacts, such as the flag.

 The scientists plan to expose coarse wool fibers-resembling those in the 
Star-Spangled Banner-to artificial sunlight. Using infrared spectrometry, they 
will correlate photochemical damage with the fibers' loss of strength.

"Light degradation is a very powerful process," says William N. Marmer, who 
heads the Hides, Lipids, and Wool Research Unit in Wyndmoor. His co-worker on 
the project, textile scientist Jeanette M. Cardamone, also serves on a 
committee for the preservation of the Shroud of Turin.

 Like museum conservators, the wool industry might reap some benefits from the 
project. It might learn how to protect wool draperies, carpets, and upholstery, 
all of which tend to disintegrate after too much sun.

 The study could even explain what happens to wool while it's still on the 
sheep. The ends of the wool are always exposed to the sun, says Marmer. That 
leads to a condition called tippiness. "The ends of the fiber behave 
differently in dyeing and are weaker than the rest of the fiber," he explains.

 While Marmer and Cardamone work with infrared spectrometers that only 
scrutinize small samples, Goddard scientists are using a camera they recently 
developed that can take images of large objects like the Star-Spangled Banner.

 John J. Hillman and David Glenar had devised a camera called the Acousto-Optic 
Imaging Spectrometer, which uses sound waves to select infrared wavelengths. 
Used with telescopes on Earth or as an instrument on board a spacecraft, the 
camera can identify chemical compounds by the characteristic ways in which they 
reflect infrared light. The Goddard team is developing the technology to go 
into an instrument that could determine the mineral composition of rocks on 
Mars.

 Testing the camera on an old, stained tapestry, Hillman says, "I demonstrated 
that there were oil signatures that were invisible to the naked eye." The 
infrared camera can also identify spots that collect moisture from the air, 
which leads to damage of the wool fibers.

 The Goddard device measures reflected light in the near-infrared range instead 
of the thermal infrared, heat-related light emitted by an object. Conventional 
spectrometers that rely on this longer-wavelength thermal infrared "cannot 
identify contaminants on the flag because they are the same temperature as the 
flag itself," says Thomassen-Krauss.

 Because of logistics, Hillman had to do his analysis while the flag still hung 
in the museum. Devising a method to take images of the three-story flag "took a 
lot of orchestrating," says Hillman.

 A lighting designer at the National Air and Space Museum created a scaffold 
for the camera and a light bar that could be raised and lowered on an elevator 
mechanism. "It was a trellis of lights-like a theatrical rock concert," says 
Hillman. The lamps, filtered to remove all extraneous ultraviolet and visible 
light, gave the flag "an eerie red glow," he adds.

 Hillman divided the flag into 72 sections and took about 30 shots of each at 
different infrared wavelengths over two intense weeks in November 1998. He 
marvels at the proximity of his subject. "Here's this monstrous flag," Hillman 
exclaims. "Not only is it on the same planet, but it's in the same room. As an 
astronomer, I'm not used to that."

 Although exciting, taking the images was only the first hurdle. The data from 
the nearly 2,500 images will take most of the summer to analyze fully, he says.

 A sample of dust vacuumed from the Star-Spangled Banner includes clay 
particles, vegetable matter, synthetic fibers, and lint magnified 300-fold. 
(Mary Ballard, Smithsonian)

 Although in need of a good laundering when it was taken down from the museum 
entry hall after Hillman's work, the Star-Spangled Banner couldn't simply be 
dropped off at the dry cleaners. In December 1998, museum employees gingerly 
laid it flat on a temporary platform for an inspection. The conservation team 
drew a map of all the holes, tears, and stains on every square inch of the flag.

 Conservators found Armistead's signature on the flag, as well as a needle left 
from its 1914 restoration. A puzzling red chevron on one of the white stripes, 
Taylor thinks, was an aborted attempt to sew the Armistead family monogram onto 
the flag. "The surface of the flag is like an archeological dig," he says. "It 
contains traces of everything that happened to it."

 From its years of hanging in the museum, the banner has collected enough dust 
and grime to make a vacuum cleaner salesman jump for joy. One of 
Thomassen-Krauss' colleagues says that micrographs of the dust collected from 
the surface look like "Bourbon Street after Mardi Gras."

 The conservators gave the flag a light vacuuming before they wound it onto a 
big cardboard tube like a giant roll of paper towels. They then moved it 
upstairs into a new conservation laboratory that doubles as an exhibit.

 The lab is a huge, climate-controlled clean room not unlike ones used to make 
computer chips. A large, adjustable table supports the flag as conservators 
care for it. A gantry, or rolling bridge, hovering above the table allows up to 
seven conservators to work, lying flat on their stomachs, just 4 inches from 
the flag's surface.

 The bridge won't deflect or vibrate, says Anthony Maher, a Washington-based 
project manager from the architectural and engineering firm KCF-SHG, which 
designed the room. A steady platform helps prevent workers from damaging 
threads of the flag as they work on stitches and stains.

 The amount of illumination in the lab is kept low-as dim as the dawn's early 
light, one might say. Filters over lightbulbs remove ultraviolet radiation, and 
light reaches the flag only indirectly after bouncing off the walls. "Light 
probably causes the most damage over time," says Thomassen-Krauss. Visitors can 
peer into the lab through a glass wall.

 On the basis of what the infrared camera has found, the conservators will 
choose cleaning fluids for each stain. Workers will drip the fluids through the 
fabric and remove the fumes and dirt with large "elephant noses," hoses 
connected to a powerful exhaust system.

 The conservators still aren't sure how they will eventually protect and 
display the newly freshened flag. "Research is ongoing," says Thomassen-Krauss.

 The museum might sandwich the banner between two layers of a sheer, meshlike 
fabric and stitch them together through the flag's holes and tears. 
Conservators are also thinking about eventually encasing the relic in a sealed 
chamber filled with an inert gas, such as neon, to prevent oxidation.

 Until then, museum visitors can watch the conservators at work. If everything 
goes according to plan, their treatment will ensure that the Star-Spangled 
Banner gallantly waves for generations to come.


