Science News Online (6/5/99): The Search for Animal Inventors

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 155, Number 23 (June 5, 1999)

 The Search for Animal Inventors

 How innovative are other species?

 By Susan Milius

 The Blue Delta guppy may look like just another pretty tail, but some 
individual guppies are more creative in finding food than others are. 
Researchers at Oxford University uncovered this distinction during experiments 
on the drabber pet-store guppies. (Stan Shubel)

 Just how human is that prized human capacity for innovation? Does a creative 
genius really need the rumpled sweatshirt and the caffeine? Or for that matter, 
does he, she, or it need an opposable thumb to wrap around the coffee cup?

 And what about the everyday innovator, the blessed individual in the carpool 
who can always come up with a perfect shortcut? If that counts as innovation, 
are there innovators, even Edisons, among monkeys? Birds? Fish?

 Kevin N. Laland might phrase his research problem a little differently, but he 
takes such questions seriously-so seriously that he and his students at the 
University of Cambridge in England are looking for innovative capacities among 
guppies.

 Laland is one of the few researchers who explicitly examines innovation in 
animals. However, other behavioral and ecological research, such as studies of 
improvisation in bird songs or in chimps' tool use, also touch upon that "Aha!" 
of creativity. The implications of all this work ripple into the study of the 
origins of human culture.

"It's fundamental," Laland says.

 Although innovation may be basic, it's not easy to define, and research-ers' 
characterizations of it vary. Laland describes it as "new or modified behavior 
patterns." He quotes the textbook examples: Local groups of blue tits in 
England began to peck open the milk bottles on doorsteps and snitch the cream. 
A Japanese macaque collected potatoes left on the beach and dipped them in 
water to remove the sand. A chimp put extra whump in his threat display by 
banging empty kerosene cans together.

"We need to know that the animal is not just doing something bizarre and 
wacky-it's not just having a funny day," Laland says. "The animal has to learn 
something [useful]."

 Therefore, Laland is not impressed when one of his guppies leaves its buddies 
and darts off in a new direction. It may be swimming boldly where no guppy has 
swum before, but Laland wants more payoff. He does, however, count as 
innovation a guppy's pioneering trip through a maze to unfamiliar food, a task 
Laland uses in his experiments.

 Even that feat doesn't satisfy Bennett G. Galef Jr. of McMaster University in 
Hamilton, Ontario. "It's not clear he's captured what we mean by innovation," 
says Galef, a long-time researcher of how new behaviors spread.

 He demands that an animal act in a manner more novel than just bumbling 
through a maze. One of his experiments, for example, focused on black-capped 
chickadees wrestling open and feasting on the little plastic cups of cream that 
restaurants supply for coffee.

 Laland counters, "At this stage, we need a broad definition."

 One of the basic questions that Laland and his student Simon M. Reader have 
explored is what factors inspire innovation, as they define it.

 The researchers tested fish in groups, releasing them in one compartment of a 
divided tank. The guppies who found their way through a simple maze that they'd 
never seen before encountered a feeder stocked with freeze-dried bloodworms. 
The test fish had never before seen that traditional guppy delight.

 The researchers noted characteristics of the guppy in each group that solved 
the puzzle first. "The most intuitive finding," Laland says, is that 
food-deprived fish tend to reach the food more often than their well-fed 
counterparts.

 Less predictable was their finding of a gender difference. In 27 of 36 groups, 
the first guppy to strike the bloodworm feast was female. Age, size, and 
tendency to dash about cannot explain the difference, Laland says.

 The finding made sense to Laland when he considered fish sex differences. One 
of the basic principles of modern behavioral ecology has been to follow the 
parental investment. A female guppy bears live young, a venture demanding 
considerably more from her than from the dad. Thus, the amount of food that she 
finds limits reproductive capacity. Availability of males, however, is not 
usually an issue because the female stores sperm from each mating.

 A male faces the opposite situation. His primary challenge is to attract a 
female's attention with displays of his gaudy tail. Food doesn't limit his 
reproductive capacity. "He simply needs enough to give him the energy to keep 
chasing females," Laland says.

 Thus, the male doesn't have the incentive to forage boldly and inventively, 
Laland concludes. The female, however, faces significant reproductive pressure 
to become a creative genius at finding freeze-dried bloodworms.

 A gender difference appeared again when Laland and Reader tested guppies that 
had been sorted by their ability to compete with other fish when scrambling for 
food, according to results to be published soon in Behavioral Ecology. 
Remembering the performance of hungry fish in the earlier experiments, the 
researchers predicted that the poor competitors-the perennial losers in 
scramble competitions-would turn out to be more innovative.

 Scramble prowess did not predict the females' success. Laland interprets this 
result: For females, "it always pays to try to gather more food."

 The loser males, however, proved more innovative than the tough competitors. 
For males, foraging innovation pays "only when you've done really, really 
badly" as a competitor, Laland concludes.

 Guppies may not be the only species with particularly innovative females. The 
pattern shows up in descriptions of chimp behavior from Jane Goodall and other 
scientists. For example, females use tools to snag desirable nuts or bugs more 
often than males do.

 A theme of the guppy findings, necessity as the mother of invention, also fits 
with some earlier studies of influences on innovation. Watching crowlike 
jackdaws, Gadi Katzir reported in the 1980s that mid- to low-ranking birds 
venture into novel spaces more often and try new foods sooner than their social 
superiors do. Goodall and Hans Kummer also reported that nonhuman primates on 
the fringes of social groups frequently prove to be the most innovative members.

 Setting aside such issues as desperation and sex, Laland and Reader also 
assert that there are Edison-class guppies. The researchers selected the fish 
that proved fastest in two consecutive rounds of solving mazes. In a third 
round, with a third kind of maze, the researchers pitted two-time winners 
(presumed innovators) against two-time losers (presumed noninnovators).

 The quick group again outperformed the others, reaching the food in an average 
of 15 minutes versus 23. Laland sees the test as evidence for identifiable 
innovators among guppies.

 He admits enjoying the irony that his guppies, "not renowned for their 
intelligence," show evidence of individual innovative zest that some allegedly 
more highly evolved animals don't seem to have. For example, a test of capuchin 
monkeys, reported by Dorothy M. Fragaszy and Elisabette Visalberghi in 1990, 
provided no evidence of individuals with special innovative powers.

 Relative advantage: The bird family including this Florida scrub-jay and its 
crow and magpie kin consistently outranks ducks in a scientist's tally of 
innovative feeding behavior. (Erika Simon/Florida Museum of Natural History)

 The frustration of trying to compare species based on the lab tests drove 
Louis Lefebvre of McGill University in Montreal to see what he could glean from 
reports of activities in the wild. He decided that he could count on the fervor 
of birdwatchers.

"Ornithologists report absolutely every new thing they see," he says. Journals 
routinely carry short descriptions of novelties, such as species sighted 
outside their ranges and birds eating something unusual or foraging in a 
peculiar way.

 Computer searches couldn't sort accurately enough, so Lefebvre mobilized 
students to read through ornithology journals, noting reports of novel feeding. 
By now, they've evaluated 1,030 anecdotes in 25 journals.

 The first installment of results, published in the March 1997 Animal 
Behaviour, noted 322 reports of innovations among birds from North America and 
the British Isles. This list includes an osprey opening conch shells by 
dropping them on concrete-filled drums, a turnstone stealing food from sea 
anemones, and a house sparrow hovering in front of the sensor that triggers the 
automatic door at a bus station and then flying inside for food.

 When Lefebvre ranked the bird groups on the creativity scale, crows and their 
relatives scored high. Ducks, chickens, and pheasants were low.

 The innovation scores intrigue Lefebvre because they match work on brain 
anatomy. Birds at the top of the innovation tally have relatively bigger 
forebrains, he says. His newest work, not yet published, supports the 
correlation and narrows in on the forebrain area that seems important.

 Lefebvre acknowledges risks of a method based on anecdotes, but he adds, "I'm 
saying, for the moment, it works."

 Humpback whales keep composing new tunes, changing the male choral song more 
often than some other mammals change hemlines.

 Bird songs yield plenty of evidence for musical innovation, according to 
researchers at the Borror Laboratory of Bioacoustics at Ohio State University 
in Columbus. Dialects, which are geographic novelties thought to have started 
with some innovative songster, are of special interest to the laboratory's 
director, Douglas Nelson. "You can tell where you are in California, Oregon, or 
Washington if you know the white-crowned sparrow song," he notes.

 By mapping the song variety of this sparrow in detail, ornithologists have 
demonstrated sharp borders between dialect areas. In some places in California, 
Nelson has discerned a shift in local sparrow dialects just by crossing a 
stream. Only a few other species have shown such clear demarcations.

 Sandra L. Gaunt, from the same lab, is working on dialects in Costa Rica's 
green violet-ear hummingbird. When males want romance, they usually gather in 
clusters of two to six birds to sing and show off. All the birds within a 
cluster produce the same courtship song. Each cluster, or lek, however, has a 
different dialect, although to human ears the songs all are "very monotonous 
and staccato," according to Gaunt.

 So many leks and so much new music may have arisen because no lek can get very 
large, Gaunt speculates. A male does not just sing over the notes of his 
competitors. He slips the phrases of his song into the slight pauses in theirs. 
As the males sing together, they speed up, making it especially tricky to 
coordinate notes. More than six birds interweaving their songs would crash into 
each other acoustically.

 Improvising new songs instead of repeating old favorites may reflect a mobile 
life, suggests Donald E. Kroodsma of the University of Massachusetts at 
Amherst. A sedentary bird that always has the same neighbors can use shared 
songs as what Kroodsma calls "a common, learned code." The migratory life, 
instead, seems to favor improvising a large number of species-typical tunes for 
communicating with changing, wide-ranging neighbors.

 In North America, for example, sedge wrens migrate, and each male improvises 
most of his several hundred songs. In Costa Rica, the same species tends to 
stay put, and neighbors' repertoires overlap, Kroodsma and colleagues reported 
in the April Animal Behaviour. In Brazil, they observed an extreme version of a 
shared repertoire. In an hour-long musical duel called countersinging, two 
males matched more than a third of each other's songs.

 Other renowned singing animals, the humpback whales, revise their songs 
constantly, notes Joseph R. Mobley Jr. of the University of Hawaii at West 
Oahu. Males in a region all sing the same highly structured number, with 
phrases combined according to syntax rules. As the breeding season progresses, 
the song is modified and all the males adopt the changes.

 Many other animals have unchanging melodies that seem biologically 
preprogrammed, Mobley says. "It'd be pretty easy to hardwire the [whale] song." 
Since that isn't the case, he bets that the innovation will turn out to play 
some important role.

 Juvenile chimps come up with all kinds of antics, supporting the idea that, 
regardless of species, the creative spark flares especially bright among the 
young, the low-ranking, and the hungry.

 Chimps clearly invent things, reports Sarah T. Boysen, who runs the primate 
lab at Ohio State. "I see something just about every day." She's not entirely 
happy about it, either.

 One of her challenges has been to keep two chimps, now 28 and 32 months old, 
from scampering to the ceiling of their room and pulling apart the light 
fixtures. For 6 months, she kept them down by greasing the most attractive 
route, a run of piping, with cooking spray so it was too slippery to climb. 
However, the chimps then started shredding materials in their cage and rubbing 
off the grease. Boysen gave up and installed a mesh ceiling to protect the 
chimps and the lights from each other.

 She also relates what happened when, to create a new toy, she dangled a length 
of stretchy surgical tubing from the mesh. "They loved it-bungee, bungee, 
bungee!" she remembers. Then, the young female wove the loose end of the tubing 
back up into the mesh and made her own swing.

 Innovation goes beyond the antics of captive animals, Boysen says. Studies of 
tool use among wild chimps show powerful evidence of lightening-bolt 
creativity. Animals in one part of Africa carry around stones that they use as 
hammers and anvils to crack open nuts. The same nuts grow among chimps 
elsewhere, but those animals don't pick up stones to crack the nutshells.

 Such localized tool traditions keep popping up as investigators watch the 
animals in the field, Boysen notes. One group of chimps drags a plant through 
ponds and then eats the algae collected on the leaves and stems. Another group 
clambers to the top of oil palms, rips out the central fronds, and then pounds 
a pestle into the trunk to crush and release the soft innards.

 These examples show how innovation allows animals to exploit a new niche, 
Boysen observes. Classic evolutionary theory emphasized population processes, 
but to appreciate innovation, "the individual becomes very important," she says.

 Primate studies in particular suggest that most individuals' innovations die 
with them. Laland notes, "Only a tiny, tiny fraction spread to the rest of the 
population."

 Part of the reason may lie in the usually low status of innovators: the poor 
competitors, the small, and the hungry. "They're not being watched," he notes.

 Actually, there may be Edisons all over the place, throughout the animal 
kingdom. The tricky part is getting anyone to notice.


