Science News Online (7/24/99): The Honeycomb Conjecture

 The Honeycomb Conjecture Proving mathematically that honeybee constructors are 
on the right track

 By Ivars Peterson

 The honeybee's storage system consists of an array of hexagonal cells 
precisely constructed from wax. (Agricultural Research Service, USDA) Honeybees 
know a thing or two about working with wax and fashioning elegant, symmetrical 
structures.

 Gorging themselves on honey, young worker bees slowly excrete slivers of wax, 
each fleck about the size of a pinhead. Other workers harvest these tiny wax 
scales, then carefully position and mold them to assemble a vertical comb of 
six-sided, or hexagonal, cells. The bees cluster in large numbers, maintaining 
a hive temperature of 35@C, which keeps the wax firm but malleable during cell 
construction.

 This energetic, piecemeal activity produces a strong, remarkably precise 
structure. Each wax partition, less than 0.1 millimeter thick, is fashioned to 
a tolerance of 0.002 mm. Moreover, the cell walls all stand at the correct 120@ 
angle with respect to one another to form a lattice of regular hexagons.

 Observers throughout recorded history have marveled at the hexagonal pattern 
of the honeybee's elaborate storage system. More than 2,000 years ago, Greek 
scholars commented on how bees apparently possess "a certain geometrical 
forethought" in achieving just the right type of enclosure to hold honey 
efficiently. In the 19th century, Charles Darwin described the honeycomb as a 
masterpiece of engineering that is "absolutely perfect in economising labour 
and wax."

 Biologists assume that bees minimize the amount of wax they use to build their 
combs. But is a grid made up of regular hexagons indeed the best possible 
choice? What if the walls were curved rather than flat, for example?

 Mathematician Thomas C. Hales of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor has 
now formulated a proof of the so-called honeycomb conjecture, which holds that 
a hexagonal grid represents the best way to divide a surface into regions of 
equal area with the least total perimeter. Hales announced the feat last month 
and posted his proof on the Internet at .

 Although widely believed and often asserted as fact, this conjecture has long 
eluded proof, says Frank Morgan of Williams College in Williamstown, Mass. 
Hales' proof "looks right to me," he comments, "although I have not checked 
every detail."

 Last year, Hales proved Johannes Kepler's conjecture that the arrangement of 
the familiar piles of neatly stacked oranges at a supermarket represents the 
best way to pack identical spheres tightly (SN: 8/15/98, p. 103).

 If Hales' proofs of the honeycomb and Kepler conjectures stand the test of 
time, "it's a remarkable double achievement," says physicist Denis Weaire of 
Trinity College Dublin in Ireland.

 In an essay on the "sagacity of bees," Pappus of Alexandria noted in the 
fourth century A.D. how bees, possessing a divine sense of symmetry, had as 
their mission the fashioning of honeycombs without any cracks through which 
that wonderful nectar known as honey could be lost. In his mathematical 
analysis, he focused on the hexagonal arrangement of cells.

 Although honeycomb cells are three-dimensional structures, each cell is 
uniform in the direction perpendicular to its base. Hence, its hexagonal cross 
section matters more than other factors in calculating how much wax it takes to 
construct a comb.

 The mathematicians' honeycomb conjecture therefore concerns a two-dimensional 
pattern-as if bees were creating a grid for laying out tiles to cover an 
infinitely wide bathroom floor.

 Mathematicians of ancient Greece asked what choices bees might have if they 
wanted to divide a flat surface into identical, equal-sided cells. Only three 
regular polygons pack together snugly without leaving gaps: equilateral 
triangles, squares, and regular hexagons. Other polygons, such as pentagons and 
octagons, will not fit together without leaving spaces between the cells.

 The Greeks asserted that if the same quantity of wax were used for the 
construction of a single three-dimensional version of the three candidate 
figures, the hexagonal cell would hold more honey than a triangular or square 
cell. Equivalently, the perimeter of a hexagonal cell enclosing a given area is 
less than that of a square or triangular cell enclosing the same area.

 Other possibilities for arrays of cells, however, are conceivable. There's no 
a priori reason why the cells must all have equal sides or identical shapes and 
sizes. What about a crazy quilt of random polygons or cells with curved rather 
than straight sides?

 Sorting through these alternative patterns proved a formidable task for 
mathematicians.

 It was relatively straightforward to establish that a regular hexagon, with 
equal sides and 120@ angles, has a smaller perimeter than any other six-sided 
figure of the same area. Moreover, polygons with more sides than the hexagon, 
such as regular octagons, do better, and polygons with fewer sides, such as 
squares, do worse.

 In 1943, Hungarian mathematician L. Fejes Toth proved the honeycomb conjecture 
for the special case of filling the plane with any mixture of straight-sided 
polygons. In effect, Morgan says, Toth established that the average number of 
sides per cell in a plane-filling pattern is at most six. Moreover, the 
advantage of having some polygons with more than six sides is less than the 
disadvantage of having some polygons with fewer sides. Under these conditions, 
the least-perimeter way to enclose and separate infinitely many regions of 
equal area is the regular hexagonal grid of the honeycomb.

 What if cells were allowed to have curved sides? Toth considered the question 
and predicted that the best answer is still a grid of regular hexagons. 
"Nevertheless, this conjecture has resisted all attempts at proving it," he 
commented.

 In recent years, Morgan has refocused attention on the honeycomb conjecture 
and related questions, such as the most economical way of packaging a pair of 
identical volumes as double bubbles (SN: 8/12/95, p. 101). In the May 
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, he outlined progress in 
proving the hexagonal honeycomb conjecture and its variants, and he suggested a 
possible route to a proof.

 With curved sides, the complication is that a side that bulges out for one 
cell must bulge in for its immediate neighbor. Bulging out helps minimize the 
cell perimeter, while bulging in hurts.

 Hales proved that the advantage of bulging out is less than the disadvantage 
of bulging in. "The basic idea is quite simple and elegant," says John M. 
Sullivan of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Hales' main result 
"shows that no single cell can do better than a hexagon if appropriately 
penalized for having more than six sides or outward curves."

 Therefore, straight-sided polygons work better than curved ones, and regular 
hexagons are truly best of all.

 Bees have that aspect of their honeycomb structures down pat.

 Two possible structures for the closed end of a honeycomb cell. Mathematician 
L. Fejes Toth showed that an end cap consisting of two hexagons and two squares 
(top left) requires a little less wax than the one honeybees make, with three 
diamond-shaped, or rhombic, panels (top right). A honeycomb consists of two 
layers of such cells placed back to back so that a chamber on one side is 
offset from its partner on the other side (bottom). (Weaire & Phelan/NATURE) 
There's more to a honeycomb than a vertical, hexagonal grid, however. It 
actually consists of two layers of cells placed back to back. The cells 
themselves are tilted upward at an angle of about 13@ from the horizontal-just 
enough to prevent stored honey from dripping out.

 Instead of a flat bottom, each cell ends in three four-sided, diamond-shaped 
panels, meeting in a point like a pencil sharpened with only three knife 
strokes. The cells of the two layers are offset so the center of a chamber on 
one side is the corner of three adjacent cells on the other side. This allows 
the layers to interlock like the bottoms of two egg cartons fitted together. In 
the honeycomb, however, one layer of material serves as the bottoms of two 
cells. In cross section, the interface between the two layers has a zigzag 
structure.

 The angles of each diamond-shaped, or rhombic, face of the cell bottom are 
109.5@ and 70.5@. In the 18th century, mathematicians proved that these 
particular angles give the maximum volume for a three-rhombus configuration.

 In 1964, Toth discovered that a combination of two hexagons and two squares 
does a little better than an end cap of three rhombuses in terms of the 
efficient use of wax. The difference, however, is very small. "By building such 
cells, the bees would save per cell less than 0.35 percent of the area of an 
opening (and a much smaller percentage of the surface area of a cell)," he 
concluded.

 Several years ago, Weaire and his colleague Robert Phelan experimented with a 
liquid-air foam to test Toth's mathematical model. They pumped equal-sized 
bubbles, about 2 mm in diameter, of a detergent solution between two glass 
plates to generate a double layer.

 The two layers of trapped bubbles formed hexagonal patterns at the glass 
plates. The interface between the two layers adopted Toth's structure.

 When Weaire and Phelan thickened the bubble walls by adding more liquid, 
however, they unexpectedly found an abrupt transition. When the walls reached a 
particular thickness, the interface suddenly switched to the three-rhombus 
configuration of a honeycomb.

 The switch also occurs in the reverse direction as liquid is removed.

 So, honeybees may very well have found the optimal design solution for the 
thicker wax walls of their honeycomb cells.

 For mathematicians, however, "many questions remain open," Morgan says.

 In two dimensions, for example, mathematicians can consider what happens when 
they allow arrangements that include regions of several, intermingled 
components or empty spaces between cells. In three dimensions, the question of 
what space-filling arrangement of cells of equal size has the minimum surface 
area is still not settled (SN: 3/5/94, p. 149).

"The strategies I developed for the Kepler conjecture were very useful with the 
honeycomb conjecture," Hales says. "A topic for future research might be to 
determine to what extent [those methods] can be adapted to other optimization 
problems."

 These are matters that concern not only mathematicians but also researchers 
interested in the characteristics and behavior of fluids, bubbles, foams, 
crystals, and a variety of biological structures, from cell assemblages to 
plant tissue.

"Cell and tissue, shell and bone, leaf and flower, are so many portions of 
matter, and it is obedience to the laws of physics that their particles have 
been moved, moulded and conformed," D'Arcy W. Thompson wrote in his celebrated 
book On Growth and Form, first published in 1917. "Their problems of form are 
in the first instance mathematical problems, their problems of growth are 
essentially physical problems."

 The honeybee's honeycomb fits neatly into the atlas of mathematically optimal 
forms found in nature.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 4, July 24, 1999, p. 60. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
