Science News Online (7/24/99): Abracadabra! Magnets float in midair

 Abracadabra! Magnets float in midair 

 By C. Wu

 Magic fingers: A strong magnet made of neodymium, iron, and boron floats in a 
touchless pinch. The fingers stabilize the levitation, which comes from a 
powerful electromagnet located 2.5 meters above. (Geim) With smoke, mirrors, 
and sleight of hand, magicians fashion illusions of levitation, but with 
magnets, physicists can create the real thing. Scientists have now shown that 
the forces from everyday materials-wood, plants, even a person's fingers-can 
help levitate small magnets placed in a magnetic field, causing them to hover 
motionless in space.

 Physicists had never before achieved stationary levitation of a magnet without 
using superconductors (SN: 8/6/88, p. 86). A 157-year-old principle known as 
Earnshaw's theorem stipulates that no arrangement of magnets can make them stay 
in a stable equilibrium, says Andr K. Geim of the University of Nijmegen in the 
Netherlands. The slightest disturbance would cause one magnet to leap toward 
another or fall away.

 Geim and his colleagues, however, learned that certain materials can stabilize 
a magnet that is being levitated by another. These so-called diamagnetic 
materials have no permanent magnetic character but generate magnetism that 
opposes an applied magnetic field. Superconductors are the strongest 
diamagnets, and many ordinary materials are weakly diamagnetic (SN: 12/6/97, p. 
362).

 A pair of well-placed fingers-made up of diamagnetic water, proteins, and 
organic molecules-is enough to do the trick. "The real surprise is that such 
weak repulsive forces are still enough to stabilize the magnet, preventing it 
from falling down or moving upward," says Geim. He and his colleagues report 
their finding in the July 22 Nature.

 This type of levitation could be used to make frictionless bearings for trains 
or energy-storage devices such as flywheels, says Geim. To illustrate the 
principle, his collaborator Martin D. Simon of the University of California, 
Los Angeles has assembled a handheld version of the levitator using permanent 
magnets and graphite plates.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 4, July 24, 1999, p. 54. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
