Science News Online (7/24/99): Kids adopted late reap IQ increases

 Kids adopted late reap IQ increases 

 By B. Bower

 Children adopted between ages 4 and 6 have more than a new family to 
celebrate. Those who at first score poorly on standard intelligence tests can 
expect dramatic IQ gains by the early teen years, especially if they live in 
affluent families, a new study finds.

 As in the general population, genes influence the IQ ranking of these 
late-adopted kids, say psychologist Michel Duyme of the University of Paris VII 
and his colleagues. For preschoolers scoring below the normal range on 
intelligence tests, however, adoptive-family environments foster IQ surges 
that, on average, put the child near or squarely within the normal range, the 
researchers report.

"Our results show that the adoptive environment for children adopted after 4 
years of age is effective in boosting low IQs," Duyme's group concludes in the 
July 20 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

 Much current research examines genetic influences on intelligence (SN: 5/9/98, 
p. 292; 6/7/97, p. 349). In contrast, Duyme and his coworkers examine the 
extent to which children's surroundings influence their intellect. In a prior 
study, they found that children adopted before age 1 into high-income families 
displayed particularly large IQ gains by adolescence.

 The new study expanded on that work. Using data from seven French public 
adoption agencies, the researchers identified 65 children who had been adopted 
between ages 4 and 6 and had received institutional or foster care because they 
had been abused or neglected as infants.

 Just before adoption, the youngsters had an average IQ of 77, with no scores 
above 86. The IQ range classified as normal runs from 90 to 110.

 When tested in early adolescence-mostly ages 13 and 14-the average IQ score of 
all the adoptees was 91. Average IQ reached 86 for those in low-income homes, 
94 for those in mid-income homes, and 98 for those in high-income homes. The 
researchers say they don't know whether these IQ gains will last into adulthood.

"They've done a nice job of showing that IQ is malleable and that it responds 
to the kind of environments adopted children go into," says psychologist Robert 
J. Sternberg of Yale University. Sternberg views IQ as a measure of analytic 
intelligence, distinct from what he calls practical and creative intelligence.

 Psychologist John C. Loehlin of the University of Texas at Austin also sees 
the new study as evidence for environmental influences on IQ. But other data 
suggest that such gains decline at later ages, says Loehlin, who views IQ, 
especially a statistical component known as g, as the core sign of a person's 
intelligence.

 Linda S. Gottfredson, a sociologist at the University of Delaware in Newark 
and also a g advocate, says that abusive care during infancy may have deflated 
IQ scores of the French children, who then recovered their true IQs after 
adoption. Thus, the findings don't show whether the environment would affect 
the IQs of kids receiving at least adequate care, she argues.

 While seeing value in studying environmental effects on intelligence, 
psychologist Peter H. Sch"nemann of Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind., 
argues that neither IQ nor g provide insight into mechanisms of intelligence.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 4, July 24, 1999, p. 54. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
