Science News Online (7/10/99): Seabed yields mark of nearby supernova

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 156, Number 2 (July 10, 1999)

 Seabed yields mark of nearby supernova

 By S. Carpenter

 A nearby supernova (SN) sends stardust (blue) toward the solar system. 
(Hillebrandt)

 A stellar explosion rocked Earth's neighborhood about 5 million years ago, 
according to German researchers who have uprooted the first direct evidence of 
a supernova so recent and so close.

 Such an explosion would have shone 10 times as brightly as the full moon for 
months, and a star remnant that appeared the size of 20 moons would have 
smoldered for millennia. Had the supernova been much closer to Earth, its 
energy would have caused mass extinction, the researchers say. "What was over 
the years only a subject of speculation-namely, that a stellar explosion could 
happen very close to the solar system-now seems to be a reality," says study 
coauthor Wolfgang Hillebrandt of the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in 
Garching, Germany.

 Hillebrandt's team sampled and dated three thin layers of a deep-sea sediment 
called a ferromanganese crust. The researchers sought particles of iron-60, a 
radioactive iron isotope produced abundantly in supernovas but having few other 
sources in the solar system. The group used a method known as accelerator mass 
spectrometry to isolate iron-60 from elements and molecules of different 
masses. A gas-filled magnet then teased iron-60 apart from nickel-60, another 
isotope of the same mass.

 The handful of iron-60 ions that emerged was enough to point to a supernova, 
the group says. The newest layer in the sample contained 14 iron-60 ions; the 
middle layer, 7 of the ions; and the oldest layer, only 2, the team reports in 
the July 5 Physical Review Letters. The researchers used the layers' known ages 
to take into account radioactive decay. They conclude that the quantity of 
iron-60-especially in the 4- to 6-million-year-old middle layer-indicates a 
massive stellar explosion, probably a type II supernova, about 5 million years 
ago.

 Although there are other explanations for iron-60 on Earth, such as cosmic ray 
bombardment, the group says that none accounts for the samples' high 
concentration. "Everything hangs together on just those few ions," notes 
physicist Louis Brown of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.). 
Nonetheless, he says, "my impression would be that these people know what 
they're doing."

 The German researchers say that after the stellar explosion, gaseous iron-60 
condensed on dust particles, probably from inside the star. Hitching a ride on 
these particles, the iron-60 had enough velocity to pierce the solar wind and 
reach Earth. From the amount of iron-60 in the samples, the supernova must have 
been within about 90 light-years, they calculate.

"It's not exact, but it's a pretty close window on when and where such an event 
happened, so in that sense I think it's quite exciting," Hillebrandt says. He 
adds that further tests must confirm the results. His team is searching for 
iron-60 elsewhere and for other supernova products, such as plutonium-244.

 Astrophysicist Stanford E. Woosley of the University of California, Santa Cruz 
says that the group's data are compelling but additional confirmation is 
essential, given the importance of the discovery.

"If this holds up, it's so astonishing that it's going to spur a tremendous 
amount of research," says astronomer Donald D. Clayton of Clemson (S.C.) 
University. "The scientific tentacles of this are very deep."


