Science News Online (7/31/99): ESP findings send controversial message

 ESP findings send controversial message 

 By S. Carpenter

 Experiments remove sensory interference to investigate telepathic 
communication. (Mort Engel) Psychologists who study telepathy rejoiced when a 
1994 study in a major scientific journal supported the existence of 
extrasensory perception (ESP), also known as psi. Now, an analysis of other 
studies using the same rigorous technique as in the earlier work suggests that 
the celebration may have been premature.

 Both believers and skeptics agree that the most stringent method for studying 
psi is the one dubbed the ganzfeld (German for whole field) procedure. In this 
technique, researchers remove sensory distractions with the aim of promoting 
telepathic communication between subjects, called senders and receivers.

 In ganzfeld studies, a receiver who's unaware of participating in a psi 
experiment describes his or her thoughts for 30 minutes. In a separate room, a 
sender who can hear the receiver views a video or still photo. The sender tries 
to telepathically coach the receiver into imagining the same scene. Afterwards, 
the receiver chooses from a set of four images the one that most closely 
resembles his or her earlier thoughts.

 In 1994, psychologist Daryl J. Bem of Cornell University and his colleague, 
the late Charles Honorton of the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, described 
surprising results from Honorton's series of 11 ganzfeld experiments. They 
found that more often than could be explained by chance, receivers chose the 
image that matched the one seen by senders (SN: 1/29/94, p. 68).

 Now, psychologists Julie Milton of the University of Edinburgh and Richard 
Wiseman of the University of Hertfordshire in Hatfield, England, have pooled 
the results of 30 ganzfeld experiments using a statistical method called 
metanalysis. In the July Psychological Bulletin, the same journal in which Bem 
and Honorton presented their results, the researchers report that their 
analysis shows no consistent evidence for psi.

"Although the new studies failed to replicate the effects of earlier studies, 
it is not clear why they did so," Milton says.

"This has been the history of parapsychology for about 150 years," remarks 
psychologist Ray Hyman of the University of Oregon in Eugene. "Procedures look 
good at the beginning, and then they fizzle out. Whether or not this is 
different is hard to say, but this metanalysis suggests that on the average it 
doesn't look like there's much going on."

 The metanalysis has generated heated discussion among psychologists. Some 
argue that Milton and Wiseman were unjustified in lumping all 30 studies 
together because their results were so disparate. Milton contends that a 
standard statistical test of variation among the results showed that they could 
treat the studies as a uniform set.

 Bem says, however, "The reason the effect isn't significant is that there are 
three studies that are pulling down the average, and those studies are very 
nonstandard." Further, 6 of the 30 studies showed significant psi effects-more 
than would be expected by chance, he adds.

 Since the metanalysis was completed, nine more ganzfeld studies have been 
published. Milton acknowledges that the psi effect would be statistically 
significant if the analysis were updated to include these studies. However, she 
observes, a single study had an especially strong result, but no clear-cut 
effect spans the broad range of investigations. "That will be a crucial thing 
to demonstrate in order to make a strong claim that the studies show a genuine 
anomaly," she says.

"My hope is that some of the proponents of the ganzfeld procedure will try to 
use [the new report] as a springboard to develop something replicable," says 
psychologist Scott O. Lilienfeld of Emory University in Atlanta. "The ball is 
now in their court."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 5, July 31, 1999, p. 70. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
