Science News Online (7/31/99): Invading Gobies Conquer Great Lakes

 Invading Gobies Conquer Great Lakes 

 By J. Raloff

 Round head of the pugnacious goby. (Jude/U. Mich.) In April 1990, David J. 
Jude found a round goby in the St. Clair River outside Detroit. A biologist at 
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, he immediately recognized the threat 
of invasion signaled by the North American debut of this European fish. Almost 
immediately, as he had feared, the goby began nesting in the adjoining Lakes 
Huron and Erie. Last week, Canadian officials announced that the fish has 
reached Lake Ontario.

 This latest sighting, in Canadian waters near the base of the St. Lawrence 
Seaway, confirms that the round goby ( Neogobius melanostomus) now populates 
all five Great Lakes, marking a remarkable rate of dispersal. In many shore 
areas, it has become the dominant fish.

 Certainly, notes Ron Dermott of Canada's Department of Fisheries and Oceans in 
Burlington, Ontario, it "should be considered a permanent resident of the Great 
Lakes."

 The good news is that these tiny predators have a voracious appetite for zebra 
mussels, earlier invaders from the fish's home waters in and around the Black 
Sea. Like the mussels, this goby probably hitched across the Atlantic in the 
ballast water of some freighter. Unfortunately, gobies don't eat just zebra 
mussels. These bottom-dwelling fish will also devour eggs and fry of any fish 
sharing their habitat, which include smallmouth bass, walleye, and perch.

 Usually much smaller than a smelt, gobies aggressively defend their 
turf-generally rocky shoals or gravel. Males, which build and guard their 
nests, appear to fear little, Dermott says, and they will tenaciously "drive 
off fish twice their size."

 In several areas, this goby has already extirpated the mottled sculpin ( 
Cottus bairdi), a Great Lakes native that it resembles in size, shape, and 
habitat, Jude notes. The aggressive goby simply claimed the sculpin's food, 
took over its nesting areas, and ate sculpin young.

 The mushrooming population of zebra mussels throughout the Great Lakes has 
fostered the goby's expansion, Jude says. These mussels "are a dead end 
ecologically," he notes, because "there's almost nothing eating them." Whatever 
nutrients the mussels consumed became locked away from the rest of the 
ecosystem-until the gobies arrived.

 With sharp biting teeth up front and shell-crushing molars in the back of 
their throats, gobies "were really designed to eat mussels," Jude observes. 
Upon entering the Great Lakes, they found a virtually untouched mussel banquet.

 Research by Gerald R. Smith at Michigan determined that a single goby can down 
five or more mussels per hour. However, Jude asserts, "there's no way gobies 
will ever control them, because they miss zebra mussels too big to eat, and 
those continue to spawn."

 Round goby has distinguishing pelvic fin (lower arrow). Other fish have two 
separate fins in place of a goby's single fused fin (arrow) on underside of 
fish (right). (Illinois-Indiana Sea Grant) Would-be goby predators have had a 
tough learning curve, Jude's studies indicate, because the 5-inch-long invaders 
behave in ways "none of our native fish ever do," he says. They jerk, scoot, 
then stop, only to shoot out unexpectedly in another direction. Other times, he 
notes, gobies dive under the gravel and vanish. Jude has watched hungry bass 
become flummoxed by the gobies' seemingly erratic activity.

 However, the predatory fish seem to be wising up. Increasingly, anglers are 
catching game fish that have stomachs full of gobies-suggesting these larger 
fish may begin reining in the gobies' territorial dominance.

 Yet that fuels another concern. Mussels pick up and store toxic pollutants 
from the water. Mussel-eating gobies will pass those toxicants on to the fish 
that prey on gobies, which can then transfer the poisons further up the food 
chain-potentially into people. "Right now, we're investigating how much of a 
[human] problem this will become," Jude says.

 Aside from a public-information campaign, in Canada "there is no control 
strategy under consideration," Dermott says. Indeed, once a nonnative species 
is established, eliminating it becomes almost impossible, argues John Mills, 
Environment Canada's regional director-general in Toronto. "Our management 
approach, then, is to attempt to limit its spread," he told Science News.

 Government officials in Canada and the United States have launched campaigns 
to help boaters and anglers recognize the goby and prevent its transfer to new 
waters. In particular, Dermott emphasized, gobies should never be used as bait, 
transported live, or even returned to the waters from which they were caught.

 The campaign may help limit the fish's migration to inland lakes in Canada, 
but U.S. officials face a tougher threat outside Chicago. Roughly a century 
ago, the Chicago and Calumet River systems were engineered to flow from Lake 
Michigan toward the Mississippi River. Federal monitoring data now confirm that 
both lake outlets have developed resident populations of round gobies.

 The concern, explains Mark Steingraeber of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
(F&WS) in La Crosse, Wis., is that if the goby reaches the Mississippi River, 
it will have largely unimpeded access to waterways throughout most of the 
central United States, as the zebra mussel does. By last month, he notes, "the 
round goby had moved inland some 30 miles [via these river systems] into the 
Mississippi River basin." That's almost a tenth of the way to the Mississippi.

 Hoping to halt, or at least slow, the gobies' advance, F&WS scientists in Ann 
Arbor, Mich., have been working on a new electric barrier for installation, 
probably next year, further down the gobies' path to the Mississippi.

 Explains Melissa Kostich, who is working on the project, the intent is to 
install electrodes into the cement wall of a narrow channel to impart an 
irritating 4-volt current in the water throughout a span several yards long. 
Though similar devices already deter salmon from moving upstream in some areas, 
this one must deter downstream movement. The critical difference: If the 
electricity stuns a fish, it will continue to float downstream-an unacceptable 
outcome. The current also must not harm other water life or people.

 In Michigan field tests of a goby-laden river, a small version of the device 
deterred "almost 100 percent" of the gobies. The goal, Kostich says, is to 
install this barrier as part of an integrated series of deterrents, perhaps 
including annoying sound and an irritating curtain of bubbles.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 5, July 31, 1999, p. 68. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
