Science News Online (7/3/99): Stop-and-Go Science

 The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science

 Volume 156, Number 1 (July 3, 1999)

 Stop-and-Go Science

 By better understanding traffic flow, researchers hope to keep down highway 
congestion

 By Peter Weiss

 Speed limits change in response to traffic conditions on M25, a highway 
encircling London that has devoted a segment of its 117-mile length to testing 
technologies to improve traffic flow. Behind the scenes, people in a control 
room use video cameras to monitor traffic along M25 and connecting roads. By 
setting speeds and giving other directions (inset shows a sign on a local 
road), the pilot system has improved traffic flows, cut accident rates, and 
lessened pollution, say London police. (Highways Agency; Highways Agency/Giles 
Barnard)

 Welcome to Los Angeles. The year is 2020. The traffic is, well, worse.

 Average commuting times are twice what they were in the 1990s. Drivers endure 
a stop-and-go crawl over almost half the miles they travel. Peak speeds on the 
region's roads have tumbled. The average rush-hour, roadway speed is 24 miles 
per hour.

 These bleak predictions from the Southern California Association of 
Governments may paint a more troubled picture for L.A. than what's expected for 
many metropolitan areas. However, the rest of the world's cities won't be far 
behind.

 Officials at all levels of government are sorting through a queue of proposals 
to lessen congestion. They include, for example, better mass transit systems, 
new road-use fees to influence driver choices, and construction of separate 
highways for cars and trucks.

 Meanwhile, scientists and engineers around the globe are trying to figure out 
how to cram more vehicles onto the existing roadways without putting highway 
speeds into a nosedive. "We can't just build more and more roads, so basically 
we have to try to use the existing capacity more efficiently," says Peter 
Molnar, a traffic scientist at Clark Atlanta (Ga.) University.

 It's a two-pronged undertaking in which researchers are generating 
mathematical and computer models of traffic flow and at the same time devising 
ways to reduce congestion.

 Some of the new mathematical models, advanced mainly by physicists, depict 
traffic as more complex and unpredictable than traditional traffic experts, 
mainly civil engineers, believe it to be. These models have sparked intense 
controversy.

 Other, relatively simple models, which are based on computer simulations 
rather than differential equations, are winning acceptance for their ability to 
generate artificial traffic networks that behave like real ones.

 Researchers have also begun applying their findings in new ways, such as 
combining simulations with actual traffic data to predict and avert delays. In 
the next few years, traffic-forecasting systems linked to intelligent highway 
controls, such as on-ramp metering lights, will become more common, the 
scientists say. Then, the benefits of their investigations should start to kick 
in.

 Traffic-flow research is undergoing "a renaissance due to technological 
advances," especially in computing, says Bernardo A. Huberman of Xerox PARC in 
Palo Alto, Calif.

 Armed with powerful mathematical and computational tools, scientists 
interested in traffic patterns have flooded the literature with creative 
representations. "You have a whole zoo of models," says Michael Schreckenberg 
of the University of Duisburg in Germany. "It seems that every second paper 
defines a new model," he jokes.

 Computer-based traffic models simulate virtual vehicles that motor by the 
hundreds or thousands through an artificial highway network. The simulations 
emerge from a more general category of computer models known as agent-based 
systems, or cellular automata.

 In such models, multitudes of agents interact in an artificial environment. A 
limited set of rules governs each agent's behavior, making possible endless 
scenarios, from the evolution of weird life forms to the rise and fall of 
artificial societies (SN: 11/23/96, p. 332).

"We're trying to boil this whole complicated thing down to a few [traffic] 
rules," says Kai Nagel of the Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Santa Fe 
Institute, both in New Mexico.

 In the early 1990s, he and Schreckenberg introduced cellular-automata models 
to traffic-flow research. Since then, such simulations have grown in 
popularity. Although the models are built from simple rules, the collective 
behavior of the antlike subunits can become complex. The units in 
computer-driven cellular-automata models can suddenly organize themselves into 
distinctive patterns (SN: 8/13/94, p. 109), some of which resemble highway 
congestion.

 In contrast to the cellular-automata methods, a more top-down, conceptual 
approach to traffic relies on equation-based models. These typically depict the 
aggregate characteristics of traffic, such as average speed and traffic 
density. Researchers often build such simulations by adapting physical models 
of the behavior of gases and liquids.

 Using this approach, some scientists have recently proposed a new picture of 
traffic. They argue that vehicle flows can suddenly and spontaneously turn 
sluggish or crystallize, a process like the transition of a freezing liquid to 
a solid. These phase transformations of traffic can appear in some parts of the 
flow but not in others.

 An even better analogy points to the flow of granular materials, such as sand 
or salt, says Schreckenberg. In a pile of sand that's partly damp and partly 
dry, slightly damp grains tend to clump up. Even dry sand can undergo sudden 
transformations, such as an avalanche.

 Recognizing that unlike molecules or sand, cars move under the control of 
people, physicists have added expressions to their equations to take into 
account drivers' abilities to anticipate conditions and attempt to avoid 
crashes.

 Spontaneous transformations of traffic, as seen in their models, indicate 
previously unrecognized complexity in highway flow, according to Shreckenberg 
and other statistical physicists. Understanding it requires the concepts and 
equations of a relatively new branch of mathematics known as nonlinear 
dynamics, they say.

 Since the late 1970s, researchers have tapped nonlinear dynamics as a tool for 
understanding a wide range of phenomena, including chemical reactions that 
progress through phases (SN: 2/21/98, p. 116) and boom-or-bust population 
cycles of various organisms (SN: 9/10/94, p. 164).

 Traffic congestion fluctuates in waves shown in graphs of solutions to a 
mathematical model of highway flow near an on ramp (at x=0). Patterns include 
bunching just next to the ramp (left), stop-and-go traffic in which cars reach 
full speed between jams (center), and stop-and-slow traffic in which cars don't 
regain full speed before reaching the next congestion wave (right). Which 
pattern, or traffic phase, forms depends on how many vehicles pour in from 
upstream (negative x direction) and from the on ramp. (Helbing et al./U. 
Stuttgart)

 If scientists can make sense of this new-found highway complexity, they may 
have a better chance of smoothing it out. "If you know the dynamic properties 
of traffic patterns, then you can predict what happens with these patterns in 
the future," says Boris S. Kerner of automaker DaimlerChrysler in Stuttgart, 
Germany. Such warning would allow traffic controllers to activate strategies to 
prevent sudden transitions or break up undesirable phases once they have 
formed, he adds.

 Kerner is a leading advocate of this new view of traffic as a complex system. 
He and Hubert Rehborn, also at the DaimlerChrysler Research Center, have found 
evidence that traffic can transform between several different phases, similar 
to the way that water changes between vapor, liquid, or ice states.

 The researchers analyzed traffic data collected from sensors built into German 
autobahns. Besides freely flowing cars and a full-scale traffic jam, they first 
reported in 1996 a third state, which they dubbed synchronized traffic flow. 
Under certain circumstances, cars would suddenly all slow down to roughly the 
same speed and tend to stay in lane, indicating that the traffic had jelled 
into a type of unified, moving mass.

 Further data revealed that the synchronous phase allows waves of dense traffic 
to pass upstream along the highway and leads to stop-and-go driving conditions. 
Kerner reported this finding in the Oct. 26, 1998 Physical Review Letters.

 He concludes, "With our experimental results ... we have understood the 
nonlinear properties of real traffic flow."

 Despite Kerner's declaration, other researchers are still adding new pieces to 
the puzzle. Huberman and Dirk Helbing of the University of Stuttgart found 
another highly coordinated, dense traffic state in a cellular-automata 
simulation of mixed cars and trucks. They described it in the Dec. 24/31, 1998 
Nature.

 The researchers reported finding evidence of their simulated traffic phase in 
Dutch highway data. "This state is quite favorable because it's associated with 
a high flow," Helbing explains.

 More recently, Helbing and other colleagues came up with a new analysis of 
traffic that defines six phases. Besides free flow and traffic jam, the 
researchers identify four phases of congestion, all characterized by waves of 
rising and falling vehicle density. The phases may overlap with Kerner's 
synchonized traffic state.

 The new findings distinguish the phases by how often waves pass through the 
stream of vehicles and how much the density drops off between waves. In a phase 
called a "pinned localized cluster," for instance, an enduring but very 
localized bunching haunts the immediate vicinity of an on ramp.

 The researchers have found evidence for each of the phases in data from 
European autobahns. Their analysis appears in the May 24 Physical Review 
Letters.

 Instead of the excitement of the physicists who have created it, the new 
picture of traffic has aroused the ire of traditional traffic researchers. 
Traffic engineers are particularly disturbed by the physicists' notion that 
traffic flow can spontaneously break down into a slow-moving or stopped state.

"When congestion arises for no apparent reason, this just means that its cause 
has not been identified," asserts Carlos F. Daganzo of the University of 
California, Berkeley. There are many possible causes to choose from, such as 
accidents, merges, stalled cars, and slowpoke drivers.

 Studies of actual traffic by Michael J. Cassidy, also of Berkeley, show that 
congestion recurs reliably at the same bottlenecks along highways. Uncovering 
the causes usually suggests cures, such as ramp metering or redesigning the 
geometry of a stretch of highway. However, "if congestion really does form for 
reasons we cannot pinpoint, then dealing with congestion in those instances 
would be much harder," Cassidy says.

 In the May 19 Transportation Research Part A, Cassidy, Daganzo, and Robert L. 
Bertini, also of Berkeley, explain how ordinary bottlenecks could account for 
Kerner's data without invoking nonlinearity or self-organizing complexity.

 Daganzo also notes that engineers have long been aware of phase transitions in 
traffic, such as the onset of a jam, but have simply used different words to 
describe the phenomena. The recent models, for the most part, rediscover and 
relabel well-known concepts and observations in their field, he and other 
engineers claim.

 The complicated, nonlinear models also fail the test known as Occam's razor, 
says Paul Nelson, a physicist at Texas A&M University in College Station. That 
is, the simplest theory that explains a phenomenon is the best theory. The 
complex models "clearly can be tuned to produce about any effect one wishes to 
produce," Nelson argues, and thus may have little to do with real traffic.

 In response to the modelers who envision improving the flow of vehicles on 
highways, Carroll J. Messer, also of Texas A&M, offers a word of caution. He 
notes that the capacity of a typical American freeway has grown steadily, from 
1,800 vehicles per lane per hour in 1965 to about 2,400 per lane per hour 
today. "It's because of better vehicle performance and driver performance and 
because our roads are better," he says. Messer, however, wonders if that figure 
can realistically go much higher. There are limits to the degree to which 
motorists' driving can be coordinated, he says.

 A simple cellular-automata simulation of traffic flow: Cars (red) and trucks 
(black) queue at a red light (red dot at lower left) and then resume movement 
when the light turns green. Graphs track behavior of a test vehicle (arrow) and 
total traffic flow. An active demonstration can be viewed at . (Second 
Institute of Theoretical Physics/U. Stuttgart)

 A number of researchers already have taken their cellular-automata models on 
the road to monitor and predict traffic throughout an extensive area. 
Schreckenberg and his colleagues have made such a model for Duisburg, a city of 
half a million people, and blended the simulation with data from road sensors. 
The model provides up-to-the-minute information on traffic flows within the 
city via the Internet (). Visitors to the Web site see a color-coded map 
indicating which streets are congested. Click on a street, and more-detailed 
information pops up, such as the number of cars per minute.

 By winter, a much more ambitious plan to simulate traffic on the major 
arteries of Europe's most densely populated region should be complete, 
Schreckenberg says. In the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia, there are 10 
million people within a diameter of 68 kilometers. He says, "It's comparable to 
Los Angeles. It has no real center." Much of the truck traffic between Western 
and Eastern Europe rumbles across the area's highways.

 Beyond minute-by-minute updates on traffic flows, which should begin in 
August, the model will also provide 1-hour traffic forecasts by the end of 
November, Schreckenberg says. "In 1 minute, you can calculate for the next 
hour," he explains. "You just accelerate the simulation."

 These predictions would allow drivers with access to the Internet to plan 
their speediest route.

 Traffic engineers at Texas A&M are also blending the real and the simulated, 
but with a different goal. In a laboratory at the Texas Transportation 
Institute, they link simulations of vehicle traffic to computerized traffic 
controllers used in the field. The controllers, in turn, simultaneously drive 
both real signals and signs, such as traffic lights, and simulations of such 
indicators.

"We could use simulated control or flip a switch and use the real control 
system," Messer says. "It's just like replacing a heart in surgery."

 By running simulations through the actual equipment, engineers get to see how 
well their control strategies handle various scenarios, such as accidents or 
construction. Test runs help them iron out bugs that could make traffic worse 
rather than better, Messer says.

 Cellular-automata simulations are also beginning to influence long-range 
traffic planning. The Transportation Analysis and Simulation System (TRANSIMS), 
which Nagel and other researchers have been developing at Los Alamos National 
Laboratory, tracks the movements, over a 24-hour period, of a population of 
software agents matched statistically to a city's residents. The simulation 
takes into account minute details about streets, traffic signs, bus and bike 
routes, and neighborhood demographics. It reveals overall and local 
traffic-flow patterns while monitoring each individual's contribution.

 A TRANSIMS simulation of part of Dallas has influenced road-construction 
planning in the city. The project's scientists hope by next year to model the 
entire city of Portland, Ore.

 While disagreeing on what it takes to understand traffic, researchers seem to 
concur that it's a comprehensible phenomenon that will yield to their efforts. 
To theorists such as Schreckenberg, who helped launch cellular-automata traffic 
models about 8 years ago, the ultimate triumph would be to unite 
cellular-automata and equation-based models under one conceptual umbrella-"a 
universal theory of traffic," he calls it.

"Development is going very fast at the moment," Schreckenberg says. He expects 
that in the next 8 years, they'll find such a theory.

 Many of the experts also seem optimistic that applying their understanding of 
traffic, either by increasing the flow of vehicles on existing roads or 
improving planning for future highway growth, will make a difference in the 
battle against congestion.


