Science News Online (8/14/99): Seabed slide blamed for deadly tsunami

 Seabed slide blamed for deadly tsunami 

 By R. Monastersky

 A year after giant waves swept away 2,200 residents of Papua New Guinea, the 
disaster has claimed its final victim: the prevailing theory about what causes 
tsunamis.

 Experts on these waves typically attribute them to undersea earthquakes, but 
evidence collected during marine surveys off the New Guinea coast implicates a 
submarine landslide or slump, reports the expedition team.

"There is no doubt that there is a shift-a sea change-in interpretation," says 
David R. Tappin, a coleader of the surveys and a marine geologist with the 
British Geological Survey in Nottingham.

"This really is one of those big paradigm shifts in science," says team member 
Philip Watts of Applied Fluids Engineering in Long Beach, Calif., who uses 
computer models to simulate tsunamis. "We suspect that a lot of the bigger, 
known tsunamis involved some landsliding."

 The Papua New Guinea tsunami, a train of three monster waves, struck the north 
shore on July 17, 1998 (SN: 10/3/98, p. 221). Ever since then, researchers have 
struggled to explain how a moderate earthquake, of magnitude 7.1, could have 
heaved up a tsunami reaching 15 meters tall. Some speculated that the shaking 
caused an underwater sediment slide large enough to spawn the waves.

 In January, a team of researchers boarded a Japanese ship to survey the 
seafloor. It was the first such intense study after a tsunami. In this 
expedition, they mapped the seabed and drilled samples of sediments. In late 
February, they used a robotic sub to photograph the seafloor.

 The scientists described their findings at a July meeting of the International 
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics in Birmingham, England, and in the July 27 Eos.

 The exploration focused on the continental slope, which plummets into a 
4-kilometer-deep trench. This chasm marks where a piece of the Pacific Ocean 
floor crashes into New Guinea. As the Pacific tectonic plate scrapes beneath 
the island, it creates the deep trench and sparks frequent earthquakes.

 The survey found that the extremely steep continental slope bears a thick 
carpet of sediments. In places, this coating has slid downhill in speedy 
landslides and slower-moving slumps.

 On one dive, the researchers discovered a fresh, amphitheater-shaped scar, 
created when a giant chunk of sediment slumped downhill. "We know this slope 
failed sometime in the past," says Watts. "The mystery is, When did it go?"

 The researchers also found a 15-km-long fault that showed evidence of recent 
movement. Faulting of the seafloor can generate tsunamis when one side jumps up 
and the other side drops, displacing water in the process.

 Tappin, Watts, and others who think a slump caused the waves contend that the 
fault could not be the source. Eyewitness accounts indicate that the first wave 
struck shore about 20 minutes after the main shock of the earthquake, too long 
for the tsunami to have originated from subsea faulting during the quake. A 
slump, however, typically lags several minutes after an earthquake and could 
explain the delay.

 When Watts modeled the tsunami, he obtained better results using an undersea 
slump than a sea-bottom quake. "I'm convinced that the main part of the tsunami 
was generated by one giant slump," he says.

 Further support comes from a 70-second-long rumble recorded in the middle of 
the Pacific soon after the earthquake. This sound lasted too long to have come 
from a small aftershock and may represent a seafloor slide, says Emile A. Okal 
of Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.

 Some survey participants, however, discount the slump theory. Harry Yeh of the 
University of Washington in Seattle argues that simulations of a subsea quake 
can explain the tsunami's size. The team found evidence for small slides but no 
obvious signs of a giant slump, he says.

 Whatever the outcome of the debate, the recent tsunami is forcing researchers 
to consider slumps as potential sources of giant waves, says Eddie Bernard, 
coordinator of the National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program in Seattle. "I 
think the good thing that this has done is to open our eyes."

 The disaster also suggests that relatively modest quakes, such as the kind 
that occasionally rock southern California, can trigger giant tsunamis by 
setting off slides. "This makes the hazard much more dangerous than the 
scientific community has perceived it in the past," says Bernard.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 7, August 14, 1999, p. 100. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
