Science News Online (8/14/99): Animal Genes Illuminate Human Sleep

 Animal Genes Illuminate Human Sleep 

 By J. Travis

 Two narcoleptic dogs experiencing cataplexy, or loss of muscle control. 
(Mignot) A decade-long search through the genes of drowsy dogs has unexpectedly 
crossed paths with a high-tech survey of the nocturnal activities of mutant 
mice. These two studies have yielded a dramatic insight into what compels 
people to spend one-third of their lives in the unconscious state known as 
sleep.

 Scientists have found two related genes, one in dogs and one in mice, that 
when mutated in these animals produce the sleep disorder narcolepsy. The 
findings may lead directly to new treatments for people with narcolepsy and may 
help scientists develop better sleeping pills.

 People with narcolepsy tend to fall into a deep sleep suddenly during the day 
and usually have trouble sleeping at night. Laughter or intense emotions may 
cause them to abruptly lose all muscle control while still awake, a condition 
called cataplexy.

 This perplexing disorder has long fascinated Emmanuel Mignot of the Stanford 
University School of Medicine, who maintains a colony of Doberman pinschers 
that suffer from a canine form of narcolepsy. The dogs inexplicably doze off in 
the middle of activities and can collapse in cataplexy when they become too 
excited.

 While the genetics of human narcolepsy appears complex, the dog form of the 
disease clearly stems from one gene. About 10 years ago, Mignot decided to 
track down this gene, a formidable task since little was known about canine 
genetics. "Everyone said I was slightly delusional," he recalls.

 By looking at patterns of DNA sequences inherited by narcoleptic dogs but not 
unaffected ones, Mignot and his colleagues closed in on a portion of dog 
chromosome 6 where the putative narcolepsy gene must reside. In the end, they 
found that Dobermans with narcolepsy have a mutation, an inserted bit of DNA, 
in a single gene in that small region. Several Labradors with narcolepsy also 
have a mutation, a deletion, in the same gene.

"The search was excruciating, but the prize was worth it," says Mignot.

 As reported in the Aug. 6 Cell, that prize is a gene called hypocretin 
receptor 2, which encodes a protein that sits on nerve cells. This receptor 
responds to hypocretin 1 and hypocretin 2, recently discovered 
neurotransmitters formed from a single precursor protein.

 The link between the hypocretins and sleep rests on more than Mignot's 
findings. In the Aug. 20 Cell, scientists from the University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas will report that mice lacking the two 
neurotransmitters develop a condition similar to human and canine narcolepsy.

 Masashi Yanagisawa of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at UT Southwestern 
has a different name for the hypocretins. He calls them orexins, after the 
Greek word for hunger, because last year his group found that injecting the 
chemicals into mice made the animals hungry (SN: 3/7/98, p. 159). His group has 
now bred mice with a mutation in the gene for the precursor protein of the two 
neurotransmitters.

 The scientists noticed few changes in the mutant animals until they used an 
infrared video camera to film the rodents at night, when mice are normally most 
active. "The mice are running around, grooming, eating, whatever, and they stop 
abruptly, oftentimes falling over to the side. They don't move at all, as if 
they're dead," says Yanagisawa. "After one or two minutes, [they] resume normal 
activity, as if nothing happened."

 Over a 4-hour period, a mouse might experience as many as 27 of these 
episodes, which the researchers initially thought were seizures. To address 
that hypothesis, they implanted tiny electrodes that record the electrical 
activity of the mouse brain. They learned that mutant mice weren't having 
seizures. They were suddenly falling into the stage of deep sleep known as REM 
sleep. Some of the episodes might also be cataplectic events, notes Yanagisawa.

 His collaborator Clifford B. Saper of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in 
Boston has also shown that the brain cells that produce the orexins connect to 
brain regions involved in wakefulness and sleeping. Moreover, Saper's group 
discovered that modafinil, a drug prescribed for people with narcolepsy, 
activates the orexin-making brain cells. "It's very good at keeping you awake, 
but no one knew how it works," says Saper.

 Taken together, the new findings suggest that the hypocretins/orexins help 
keep animals awake. Do people with narcolepsy have mutations in the genes for 
the neurotransmitters or their receptors? A few might, says Mignot, but he 
suspects most have more subtle problems with this neural system.

 Still, administering hypocretins/orexins may help treat narcolepsy, he notes. 
Drugs that block the receptors for the compounds could also prove superior to 
current sleeping pills, which rarely generate normal REM sleep. "Suppressing 
the orexin system might lead to a more natural mode of sleep," says Yanagisawa.

 Investigators also suggest that these new neurotransmitters will help explain 
the many documented links between feeding and sleeping. "The orexin cells are 
probably involved in the arousing aspect of feeding," says Saper. "You've got 
to be awake to hunt and eat, and there are few things more arousing than food. 
There are also very few things that make you feel more content and want to go 
to sleep than a big meal."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 7, August 14, 1999, p. 100. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
