Science News Online (8/21/99): Schizophrenia caregivers take health hit

 Schizophrenia caregivers take health hit 

 By N. Seppa

 Although people suffering from long-term, incapacitating psychiatric disorders 
were once consigned to mental institutions and hospital back wards, as many as 
2 out of 3 now live with family members. People caring for a mentally ill 
relative not only face a draining and seemingly endless task but may in certain 
cases catch far more than their fair share of colds and other infectious 
illnesses, a new study suggests.

 The frequent appearance of hallucinations, delusions, and other so-called 
positive symptoms in people diagnosed with schizophrenia accompanies high 
numbers of infectious ailments in their caregivers, asserts a team led by 
psychologist Dennis G. Dyck of Washington State University in Spokane.

 Symptoms of schizophrenia that are classified as negative, such as persistent 
apathy and social withdrawal, exhibit no link to caregivers' infectious ills, 
the scientists report in the July/August Psychosomatic Medicine.

 These long-lasting, negative symptoms did, however, create a greater burden 
for caregivers than intermittent positive symptoms, the researchers contend. In 
the study, the team measured burden by evaluating care-related money woes, 
worry about one's afflicted relative, self-blame for the situation, and stigma 
attached to having a mentally ill family member.

 The new evidence "contributes to a growing body of literature suggesting that 
. . . caregiving may be not only burdensome but actually hazardous to the 
caregiver's health," comments psychiatrist Igor Grant of the University of 
California, San Diego in the same journal issue.

 Other researchers have found that people who care for spouses with Alzheimer's 
disease report high levels of burden and depression and also exhibit signs of 
weakened immune function (SN: 4/6/91, p. 217). Unlike Alzheimer's disease, 
however, schizophrenia typically strikes young adults who then require decades 
of care from relatively young parents or siblings.

 The mental and physiological consequences of this type of "very-long-term 
stress" for caregivers have attracted little scientific attention, Grant says.

 In the new work, a nurse interviewed 70 people who cared for relatives with 
schizophrenia-mainly mothers tending adult children-about their own physical 
symptoms and physician visits in the past 6 months. Caregivers averaged 52 
years old, and their charges, 33 years.

 A second interviewer then assessed each caregiver's perceived burden, 
depression, anger, support from friends and family, and style of coping with 
stress. Coping styles included wishful thinking (such as hoping for a miracle), 
focusing on problems (making and following a plan of action), avoidance (trying 
to forget about the problem), relying on religious faith (such as frequent 
prayer), and self-blame for the relative's illness.

 Several independent raters also estimated the extent of the burden that each 
patient placed on his or her caregiver.

 Caregivers who engaged in wishful thinking, avoidance, and self-blame tended 
to find their situations extremely burdensome. Surprisingly, caregivers who 
formulated specific plans also reported a comparably high level of burden.

 Although not citing especially high or low burden, those who relied on 
religious faith or were satisfied with the support received from friends and 
family cited the lowest rates of infectious illness, the researchers hold.

 Caregivers with excessive burdens didn't necessarily report an elevated rate 
of illness. Burdens imposed on caregivers apparently do not lay the groundwork 
for infectious illness, Dyck's group theorizes. Instead, specific aspects of 
the condition under care-such as positive symptoms in schizophrenia-and a 
caregiver's coping style influence the immune system's ability to fend off 
infections, in their view.

 This health-undermining process may hinge on caregivers' behavioral responses, 
such as eating poorly and exercising little, or on emotional distress that 
sparks a cascade of hormonal and immune changes, Grant says.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 8, August 21, 1999, p. 119. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
