Science News Online (8/7/99): Personality Conflicts

 Personality Conflicts A clinical upstart elbows its way into the 
personality-assessment fray

 By Bruce Bower

 The landscape of an individual's personality has much in common with one of 
those 19th-century impressionist paintings made up of thousands of colored 
dots. From across the room, an art lover gazing at such a framed creation sees 
sunbathers lolling by a lake, or perhaps a circus scene. Personality features 
pondered from a suitable distance also seem to coalesce into familiar forms. 
For example, a coworker comes across as friendly and fun loving, while an 
office supervisor always seems grouchy and distracted.

 From up close, however, so-called pointillist paintings drive observers dotty. 
Beautiful scenes crumble into a crazy quilt of tiny tinted flecks. Close-up 
scrutiny of someone's personality can prove just as disorienting. Solid-looking 
dispositions dissolve into pools of often-contradictory desires, feelings, and 
habits.

 Consider that hale and hearty coworker. He may cozy up to lots of folks 
because he loves social contact and craves his peers' approval. Or perhaps his 
chummy behavior masks discomfort around others and a deep-seated need to 
manipulate them for his own ends. If the latter proves true, is he more shy 
than gregarious, or vice versa?

 Drew Westen, a psychotherapist at Harvard Medical School in Boston, takes the 
close-up perspective in treating people whose personalities have gone awry. 
Like most psychotherapists, Westen relies on clinical experience and intuitive 
guesswork to do his job. Current methods of classifying personality and its 
disturbances offer clinicians little practical help, he contends.

 So, Westen and Aspen, Colo., psychotherapist Jonathan Shedler, both of whom 
are also research psychologists, have developed their own 
personality-assessment tool.

 They hope their technique will inspire psychiatrists to revise and refine 
official diagnoses of personality disorders. Westen and Shedler also would like 
to break psychologists from the habit of using volunteers' questionnaire 
responses to map out personality characteristics. This popular approach has 
yielded a handful of traits that scientists are trying to link to various 
genes. Its proponents, however, have failed to generate any theories of how 
personality develops and what purposes it serves, Westen argues.

 In his view, questionnaire responses tap into a person's self-concept and 
social reputation without addressing the deeper organizing principles of his or 
her personality.

 Not surprisingly, some personality researchers disagree. Westen and Shedler, 
however, are targeting their method to psychotherapists. These practitioners 
could use a tool that would act as a scalpel to cut through the self's outer 
hide to explore personality's inner workings, Westen and Shedler say.

 Many clinicians find fault with commonly used systems for personality 
classification. Psychotherapists disparage as laundry lists of symptoms the 
personality disorders described in psychiatry's official diagnostic manual. 
These categories mainly exist for the convenience of insurers that cover mental 
health care, they say. Moreover, clinicians frequently denigrate the handful of 
personality traits studied by psychologists as statistical entities that only 
skim personality's surface.

 Behavioral researchers return the favor by tending to brand psychotherapists 
as hopelessly subjective, mistake-prone in their judgments about clients, and 
willfully ignorant of scientific advances.

 Westen hopes his new personality measure, which combines clinical experience 
with hard-nosed statistical analysis, will ease tensions between mental-health 
practitioners and scientists. However, he notes, it could just as easily 
alienate both camps.

"It's hard to sustain the view that fundamental aspects of personality can be 
found by asking people direct questions about themselves and others on 
questionnaires," Westen says. "We need to analyze in a scientific way the 
observations of personality experts, such as experienced clinicians, who listen 
to the stories people tell about their lives and watch their actual 
interactions."

 It's time for some old ideas about personality to step boldly into the 
scientific spotlight, say Westen and Shedler. At the beginning of this century, 
theorists such as Sigmund Freud and George Herbert Mead argued that 
personality-enduring ways of behaving, perceiving, and thinking about oneself 
and others-arises through social interactions, beginning with the mother-child 
relationship. Encounters with others always carry underlying meanings that 
occur largely outside of awareness, in this view.

 Mental life consists of warring impulses, ambivalent feelings, and a generous 
capacity for self-deception, these thinkers maintained. It thus takes hard work 
and courage to confront the nitty-gritty of one's own personality or that of 
someone else.

 Researchers began to turn away from this Freud-inspired perspective by 
mid-century. Psychologists embraced a statistical method known as factor 
analysis, which allowed them to group thousands of adjectives deemed 
descriptive of personality into coherent clusters or traits. Factor-analysis 
proponents assume that languages build up reservoirs of adjectives related to 
important personality traits, so these traits should pop into relief when 
scientists give the welter of words a vigorous statistical massage.

 Factor analysis ran into early problems, however, as different investigators 
generated different numbers and types of personality traits. In the past 
decade, however, an influential group has championed what psychologists call 
the five-factor model.

 As research psychologists had earlier rejected the Freudian perspective, 
psychiatrists in 1980 turned away from early approaches to personality. The 
American Psychiatric Association sanctioned an extensive revision of its 
official diagnostic manual of mental diseases. For the first time, it included 
separate diagnoses of personality disorders. The diagnoses rest on sets of 
specific, clinically observed symptoms.

 The new symptom clusters then qualified as medical conditions, distinct both 
from other psychiatric disorders and from what are considered normal 
personalities. The current diagnostic manual describes 10 personality disorders 
and mentions 2 others deemed worthy of further study.

 For instance, the manual portrays paranoid personality disorder as an 
ingrained distrust and suspiciousness of others' motives, while the symptoms of 
histrionic personality disorder include excessive emotional displays and 
constant attention seeking. Several influential researchers have proposed that, 
in its next version, the manual should use traits from the five-factor model to 
classify personality disorders (SN: 3/5/94, p. 152).

 Despite its statistical rigor, the five-factor model operates on the dubious 
assumption that armed with enough adjectives, anyone can decode his or her own 
personality or that of a friend or family member, Westen asserts.

 Psychologist Jack Block of the University of California, Berkeley agrees with 
Westen. He maintains that factor analysis can't make sense of the disparate 
assumptions that typical volunteers have about adjectives in personality 
questionnaires. For instance, people may disagree whether the term disagreeable 
refers to being hostile, appearing self-absorbed, or tending to pry into other 
people's business.

 Of more practical concern to clinicians, knowing a patient's five-factor 
status-such as being rated low on agreeableness, relatively closed to new 
experiences, and high on neuroticism-provides little guidance about how to 
structure treatment, Westen maintains.

 Westen and Shedler presented their alternative classification system in the 
February American Journal of Psychiatry. Over the past 7 years, they have 
refined it for use as a clinical tool to describe patients' personalities in a 
quantifiable form. Although the two clinicians probe personality from a 
psychodynamic, or Freudian-inspired, perspective, psychotherapists of any 
theoretical persuasion can use the new technique, they add.

 Their system covers three major realms of individual personality. First, it 
explores the mental resources at a person's disposal. These include the ability 
to express and to rein in emotions and the tendency to deploy unconscious 
strategies for self-protection, such as perceiving one's own unsavory traits in 
others. Second, it addresses a person's desires, fears, and values and whether 
these motives are consciously appreciated and compatible with one another. 
Third, it examines a person's view of self and others and his or her ability to 
form fulfilling intimate relationships.

 At the heart of this procedure lie 200 personality-related statements printed 
on cards. Dipping into his or her experience with a patient, a clinician ranks 
each statement from 0 to 7, signifying the degree to which it describes a 
particular patient, and then places the card in one of eight piles. Depictions 
include "tends to feel empty or bored," "tries to manipulate others' emotions 
to get what he/she wants," "is able to understand self and others in subtle and 
sophisticated ways," and "tends to be overly sexually seductive or provocative, 
whether consciously or unconsciously."

 Each of 530 randomly selected psychiatrists and psychologists from throughout 
the United States-who had an average of 18 years' experience as 
psychotherapists-used Westen and Shedler's instrument to describe a current 
patient who met diagnostic-manual criteria for a personality disorder and whom 
they had seen five times or more.

 A statistical sorting of these patients based on the similarity of their 
personality profiles yielded 12 personality dimensions that differ in many ways 
from the personality disturbances emphasized in the diagnostic manual, the 
investigators contend.

 Moreover, these dimensions delve into corners of personality left unexplored 
by the five-factor model, according to a statistical comparison of the two 
approaches conducted by Westen and Shedler.

 Examination of these dimensions promises to illuminate the many ways in which 
personality develops and the means by which this process can foster 
psychological ailments, Westen holds.

 For instance, in an unpublished study, he and a colleague used the new 
personality instrument to tease out three strands of disturbance in 104 young 
women suffering from eating disorders. One group of impulsive, highly 
emotional, and openly distressed women mainly exhibited bulimia's binges and 
purges or veered back and forth from bulimia to anorexia. A second group kept a 
lid on feelings, sexual urges, and any behaviors that might lead to pleasure, 
avoided other people, and usually clung to the self-starvation typical of 
anorexia. The third group functioned well at work and with others despite bouts 
of bulimia or anorexia and high levels of self-criticism.

"Knowing that a patient has bulimia or anorexia may be much less important for 
designing treatment than understanding how these symptoms function in the 
context of an individual's personality," Westen contends.

 His new assessment method may also shed light on the aftermath of severe 
childhood maltreatment. By young adulthood, victims of physical abuse, sexual 
abuse, and neglect suffer from greatly elevated rates of personality disorders, 
according to research directed by psychologist Jeffrey G. Johnson of the New 
York State Psychiatric Institute in New York City. Johnson's team presents its 
findings in the July Archives of General Psychiatry. Westen suspects that his 
clinical aid will generate a deeper understanding of personality problems 
related to child abuse.

 Five-factor advocates, such as psychologist Thomas A. Widiger of the 
University of Kentucky in Lexington, shrug off Westen and Shedler's criticisms.

"They want to classify personality by relying on clinicians' perspectives and 
returning to a psychodynamic approach," Widiger says. "I see that as a step 
backwards."

 He views as more promising the ongoing five-factor research that's examining 
that model's ability to illuminate individual personality differences and to 
improve the diagnosis of personality disorders.

 In contrast, Block welcomes Westen and Shedler's approach. Block published a 
critique of the five-factor model in the March 1995 Psychological Bulletin. 
Researchers have often used factor analysis in an arbitrary way, he argues. He 
holds that helpful personality measures will emerge by examining the insights 
of experienced clinicians and other seasoned personality observers, as Westen 
and Shedler do.

"Westen and Shedler's personality model is a breath of fresh air, but it needs 
to be evaluated against other approaches," remarks psychiatrist Robert L. 
Spitzer of the New York State Psychiatric Institute, who directed the 1980 
revision of the manual of psychiatric diagnoses.

 Spitzer is currently coordinating a project aimed at comparing the clinical 
usefulness of Westen and Shedler's method with that of the five-factor model 
and of two other personality measures-one containing four temperament and three 
character dimensions, the other consisting of 15 personality traits. Clinicians 
will use the competing instruments to formulate and carry out treatment plans 
for patients diagnosed with personality disorders and then chart their progress.

 For now, nearly everyone agrees that personality disorders as currently 
defined are "ripe for an overhaul," says psychiatrist John G. Gunderson of 
McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass. "It's just not clear whether one or another 
approach to personality assessment should be dominant."

 May the most conscientious, agreeable, and best-adjusted system win.

 Dimensions of Personality According to the Five-Factor Model

 Neuroticism

 Proneness to psychological distress and impulsive behavior

 Extroversion

 Tendency to join in social situations and feel joy and optimism

 Openness to experience

 Curiosity, receptivity to new ideas, and emotional expressiveness

 Agreeableness

 Extent to which someone shows both compassion and hostility toward others

 Conscientiousness

 Degree of organization and commitment to personal goals

 Dimensions of Personality According to Drew Westen and Jonathan Shedler

 Psychological Health

 Ability to love others, find meaning in life, and gain personal insights

 Psychopathy

 Lack of remorse, presence of impulsiveness, and tendency to abuse drugs

 Hostility

 Deep-seated ill will

 Narcissism

 Self-importance, grandiose assumptions about oneself, and tendency to treat 
others as an audience to provide admiration

 Emotional Dysregulation

 Intense and uncontrolled emotional reactions

 Dysphoria

 Depression, shame, humiliation, and lack of any pleasurable experiences

 Schizoid Orientation

 Constricted emotions, inability to understand abstract concepts such as 
metaphors, and few or no friends

 Obsessionality

 Absorption in details, stinginess, and fear of dirt and contamination

 Thought Disorder

 Such as believing one has magical powers over others or can directly read 
their minds

 Oedipal Conflict

 Adult pursuit of romantic partners who are already involved with others, 
inappropriate seductiveness, and intense sexual jealousy

 Dissociated Consciousness

 Fragmenting of thought and perception often related to past sexual abuse

 Sexual Conflict

 Anxieties and fears regarding sexual intimacy

 Psychologists disagree about which set of factors, listed here with 
descriptions or examples, is most useful in classifying personality disorders.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 6, August 7, 1999, p. 88. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
