Science News Online (8/7/99): Antibiotics for Muscular Dystrophy?

 Antibiotics for Muscular Dystrophy? 

 By J. Travis

 On the road, it's illegal and dangerous to ignore a stop sign. Tricking human 
cells into doing the same might be a life-saving act, however.

 According to a new mouse study, antibiotics that fool cells into ignoring 
genetic defects called stop mutations may sometimes halt the progression of 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a usually fatal disease. The antibiotic strategy 
may also help treat other illnesses triggered by stop mutations, including some 
cases of cystic fibrosis and cancer.

"This is going to spur lots of work on lots of diseases. For diseases where 
there's nothing, this gives you something to try," says study coauthor H. Lee 
Sweeney of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia.

 Duchenne muscular dystrophy usually results from mutations in the gene for 
dystrophin, a crucial structural protein in muscles. In some cases-between 5 
and 15 percent, according to various estimates-the mutation consists of a 
premature stop codon, a brief DNA sequence that tells muscle cells to stop 
making dystrophin before the protein has all of its amino acids.

 Twenty years ago, scientists found that antibiotics called aminoglycosides can 
prompt yeast cells to bypass stop codons. The antibiotics kill bacteria by 
latching onto their protein-making factories, called ribosomes, and shutting 
them down. In yeast cells, the drugs don't shut down ribosomes but disrupt them 
enough that they often misread stop-codon mutations. Instead of stopping, 
ribosomes harmlessly insert a random amino acid into the protein they're 
building and continue on.

 Several years ago, David M. Bedwell of the University of Alabama at Birmingham 
and his colleagues showed the potential of this trick for treating cystic 
fibrosis, a respiratory disease caused by mutations in the gene for a protein 
called CFTR. In test-tube studies, they demonstrated that human cells with a 
CFTR gene containing a premature stop codon could occasionally construct the 
full protein if treated with aminoglycosides.

 Impressed by the cystic fibrosis studies, Sweeney tried the antibiotics on 
mouse muscle cells containing a dystrophin gene with a premature stop codon. As 
he hoped, the drugs prompted the production of significant amounts of 
full-length dystrophin.

 Sweeney initially doubted whether this antibiotic approach would succeed with 
patients. Aminoglycosides can accumulate in the ears and kidney, where they 
shut down protein production and cause hearing loss and kidney damage.

"If you give too much of the drug, it's quite toxic. So, the big question was, 
Can you give a dose that is not toxic and still get enough dystrophin made to 
do some good?" says Sweeney.

 His group decided to test the approach on mice whose dystrophin gene has a 
premature stop codon, causing a degenerative muscle disease similar to Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy. For 2 weeks, the researchers once a day gave the rodents a 
large dose of an aminoglycoside called gentamicin. This antibiotic flood, they 
hoped, would trigger dystrophin production but still give the mice time to 
clear the drug before the next dose.

 In the Aug. 15 Journal of Clinical Investigation, Sweeney and his team 
describe the apparent success of this method. They detected normal dystrophin 
in the muscle tissue of the mutant mice. More important, in two tests of muscle 
integrity, they found that the treated mice suffered much less degeneration 
than the untreated mice did. Moreover, the animals remained otherwise healthy.

"It's very suggestive and encouraging," says Jeffrey S. Chamberlain of the 
University of Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor. "A lot of people were 
skeptical that [antibiotics] would be effective in a whole animal or [thought] 
there would be too many side effects."

 Sweeney and his colleagues have begun to plan a short trial of the antibiotic 
treatment on people with Duchenne muscular dystrophy caused by premature stop 
codons. They're hopeful that the gentamicin dose needed for dystrophin 
synthesis will prove tolerable. Combining the antibiotic with drugs known to 
prevent its buildup may help, says Sweeney.

 Bedwell and his colleagues have recently tested aminoglycosides on people with 
cystic fibrosis caused by a premature stop codon-about 5 percent of all cases. 
While he declines to discuss the results of the small study until they're 
published, Bedwell hints that the antibiotic therapy prompted some production 
of normal CFTR. "We haven't cured cystic fibrosis," he says, "but we're doing 
something for these people."

 His group has also begun to explore the use of aminoglycosides in several 
other genetic disorders, including some cancers. For example, when mutated, the 
gene brca1 predisposes women to breast and ovarian cancer. Premature stop 
codons make up nearly a quarter of the mutations, notes Bedwell.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 6, August 7, 1999, p. 84. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
