Science News Online (9/11/99): Is there a super way to make black holes?

 Is there a super way to make black holes?

 By R. Cowen

 Illustration of the binary system GRO J1655-40 shows an ordinary star circling 
a disk of material surrounding a black hole. (Gabi Perez) Twisting space like a 
pretzel and sucking in everything around it-even light-a black hole can seem 
like a notion that's hard to swallow. Although weighty evidence has convinced 
most astronomers that these gravitational monsters indeed exist, scientists are 
still unsure how they form.

 According to one theory, stars more than 10 times as massive as the sun 
succumb quietly to gravity after burning up their nuclear fuel. They collapse 
under their own weight to become black holes.

 In a second model, the demise of these stars unfolds less directly. First, 
they explode as supernovas, hurling their outer layers into space and leaving 
behind a dense, burned-out remnant called a neutron star. Debris from the 
explosion then falls back onto the neutron star, turning it into a black hole.

 Theorists have spotlighted the supernova scenario because it may explain the 
origin of mysterious flashes of high-energy radiation, or gamma-ray bursts (SN: 
7/10/99, p. 28). Now, observations of a star that closely orbits a suspected 
black hole strongly support the supernova model of black hole formation, 
researchers report in the Sept. 9 Nature.

 Rafael Rebolo of the Institute of Astrophysics of the Canary Islands in La 
Laguna, Spain, and his colleagues examined the composition of the atmosphere of 
an ordinary star, about twice the sun's mass, that circles a suspected black 
hole more closely than Mercury orbits our sun. Residing some 10,000 light-years 
from Earth, the pair of objects is known as GRO J1655-40 or Nova Scorpii 1994.

 Using the Keck I Telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, the team found that the 
star's outer layers contain oxygen, magnesium, silicon, and sulfur in 
abundances 6 to 10 times those found in the sun. That's a puzzle because the 
relatively lightweight star would never have reached the internal temperature, 
greater than 3 billion kelvins, required to forge high concentrations of these 
elements. In contrast, the star's massive companion could easily have generated 
them before it became a black hole.

 If the companion had collapsed directly into a black hole, the material would 
have remained locked inside. However, if the heavyweight had first exploded as 
a supernova, ejecting the elements into space, its lower-mass partner could 
have captured them.

"This is, to our knowledge, the most direct evidence ever found for a link 
between a supernova and black hole formation," Rebolo and his colleagues assert.

"There's no other way I can think of that you could actually have an 
enhancement [of the four elements] except to say that the star that just became 
a black hole must have first blown up and injected that enriched material into 
the companion star," says John J. Cowan of the University of Oklahoma in Norman.

 Another possibility, enrichment via a wind blown from the massive star, 
doesn't work, he says. A wind would contain a variety of materials, including 
iron, but the star shows enhancement by only the elements likely to be released 
in a supernova explosion, Cowan notes.

"These are fascinating observations," says Stan Woosley of the University of 
California, Santa Cruz, but he adds that he would like to see a detailed 
supernova model that explains the observed abundance pattern. Woosley has 
championed the supernova-black hole model to explain gamma-ray bursts.

 One complication is the star's proximity to its partner. Before becoming a 
black hole about a million years ago, the latter was a star 25 to 40 times the 
mass of the sun. Its outer layers would have enveloped the smaller star.

 The evidence suggests, however, that such direct contact played only a minor 
role in altering the star's atmosphere, Rebolo says. For example, nitrogen, 
which would have been plentiful in the outer layers of the black hole's 
predecessor, has relatively low abundance in the low-mass companion.

 Rebolo holds that black holes may arise either through supernova explosions or 
direct gravitational collapse. His team plans to search for the supernova 
signature in other black hole systems.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 11, September 11, 1999, p. 165. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
