Science News Online (8/28/99): Acclimating to a Warmer World

 Acclimating to a Warmer World With some climate change unavoidable, 
researchers focus on adaptation

 By Richard Monastersky

 In November 1950, a storm sent sea water flooding over dikes at La Guardia 
Airport in New York City. (Queens Borough Public Library, Long Island Division)

 Next January, shortly after the Y2K bug comes out of hibernation for its New 
Year's feast, a group of U.S. researchers will report to Congress and the 
President on an even less tractable problem: the issue of global climate 
change. The study will offer up now familiar charts of rising temperatures, 
swelling seas, and strengthening storms, but it will also present an expansive 
new strategy for dealing with the threat of greenhouse warming.

 For more than a decade, climate scientists have been following essentially one 
route by investigating the need to limit emissions of carbon dioxide and other 
heat-trapping gases. Their work on mitigation strategies helped forge the 1997 
Kyoto Protocol, an international treaty that would force industrialized 
countries to cut emissions by 5.2 percent over the next 10 years or so (SN: 
12/20&27/97, p. 388). The agreement, however, has garnered little support in 
Congress, which objects to a treaty that doesn't include limits for developing 
nations as well.

 Amid this political thicket, scientists in the United States and around the 
world are now taking a different course-recommending that society find ways to 
adapt to a warmer world. The approach doesn't represent a reversal so much as a 
broadening of paths. While reducing emissions is a necessary step, researchers 
say, the Kyoto accord cannot succeed on its own or reap immediate results. In 
fact, adapting to warmth may even allow some industries to benefit from novel 
economic opportunities.

"No matter what happens with these international agreements, we are 
experiencing climate change now, and we will be experiencing it for many 
decades," says Michael C. MacCracken, who is helping coordinate the U.S. study, 
which goes by the unwieldy title of the U.S. National Assessment of the 
Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change for the Nation.

"We really need to focus on adapting and coping with a changing situation," 
says MacCracken. "Mitigation is aimed at trying to slow or stop climate change 
out several decades to centuries from now, and that's a very important issue. 
But in the meantime, society is making a lot of choices that will determine how 
we are going to be affected by changing climate in the future."

 Reaping the benefits of adaptation: Despite this year's drought, some corn in 
this Maryland field remains healthy. Tall stalks in the background are 
protected by an organic mulch that retains soil moisture. Stunted corn in the 
foreground was planted in bare soil. (USDA)

 The fatalism now creeping into climate studies grows in part from a simple and 
disturbing realization.

"It's only when you start to calculate through the numbers that have been 
proposed for emissions reduction in the Kyoto agreement that you realize it's 
barely scratching the surface of the problem," says Martin Parry of the 
University of East Anglia in England. "So, even if you get full implementation 
now of the Kyoto proposals, you can see from those numbers the relatively small 
amount by which climate change is drawn down," says Parry, who studies how 
climate shifts will affect global food supplies.

 Computer models, for example, project that with no emissions limits, global 
temperatures will climb 2.5@F by the year 2050. The Kyoto Protocol would shave 
only 0.1@F off that amount of warming, according to Parry and his colleagues, 
who discussed these results in the Oct. 22, 1998 Nature.

 Moreover, the protocol wouldn't seriously ameliorate the suffering due to 
climate change, they say. According to their calculations, the Kyoto agreement 
would leave unchanged the population threatened by water shortages in the 
middle of the next century and would reduce by only 4 percent the number of 
people facing an added risk of coastal flooding from rising seas.

 Water shortages aren't inevitable, however. Countries can significantly reduce 
their vulnerability by taking steps aimed at adaptation, contend Parry and his 
coworkers. If conservation efforts could squeeze a 5 percent reduction in 
global water consumption, 600 million people would drop from the list of those 
potentially at risk of water shortages.

 While adaptation can have dramatic benefits, scientists have been reluctant to 
explore this route in the past, says Parry. "If we start thinking about 
adaptation, there is a tacit admission that climate change cannot fully be 
mitigated out of the system. In other words, that's sort of an admission of 
failure, if you like."

 At the same time, he says, the complexity of studying adaptation daunted 
researchers initially. Mitigation, although hard to accomplish, actually poses 
a much simpler scientific problem than trying to assess how various regions and 
sectors of society might adapt to global warming.

 Climate researchers worldwide are now plunging into the more difficult task as 
part of an upcoming study by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC). The United Nations body that does scientific analyses for international 
negotiators, the IPCC is currently drafting its third assessment, a decade 
after the first one captured worldwide attention.

 In 1995, the panel produced an 878-page volume subtitled "Impacts, 
Adaptations, and Mitigation of Climate Change." At the time, however, the topic 
of mitigation dominated over adaptation. "Although the word adaptation appears 
in the title of the report, it was barely evident," says James McCarthy of 
Harvard University, one of the editors of the upcoming assessment. "It will be 
a much more serious focus this time around," he told an audience in June at a 
meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Boston.

 The IPCC will look at two kinds of adaptations, says geographer Barry Smit of 
the University of Guelph in Ontario, who is editing a chapter on this topic. It 
will be critical, he says, to assess how much natural ecosystems can adapt to 
climate change, as well as to estimate how society may cope. "Getting a handle 
on the sorts of adaptations that we can reasonably expect to occur is 
fundamental to any reasonable estimation of the implications-costs and 
opportunities-of climate change. The research community has gradually 
recognized this," says Smit.

 Future floods will strike areas marked in blue, which is land within 10 feet 
of sea-level in the metropolitan New York City area. Historically, these spots 
have flooded about once a century. By 2100, water could inundate them every 
year, according to the worst-case climate models. (NASA GISS)

 The weather that scorched much of the United States in July underscored this 
new research focus by showing just how ill-prepared the nation is to deal with 
current conditions, let alone those to come.

 Across the eastern half of the country, dozens of elderly and low-income 
people baked to death in shuttered homes. In New York City, overheated wires 
and an unprecedented demand for air conditioning strained the electric-power 
grid, blacking out parts of Manhattan. Several eastern states have suffered 
their worst drought on record as unrelenting sun withered crops and drained 
reservoirs.

 If climate scientists are correct, the weather served up this summer is just 
an appetizer. In the New York City region, for example, the average 
temperatures may climb 3@F to 4.5@F by the year 2050, according to computer 
climate simulations. At the same time, the number of days each year exceeding 
90@F would grow from the current average of 13 to somewhere between 31 and 37. 
These data come from the New York component of the national assessment.

 Such numbers are not meant to be exact predictions but rather scenarios to 
help people think about climate change, says the leader of the New York study, 
Cynthia Rosenzweig of Columbia University and NASA's Goddard Institute for 
Space Studies in New York City.

 The New York study, which will come out as a separate report next year, seeks 
to analyze just how these changes will affect the 19.6 million people living in 
the city's greater metropolitan region. To make such a broad assessment, 
Rosenzweig and her colleagues have brought in local experts who must deal with 
whatever changes occur. The list includes representatives of utility companies, 
municipal governments, federal agencies, business people, and community 
organizations.

 As part of the national assessment, similar campaigns involving thousands of 
people are going on in 14 other regions around the country. In all these 
studies, the researchers must first map out the range of problems currently 
plaguing each area. Then, they can ask how climate change will alter the 
picture.

 What degree of warming? Scientists used two computer models to estimate the 
temperature rise in New York City by 2050. Red and aqua bars indicate numbers 
from a Canadian model, blue and green come from a British model. The aqua and 
green bars depict less warming because they include the cooling effect of 
sulfur pollution. Tan bars represent what would happen if historical 
temperature trends continued.

 Global warming will in many cases pile more stress onto already overloaded 
sectors of society. The transit and sewer systems in New York City, for 
example, occasionally flood even in current weather conditions, says Rae 
Zimmerman, professor of planning and public administration at New York 
University.

"There is a problem with flooding right now," she says. "As climate change 
becomes more severe, these frequencies are going to be greater."

 The sewer system in New York City channels storm runoff into surrounding 
waterways, but these outlets close automatically during high tides to prevent 
salt water from backing up into the system. Sea levels are currently inching 
upward, however, because increasing global warmth is causing ocean water to 
expand and is melting many glaciers.

 In the next century, the rising water will eventually submerge and close the 
drainage system even at low tide, causing flooding in the streets during 
storms. Raising the system, says Zimmerman, "would involve massive construction 
and huge costs."

 During December 1992, a strong nor'easter storm caused extensive flooding in 
the subway, an underground commuter-train system, airports, and highways around 
the city, says Janine Bloomfield, an ecologist with the Environmental Defense 
Fund in New York City. Throughout its history, the city has suffered this 
degree of inundation about once every 40 to 50 years.

 With higher sea levels, however, smaller storms should spur similar amounts of 
flooding. Projections suggest that the type of inundation seen in 1992 could 
happen every 13 years by 2100. In the most worrisome projections from a set of 
four climate simulations, such events would recur every year, according to a 
report issued by Bloomfield and her colleagues in June. In that study, the 
Environmental Defense Fund borrowed climate scenarios from Rosenzweig and the 
ongoing New York assessment.

 Rosenzweig says the New York study will help in planning for the future. The 
city's water supply, for instance, comes mostly from upstate river systems, but 
it draws from the Hudson in cases of drought. As salt water from rising seas 
moves farther up the Hudson, it will reach the site of the current pumping 
station, forcing managers to move the intake, she says.

 Part of the success of the study, she says, will come from bringing together 
climate experts and a diverse set of so-called stakeholders, people who will be 
affected by coming changes. "The institutional constraints to adaptation are so 
complicated. By working this through, we'll be improving the potential for 
adaptation," she says.

 In some cases, the researchers envision windfalls from future weather. "It's 
very easy to fall into the assumption that it's all going to be negative," says 
William Solecki, a coleader of the New York study and a researcher at Montclair 
State University in New Jersey. "We're trying to also look at what might be 
opportunities. With more moderate winter temperatures, maybe retirement 
communities might be more willing to locate to the region rather than going 
further south."

 A world away from Manhattan, residents of the Great Plains are also straining 
to see what lies decades ahead. To do that, researchers have looked back to see 
what kinds of climate shifts have happened before.

"One of the things that seems to be emerging in our analysis is that various 
management systems have evolved in the last 30 years, when temperature and 
precipitation have been more stable," says Dennis Ojima, an ecosystem scientist 
at Colorado State University in Fort Collins who heads the central Great Plains 
assessment. This region typically experiences much larger climate shifts than 
occurred over the past 3 decades, he says, and projections suggest that the 
swings will intensify with climate warming.

"We have to be more agile and flexible in dealing with that year-to-year 
variability in climate," says Ojima.

 The agricultural industry, he says, can respond by maintaining a diverse 
selection of crop varieties and breeds of livestock. Water managers have 
suggested storing water in underground aquifers, instead of in open reservoirs 
that lose much of their moisture to evaporation.

 While the assessment process has helped identify opportunities for adaptation, 
says Ojima, it has also served as a way to bridge the gap between climate 
researchers and the public. "As a researcher, I've learned a lot in discussions 
with people in terms of understanding what information is most useful to them." 
Equally important, he has dispelled many myths about climate change and has 
started getting more people to consider the potential impacts of global warming 
on their lives.

 Indeed, many scientists involved in making the national assessment view the 
process as just as important as the reports they will eventually produce. "One 
of my personal hopes for the legacies of the assessment activity is that we'll 
have built some networks of people who can think about these issues," says one 
of the study's coleaders, Jerry Melillo of the Marine Biological Laboratory in 
Woods Hole, Mass.

 This arrangement leads to a more comprehensive approach that links climate 
threats together with all the other civic and resource problems affecting each 
region. Only by considering these together, say the scientists, can society 
hope to cope with some of the inevitable challenges just over the horizon.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 9, August 28, 1999, p. 136. Copyright C 1999, 
Science Service. 
