Science News Online (9/11/99): Lost Space

 Lost Space Rising din threatens radio astronomy

 By Siri Carpenter

 Twilight at the Very Large Array radio telescopes near Socorro, N.M. (Dave 
Finley/NRAO/AUI)

 The amount of energy collected from space by all the radio telescopes ever 
used to explore the sky would not light a single lightbulb. This fact, oft 
stated by radio astronomers, points out the Achilles' heel of their endeavor.

 Radio astronomy tracks cosmic events by tuning into weak radio waves that 
identify the molecules in stars and other celestial bodies. Stronger signals, 
either from space or earthly sources, can easily overwhelm even the most 
sophisticated radio telescopes. Today, the sky buzzes with the signals of cell 
telephones, television and radio broadcasts, military radar, 
air-traffic-control chatter, and satellites involved in communications, 
navigation, and meteorology.

 Since radio astronomy arrived on the scene in 1932, it has radically 
transformed scientists' understanding of the universe. Eavesdropping on radio 
whispers, astronomers detected microwave echoes left over from the Big Bang, 
discovered compact spinning stars called pulsars, and documented the earliest 
moments in the formation of galaxies.

 Exploration at radio wavelengths has uncovered rich details invisible to 
optical telescopes. While an optical image of a massive group of galaxies shows 
only scattered pinpricks of light, a radio image reveals swirling streamers of 
hydrogen gas that connect the star systems and provide clues to their behavior.

 Radio astronomers have been able to make such discoveries because the skies 
remained free of noise for much of this century. Now, though, the radio 
environment has grown deafening, by astronomers' standards, and the competition 
among those who would like a piece of the radio spectrum has become frenzied.

"It's like gold mining," says Paul A. Vanden Bout, director of the National 
Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) in Charlottesville, Va. "People are 
scrambling like crazy for spectrum."

 The organization charged with keeping order is the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) in Geneva, an agency of the United Nations. It 
meets every 3 years to divvy up radio-frequency bands among more than 40 types 
of services, from airplane phones to military radar. Since 1959, the agency has 
tried to protect scientists by setting aside a few small slivers of the radio 
spectrum. At the low end of the spectrum-the traditional hunting ground for 
radio astronomers-scientists lay claim to about 2 percent of the territory.

 Many other groups share areas of the spectrum, but astronomers can't do that 
as readily because human-made signals can easily swamp a radio telescope's 
electronics.

"The rest of the users tend to regard us as kind of a nuisance, because we're 
the ones that are the most demanding," says Vanden Bout. "But the fact of life 
is that we're incredibly sensitive to all these other signals, so competing 
commercial interests can find ways to live with each other that are acceptable 
to them but are not acceptable to us."

 Virtually any strong source of radio waves can cause interference if its 
signals stray too near the frequencies at which scientists are observing. Even 
the transmissions from an ordinary cordless telephone, if used close to a radio 
telescope, would be strong enough to throw off the instrument.

 When it comes to making radio astronomers really edgy, nothing works as well 
as throwing a few dozen satellites into low Earth orbit. There's no escaping 
satellite systems, because their very goal is to blanket even the most 
far-flung corners of the planet all the time. To date, several hundred 
satellite systems have petitioned ITU for frequency allocations. With the rapid 
growth of wireless communications, radio astronomers fear they may soon have no 
quiet spots left for their research.

"You can think of the spectrum as a resource, much like timber or government 
land," says Mark M. McKinnon of the NRAO's Green Bank, W.Va., site. "Some of 
these things you open to exploitation-that's fine. But then there are 
wilderness areas you'd like to preserve."

 Visible-light image (left) of the M81 group of galaxies shows light emitted by 
individual stars. Radio image (right) shows hydrogen gas connecting the 
galaxies. (Dave Finley/NRAO/AUI)

 Even in radio astronomy's youth, scientists understood the importance of a 
quiet sky. In 1958, the NRAO built its first telescope in Green Bank. In the 
isolated West Virginia mountains, radio astronomers could largely escape 
interference from short-wave radio, military radar, aircraft communications, 
and television transmissions.

 To protect the new observatory, the federal government surrounded it with a 
13,000-square-mile National Radio Quiet Zone. Within that area, anyone who 
wanted to install a fixed transmitter had to demonstrate that their signals 
would not interfere with astronomers' observations. Today, the area around 
Green Bank remains the only such quiet zone in the world.

 Like the Green Bank observatory, most of the world's major radio telescopes 
are tucked into remote sites that have been relatively uncluttered by 
ground-based interference. In recent years, however, radio astronomers have 
found their privacy increasingly violated from above.

 For a decade, astronomers have grappled with a constellation of Russian 
navigational satellites called the Global Navigation Satellite System 
(GLONASS). When the Soviet Union launched the satellites in the late 1980s, it 
didn't take part in the ITU allocation process. The satellites' signals 
seriously interfere with astronomers' observations in a protected radio band at 
about 1612 megahertz (MHz).

 This is the same frequency radiated by hydroxyl (OH)-a substance as central to 
astronomy as ozone is to meteorology. Radio waves from hydroxyl stream from 
interstellar dust clouds as they collapse to form stars. The signal hails from 
the atmospheres of aging red giants, stars that are relatively cool and larger 
than the sun, and from a type of star, called a Mira variable star, that 
astronomers use as an indicator of celestial distances.

 With hydroxyl serving as such an important tool for studying objects in the 
Milky Way and beyond, radio astronomers hated having the satellites blur their 
view of its signal. In 1992, the Russian government agreed to replace aging 
GLONASS satellites by 2005 with satellites that will not interfere with radio 
astronomy observations.

 Recently, though, another satellite system has worried astronomers. Iridium, a 
telecommunications company based in Washington, D.C., last year launched a 
fleet of 66 satellites designed to provide global wireless telephone services, 
even where cell towers can't reach.

 These satellites' main earthbound signals, called downlinks, are just above 
1621 MHz. Although this frequency falls outside radio astronomy's protected 
band, Iridium's downlinks, like GLONASS' signals, include weaker, extraneous 
signals that sometimes seep into hydroxyl's band. Because the Iridium network 
covers the entire Earth at all times, such leakage could cripple astronomers' 
observations anywhere.

 In the end, radio astronomers and Iridium reached a compromise. To gain 
licenses in the United States and some other countries, Iridium pledged that 
for a few hours each day, it would keep the levels of spurious emissions to 
levels tolerable to the scientists.

 So far, Iridium has kept its promise-although not for reasons the company 
would have preferred. Because Iridium hasn't sold as many subscriptions to its 
service as it had hoped, its satellites haven't transmitted at their full 
capacity.

 Even without breaching regulations, however, Iridium has impaired some 
scientific observations. Most radio telescopes can't avoid picking up emissions 
in radio bands near the ones they're tuned to, making it hard to deal with 
Iridium's emissions lurking just outside the protected hydroxyl band.

 This problem has particularly plagued NRAO's Very Large Array (VLA), an 
assembly of 27 radio telescopes, plus one spare, near Socorro, N.M. The array's 
many antennas make it particularly susceptible to interference, says VLA's 
Gregory B. Taylor. When the electronic messages between the telescopes mingle 
with Iridium's downlinks, they become garbled, and the array doesn't function 
properly.

 Since Iridium began transmitting last year, the VLA has discontinued all 
observations at 1612 MHz. "It's not [Iridium's] fault," Taylor acknowledges. 
"They're abiding with the agreement. But the VLA wasn't designed with this sort 
of interference in mind."

 Radio astronomers gained a reprieve last month when Iridium declared 
bankruptcy. "In some sense, it might give radio astronomers a grace period," 
says McKinnon. "If Iridium had been successful, everyone would want to jump on 
the bandwagon."

"Iridium's setback has been so widely publicized that there's enormous caution 
in the financial world about funding new ventures," says John V. Evans of 
COMSAT Corp. in Bethesda, Md. However, Evans says, Iridium was "a wake-up call 
to the radio astronomers to discover that there's a huge demand for radio 
frequencies."

 The legs of the tripod supporting the receiver of the 300-foot telescope 
(left) at Green Bank, W.Va., captured interfering signals. To replace this 
telescope, which collapsed in 1988, astronomers are building a new telescope 
(right), whose offset design should minimize interference. (NRAO/AUI)

 As the wireless-communications industry expands, astronomers expect they'll 
soon confront interference from a profusion of satellite systems. To cope with 
such threats, observatories are dedicating more time and effort to combating 
interference.

 Most observatories now have at least one scientist working full-time to deal 
with radio interference, says Michael M. Davis of the Arecibo Observatory in 
Puerto Rico. There, a team of 10 astronomers and engineers share the job of 
advising local transmitters of radio signals how to avert interference problems.

"That's the kind of subtle impact interference has on an observatory," remarks 
Davis. "Every person you have working on radio frequency interference is a 
person who isn't spending that time doing something else equally useful to the 
observatory."

 Some observatories are trying to build a degree of immunity into their 
telescopes. A few sport expensive electronic equipment that filters out 
frequencies in which human-made signals create interference, allowing 
astronomers to observe in peace at nearby frequencies.

 Even when observatories can afford it, filtering out unwanted signals won't 
solve all of radio astronomy's interference woes, however. "Each time there's 
one of those new interfering signals, it means that's another frequency range 
that's lost for doing astronomy," explains Paul F. Goldsmith, director of the 
National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, which operates the Arecibo 
Observatory. "It's like putting blinders on a horse so it can only look in 
certain directions."

 The currently protected bandwidths don't encompass all the signals of interest 
to astronomers, either. Scientists have so far detected thousands of radiation 
frequencies emitted from more than 100 different molecules. At the far reaches 
of the cosmos, the expansion of the universe causes the radiation from these 
molecules to shift to lower frequencies, a phenomenon known as the Doppler 
effect.

 At the NRAO's Green Bank site, a new telescope will include a feature that 
scientists hope will defeat some of the most troublesome interference. On 
traditional radio telescopes, a receiver that collects radiation is 
structurally supported by a tripod centered over the dish. A shortcoming of 
this design is that the legs of the tripod capture interfering signals and 
bounce them into the receiver, exacerbating problems.

 The new Green Bank telescope, scheduled to be completed this year, moves the 
support structure to the side of the dish, which keeps it from reflecting 
unwelcome signals into the receiver.

 Radio astronomy is fast approaching a crisis, say many scientists. Feats of 
engineering may help beat back the interference in the short term, but many 
radio astronomers are reluctant to rely solely on technical solutions to keep 
their field afloat.

 Some scientists argue that more responsibility for curbing spurious 
emissions-those signals that leak outside their intended frequency range-should 
fall to the services that generate the problem. Satellite companies can 
minimize unwanted noise by designing transmitters more carefully or by using 
filters to block particular signals.

 Whether or not companies choose to do this is partly a matter of economics. 
Filters, for example, add weight to a spacecraft, driving up launch costs. Some 
satellite makers voluntarily include filters and other precautions against 
spurious signals, but astronomers are pushing for requirements more stringent 
than the current rules.

 Perhaps radio astronomers' greatest hope is for the use of frequencies above 
71 gigahertz, where much of the cutting-edge research is turning. Commercial 
interest in these higher frequencies is only now emerging, and at ITU's next 
allocation meeting, in Istanbul, Turkey, next May, scientists will aim to 
preserve the relatively pristine landscape they now enjoy at such high 
frequencies.

"It's inevitable that the commercial organizations will continue to put 
pressure on," comments ITU's Roger N. Smith. "But I think radio astronomers 
have to draw a line in the sand to make sure the situation doesn't get any 
worse, because once they lose the spectrum, it's lost."

"We just have to go on fighting," says Goldsmith. "You're never going to say 
you've won. The best you can do is to say you haven't lost. And we want to hold 
on to as much as we can for the future."

 It's easy to detect a note of resignation when radio astronomers talk about 
the noisy universe created by expanding wireless technology. Even as they 
describe ways to maintain a tenuous grasp on their few prized slices of 
spectrum, radio astronomers almost always add another quiet observation. If 
nothing else, maybe someday they can hide their telescopes in a place that's 
likely to remain quiet: the far side of the moon.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 11, September 11, 1999, p. 168. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
