Science News Online (9/4/99): Gene tinkering hikes fear and anxiety in mice

 Gene tinkering hikes fear and anxiety in mice 

 By B. Bower

 Since only a portion of the people exposed to traumatic events develop anxiety 
disorders, researchers suspect that some type of genetic vulnerability 
contributes to these distressing conditions.

 Rodents may yield valuable clues to the presumably inherited roots of severe 
anxiety reactions, a new study suggests. Mice deprived of a gene that 
facilitates transmission of specific chemical messages in the brain represent a 
potential animal model of anxiety-prone people, reports a team of 
neuroscientists led by Florence Crestani and Hanns Mohler of the University of 
Zurich.

 Experimental deletion of the mouse gene leads to a marked drop in the number 
of molecular receptors for a neurotransmitter known as GABA, the researchers 
contend. GABA dampens the activity of brain areas-such as the amygdala and 
hippocampus-implicated in fear and anxiety. Antianxiety drugs, such as Valium, 
work by activating the GABA receptors that Crestani and Mohler's group focused 
on.

 An inherited shortage of these signal entry points into brain cells may 
predispose people to develop anxiety disorders in response to stressful or 
traumatic experiences, the scientists propose in the September Nature 
Neuroscience.

 They first examined brain slices taken from mice either retaining or missing a 
copy of the GABA-receptor gene. Those missing the gene had many fewer GABA 
receptors, mainly in the hippocampus, amygdala, and frontal brain.

 Gene-deprived mice showed greater anxiety on several laboratory tests, the 
scientists say. For instance, in an elevated maze, they usually avoided walking 
along passages with no walls, unlike their DNA-intact comrades.

 Receptor-poor mice also learned more quickly to react fearfully to a tone that 
regularly preceded a foot shock by 1 second, as well as to a light that 
occasionally appeared just before the tone and foot shock. This shows that, 
like anxiety-ridden humans, the genetically altered mice feel distressed even 
by events with a tenuous link to an actual threat, the scientists say.

 Mutant mice performed as well on spatial learning tasks as receptor-rich mice 
did, indicating that the genetic loss influenced only anxiety. Moreover, the 
mutant mice became far less fearful after receiving injections of a Valium-like 
drug.

 These mice "offer the promise of a genetic model of the anxiety-predisposed 
human," remark neurobiologist Stephan G. Anagnostaras of the University of 
California, Los Angeles and his colleagues in the same journal. Such mice may 
prove useful in testing new antianxiety drugs, they say.

 Brain mechanisms by which the gene deletion pumps up anxiety remain uncertain, 
Anagnostaras' group notes.

 Psychiatrist Kenneth S. Kendler of Virginia Commonwealth University in 
Richmond commends the new study as "beautiful work," although he says it's 
difficult to compare the mutant mice to people suffering from most anxiety 
disorders. The rodents, however, may help scientists understand the constant 
sense of anxiety and fright experienced by individuals diagnosed with 
generalized anxiety disorder, says Kendler.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 10, September 4, 1999, p. 149. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
