Science News Online (9/4/99): Gene tinkering makes memorable mice

 Gene tinkering makes memorable mice 

 By J. Travis

 Session One

 Session Two

 Compared with normal mice, the memory-enhanced mouse is more likely to explore 
a novel object (star) rather than one it encountered in a previous session. 
(Adapted from Nature) From the early days of genetic engineering, biologists 
and ethicists have debated whether the technique might one day allow parents to 
shape the intelligence and temperament of their children. Many scientists have 
argued that the hereditary underpinnings of these characteristics are so 
complex that such control falls in the realm of science fiction.

 In the Sept. 2 Nature, Joe Z. Tsien of Princeton University and his colleagues 
describe how the addition of a single gene endowed mice with superior memory 
and learning ability. "Our results suggest that genetic enhancement of mental 
and cognitive abilities such as intelligence and memory in mammals is 
feasible," the investigators conclude.

 The improvement in mouse mental agility, without apparent side effects, stems 
from adding the gene for a protein that helps brain cells communicate. The 
study "demolishes the argument of those who claim that things like memory, 
learning, and intelligence are so complicated that scientists will never be 
able to figure out ways to enhance those traits," says Lee M. Silver, also of 
Princeton, who studies the social implications of genetic engineering.

 Tsien's mice aren't the first engineered rodents with a super memory. Last 
year, Japanese researchers reported that some of their mice did unexpectedly 
well on certain memory tasks. The mutant mice were missing a protein that cells 
use to respond to the brain chemical called nociceptin. The absence of these 
receptors, however, impairs their hearing and some other brain functions.

 Tsien's group created mice with extra copies of the gene for a component of 
the NMDA receptor, a protein complex on brain cells that responds to the 
neurotransmitter glutamate. The receptor seems suited to memory formation since 
it takes two closely timed but distinct stimuli at these complexes to make a 
nerve cell respond. This allows the brain to connect related stimuli, such as 
the striking of a match and the warmth of its flame, investigators speculate.

 The NMDA receptor also plays a role in long-term potentiation (LTP), the 
strengthening of connections between nerve cells. Many scientists argue that 
the brain forms memories using LTP, though that hypothesis remains 
controversial.

 The brain contains several NMDA-receptor types. The most active, so-called 
juvenile form declines in number as mice, and people, grow old. To counter that 
trend, Tsien's team made mice overproduce one subunit of the juvenile receptor.

 Studies of brain cells of these transgenic mice revealed that they experience 
LTP much more readily than normal brain cells do. In addition, the transgenic 
mice scored better than normal mice on learning and memory tests. For example, 
the mutant mice better remembered the location of a platform submerged in a 
tank of milky water. The transgenic mice also learned more quickly to associate 
a foot shock with a sound.

 Scientists caution that results in mice might not apply to people. "It's not 
at all clear that if you took a pill that improved memory in exactly the same 
way as [in] the mice, we would be any more intelligent," says Charles F. 
Stevens of the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif. In 
fact, he says, an overactive memory might even interfere with intelligence.

 If human genetic engineering becomes safe and practical, will people choose to 
boost the brain power of their children? "I do think it will be irresistible 
for future parents, but I don't think it will happen overnight," says Silver. 
Still, he notes that only recently he believed that genetic enhancement of 
intelligence was at least 25 years away. He now suspects that's a 
"conservative" estimate.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 10, September 4, 1999, p. 149. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
