Science News Online (9/18/99): Have Milky Way MACHOs Been Found?

 Have Milky Way MACHOs Been Found? 

 By R. Cowen

 MACHO images? Located in the Hubble Deep Field North, the central green 
objects in the five small frames could be white dwarfs in the galaxy's 
dark-matter halo. (Ibata, Richer, et al.) More than 20 years ago, astronomers 
came face to face with an unsettling finding: The tug exerted by all the 
visible material in our galaxy is not nearly enough to keep it intact. To 
explain why the rapidly rotating stars and gas at the edge of the galaxy don't 
simply fly away, scientists have been forced to assume that a vast halo of dark 
matter, extending thousands of light-years beyond the Milky Way's visible 
outline, envelops the galaxy. The identity of this unseen material has remained 
under wraps.

 Now, two teams of astronomers report that they may have glimpsed some of the 
veiled stuff, and it might be nothing more than elderly white dwarfs-the dim, 
compact remains of ordinary stars like the sun. The dwarfs could account for 
about half the Milky Way's dark matter and may be some of the long-sought 
MACHOs (massive compact halo objects) that scientists have suggested reside at 
the outskirts of the galaxy (SN: 4/29/95, p. 261).

 With only 20 objects imaged, the researchers say they must do follow-up 
observations to verify their conclusions. If the findings hold up, they could 
revolutionize the way astronomers think about the Milky Way and perhaps the 
structure of all galaxies.

 However, the results won't solve the mystery of dark matter throughout the 
universe. The Big Bang theory predicts that most dark matter must be of some 
exotic form not made from protons and neutrons.

 Both teams went hunting for MACHOs in postage-stamp patches of sky 
photographed by the Hubble Space Telescope. Rodrigo A. Ibata of the European 
Southern Observatory in Garching, Germany, Harvey B. Richer of the University 
of British Columbia in Vancouver, and their colleagues used Hubble to reexamine 
the Hubble Deep Field North 2 years after the telescope first imaged this 
region of sky (SN: 1/20/96, p. 36).

 By comparing the two image sets, they picked out five extremely faint objects 
that had moved slightly. Remote galaxies do not move perceptibly across the 
sky, so the objects must reside in or near the Milky Way. Their particular 
motion, brightness, and bluish color suggest they are faint white dwarfs a few 
thousand light-years from Earth, the international team reports in an article 
scheduled for publication in the Astrophysical Journal Letters.

 Richer cautions that the findings will remain speculative unless Hubble 
observations scheduled for December show that the objects continue to move in 
the same way. "We want to be pretty conservative," he says, "because the 
objects we're looking at are extremely faint, and the motions . . . are very 
small."

 Taking a different approach, Rene A. Mendez of the Cerro Tololo Inter-American 
Observatory near La Serena, Chile, and Dante Minniti of the Pontificia 
Universidad Cat-lica de Chile in Santiago analyzed single images of both the 
Hubble Deep Fields, North and South. They found 15 pointlike sources of light 
whose bluish color is indicative of old white dwarfs. These objects are likely 
to lie in the halo less than 6 thousand light-years from Earth, the researchers 
report in an article to be published in the Astrophysical Journal.

 The team couldn't determine whether the 15 objects have detectable motion, but 
tests show that they aren't remote galaxies, Mendez says. A preliminary 
analysis by Ibata's team suggests that these 15 objects do not include the 5 
found by comparing old and new images.

 Halo populations of white dwarfs pose serious problems, Richer notes. 
Formation of such objects would have thrown into interstellar space far more 
carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen than observations show. In addition, the 
appearance of galaxies today does not indicate that they once had enough 
sunlike stars to form a large population of halo white dwarfs.

 Theorist Bohdan Paczynski of Princeton University says the findings are 
intriguing, but he notes that by invoking the white dwarfs, the researchers 
"are trading one set of difficulties for another that is equally as difficult."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 12, September 18, 1999, p. 180. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
