By a nose, worms reveal new Prozac targets, Science News Online (9/25/99)

 By a nose, worms reveal new Prozac targets 

 By J. Travis

 A normal worm (left) and one wrinkling its nose in response to Prozac (right). 
(Choy and Thomas/ Molecular Cell) The scrunched-up noses of worms swimming in a 
solution of Prozac could help explain the popular antidepressant's side 
effects, such as insomnia, sexual dysfunction, and nausea. They may even 
challenge the current theory of how the drug lifts spirits.

 Although millions of people each year receive prescriptions for Prozac, a 
debate continues about how it and related antidepressants work. The prevailing 
hypothesis holds that these drugs correct a deficiency of the brain chemical 
serotonin by binding to and interfering with cell-surface proteins, the 
serotonin reuptake transporters, that mop up the neurotransmitter.

 Some investigators, however, contend that Prozac doesn't battle depression 
much better than placebo pills or talk therapy. Others accept the drug's value 
but dispute the evidence that serotonin deficiency causes depression.

"It's not that the drugs don't help some people-I think they do-but I don't 
think we know why," says Elliot S. Valenstein of the University of Michigan in 
Ann Arbor, a critic of the serotonin hypothesis. "There's so much that 
contradicts this simple theory, but we don't know what to turn to."

 To explore the workings of Prozac, Robert K.M. Choy and James H. Thomas of the 
University of Washington and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, both in 
Seattle, chose the humble nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. While its nervous 
system is extremely simple, the worm's nerve cells employ many of the same 
molecules, such as serotonin and its transporters, that the human brain does.

 When bathed in Prozac, C. elegans responds in two obvious ways. First, the 
drug triggers the female worms to lay eggs. Second, it induces muscle 
contractions, most dramatically in the muscles around the olfactory cells at 
the worm's tip.

 Investigators had previously shown that the egg-laying response stems from 
Prozac's interactions with the serotonin system. Choy and Thomas, however, 
found that the nose-muscle contractions occur independently of the drug's 
inhibition of serotonin transporters. This suggests that Prozac has other 
molecular targets in the worm, and possibly in people as well, says Choy.

 By exposing C. elegans to a mutation-causing chemical, the scientists created 
several strains of worms that in response to Prozac, lay eggs but don't wrinkle 
their noses. The researchers have now identified two genes-and continue to 
search for more-that when mutated confer resistance to Prozac's effect on the 
nematode nose. The genes encode novel cell-membrane proteins and are part of a 
larger family of genes, the scientists report in the current (August) Molecular 
Cell.

 Choy and Thomas haven't yet found comparable genes in people or shown that 
Prozac and similar antidepressants interact directly with the worm 
cell-membrane proteins. Only then, says Choy, can scientists address whether 
these proteins play any role in Prozac's antidepressant actions.

 While he favors the prevailing serotonin hypothesis, neuroscientist Randy D. 
Blakely of the Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville suspects that 
Choy and Thomas have uncovered interesting new targets of Prozac and related 
antidepressants. "They do make a very strong case that some side effects of 
these agents may be mediated through interactions with these proteins," he says.

 In the future, scientists may bathe worms in drugs other than Prozac. Blakely, 
for example, plans to expose C. elegans to antipsychotic drugs that affect 
transporters for the brain chemical dopamine.

"Drugs have historically been effective tools for investigating how worm 
neurons work; worm neurons may prove equally effective for investigating how 
drugs work," notes William R. Schafer of the University of California, San 
Diego in a commentary in the Sept. 3 Cell.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 13, September 25, 1999, p. 196. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
