Science News Online (9/4/99): Rarest of the Rare

 Rarest of the Rare Remote-camera images and dung-heap data give a portrait of 
Vietnam's rhinos

 By Janet Raloff

 Vietnam's Javan rhinos live in the jungle vegetation of Cat Tien National 
Park. (Ina Becker)

 Dense stands of bamboo commingle with spiny rattan and an occasional small 
tree to form a low, prickly jungle. This is an area almost devoid of trails, 
much less anything so accommodating as a road.

 In the dry season, the land is parched. During the other 9 months of the year, 
the heavens dump rain continually, creating swamps in the lowlands and steamy, 
slick hillsides elsewhere. And oh, those hills-not high so much as endlessly 
undulating. Traversing them puts a constant strain on leg muscles.

 Mosquitoes ply their blood-sucking trade, in the process often infecting 
trekkers with the infectious agents responsible for dengue fever, malaria, or 
Japanese encephalitis. Huge leeches stealthily attach themselves to passersby, 
hoping to crawl up to a warm meal on someone's leg or perhaps neck. At bedtime, 
as rare travelers string their hammocks in this jungle, a snarl might pierce 
the dark, signaling that a tiger is on the prowl.

 Surveying this area on foot is not most people's idea of a walk in the park. 
Yet that's exactly what conservation biologists and park guards sign up for 
when they come to Cat Loc, a portion of Cat Tien National Park in southern 
Vietnam.

 Those who patrol this formidable terrain are protecting what is arguably the 
most endangered mammal on earth. In this 6,200-hectare portion of the park 
resides the last surviving remnant of Javan rhinos outside Indonesia.

 Following the Vietnam War, scientists assumed that this subspecies was 
extinct-until the carcass of a poached animal turned up in a local market stall 
in 1989. Since then, scientists have been trying to protect Vietnam's elusive 
pocket of survivors.

 There aren't many Javan rhinos in the park, and in fact, none of the intrepid 
conservationists has ever seen one here in the flesh. Last year, an indirect 
census based on hoofprints pegged Vietnam's population at only five to eight 
rhinos. Still, that may constitute almost 15 percent of the species' global 
population-and a sizable share of its biodiversity.

 Several conservation groups and government agencies, including the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service, argue that there's an urgent need to safeguard this rhino 
from further threats. All acknowledge that the effort will be an uphill battle. 
At a minimum, government officials and biologists must weigh some politically 
charged tradeoffs if they hope to spare this creature from extinction.

 On patrol: Forest guards climb a hill covered with bamboo stands and jungle 
vegetation in Vietnam's protected rhino area. (WWF/Cat Tien National Park 
Conservation Project)

 The Javan, or lesser one-horned, rhino ( Rhinoceros sondaicus) once thundered 
throughout Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Burma, and Indonesia. Primarily a 
lowland dweller, populations even extended into India. In the mid-19th century, 
"this rhino could be found 20 kilometers from where Calcutta is now," notes 
Java-based conservation biologist Nico van Strien of the International Rhino 
Foundation (IRF), with headquarters in Cumberland, Ohio. He and other 
biologists were invited by the Vietnamese government to develop a 
rhino-conservation plan.

 Today, all rhinos are endangered owing to centuries of hunting-both to fill 
trophy cases and to supply folk medicine's demand for rhino horns, which 
traditional Oriental healers still prescribe as an aphrodisiac (SN: 11/17/79, 
p. 346). In the most dire condition are the Javans, barely holding on with some 
60 animals, and the Sumatran rhino ( Dicerorhinus sumatrensis), with perhaps 
300 individuals, all in Indonesia.

 Poaching of both rhinos is now largely under control, so human encroachment 
and poor habitat are emerging as leading constraints on each species' recovery. 
Nowhere is this more evident than in Vietnam.

 At about the same time the Vietnamese government made Cat Loc a rhino refuge 
in 1992, it designated this and the surrounding forested region a "new economic 
zone." In essence, the authorities invited citizens, especially ethnic 
minorities from crowded regions in northern Vietnam, to farm the area. People 
responded in droves, notes IRF program director Tom Foose.

 Some immigrants took up rice farming; many others cut down forest to establish 
cashew plantations. Though illegal, rattan harvesting in the park also 
developed into a thriving trade.

 Villagers' migration and activities have reduced the rhino's habitat to about 
15 percent of its area in 1990, Foose reports. Some 16,000 people now live 
right outside Cat Loc's forest-which, he notes, is the only area of Vietnam 
where rhinos remain. Another 200 people have actually moved inside the park's 
rhino territory, reports Gert Polet of the World Wildlife FundDVietnam, 
speaking by phone from Cat Tien, 150 kilometers north of Ho Chi Minh City.

 These local farmers tend to be very proud of the rhinos, says Polet, who heads 
the Cat Tien Conservation Project. Unfortunately, he adds, "the farmers are 
also very poor, and their making a living these days involves cutting down 
forest."

 What remains of the forest is no picnic for the animals, he adds. Javan rhinos 
prefer to eat shrubs, small trees, and the occasional mouthful of grass. 
Defoliants sprayed by U.S. planes during the Vietnam War, however, largely 
eradicated what had been the rhino's dietary staples. The bamboo and rattan, 
which quickly filled in the forest, remain.

 On the basis of hoofprint measurements, Vietnam's rhinos are only about 
two-thirds as big as members of their species in Java's Ujung Kulon National 
Park. While this difference might be genetic, Polet notes that the diminutive 
stature of Vietnam's rhinos may also reflect their poor diet.

 Infrared-triggered cameras recently provided a few images of live Javan rhinos 
in Vietnam. (Mike Baltzer/WWF)

 Though Polet would love the opportunity to measure a Vietnamese rhino, he'd 
settle for just laying eyes on one. To date, he and others working at Cat Loc 
have had to content themselves with poring over low-contrast, mostly nighttime 
flash photos of the animals captured by cameras set up last May.

 Polet's team identified 10 places in the park where rhinos were likely to 
wander, based on habitat and dung sightings. On strategically placed trees at 
each site, they mounted cameras and infrared sensors that trigger the shutters.

 Every 2 weeks, park guards laboriously trek to each camera to exchange film. 
The first rolls from four of the cameras yielded a total of seven portraits-the 
first-ever photos of live Vietnamese rhinos. In the intervening months, 
however, none of the cameras has caught another rhino on film. It almost 
appears, Polet says, as if the cagey critters are out to sabotage the system. 
Where hoofprints appear, they're now behind the trees bearing cameras. Several 
infrared sensors have also been roughed up and shoved out of alignment, 
presumably by the rhinos.

 Polet's hope is that photos from cameras placed in varying locations 
eventually will provide a noninvasive means of surveying the population over 
time, offering not only portraits of individuals, but also information on size, 
gender, and reproduction.

 In the next few months, dung should also emerge as a rich source of 
information on these elusive populations, according to Don J. Melnick of 
Columbia University in New York City.

 Forest guards place plaster casts of rhino hoofprints on a fallen tree. 
(WWF/Cat Tien National Park Conservation Project)

 For the past several years, Melnick has been fingerprinting DNA from the dung 
of rhinos and other endangered species. Not only do these data identify an 
animal's gender, but they also permit analyses of the degree to which 
individuals' genetic blueprints diverge.

 Conservation biologists have begun using such analyses to help them manage 
disappearing pockets of various endangered animals. Under a U.S. Fish & 
Wildlife Service grant, researchers in Melnick's lab are working out methods to 
analyze dung from Javan rhinos. They are working with dung from Indonesia and 
have arranged for specimens to be sent from Vietnam within the next few months.

"There are two measures of a population," Melnick explains. A census tallies 
how many individuals exist. As important to species conservators managing 
recovery of populations is the effective population size-how many animals have 
relatively dissimilar sets of genes. If the same individual fathered many of 
the animals in a group, the effective population size would be significantly 
smaller than the census indicates.

 Melnick notes that conservators often are tempted to move animals between 
groups to maximize their reproduction. If almost all of the seven or so 
Vietnamese rhinos prove to be male, for instance, biologists might consider 
airlifting in a few females from Java's Ujung Kulon reserve.

 Yet, important adaptations to endemic diseases or other aspects of each 
population's local environments may underlie any genetic distinctions between 
the two populations-already considered separate subspecies of R. sondaicus. 
Introducing genes from one group to the other might therefore render future 
generations of this beleaguered species even less fit, Melnick worries.

 His data already show that geographic distances between populations offer a 
poor gauge of genetic divergence. Black rhinos in Kenya and South Africa 
possess roughly the same genes, he found, indicating there would be no genetic 
problems in moving animals between the populations to enhance breeding.

 DNA analyses of Sumatran rhinos on two Indonesian islands, however, suggest 
that their populations diverged some half million years ago (SN: 2/8/97, p. 
92). As a result, Melnick says, "we argued very strongly that these animals not 
be translocated."

 If the Javan rhino populations in Indonesia and Vietnam also exhibit unique 
genetic adaptations to their local environments, Melnick told Science News, 
"only in the most dire circumstances would you consider interbreeding them."

 Guard points out a pile of rhino dung. (WWF/Cat Tien National Park 
Conservation Project)

 Experience with Indonesia's Javan rhinos suggests that protecting this species 
in Vietnam won't prove easy.

 A few decades back, Java's Ujung Kulon contained far more than the 50 or so 
animals it has now, observes van Strien. Yet despite "no [human] encroachment, 
and no confirmed poaching here for years," the rhino population refuses to 
climb, he says. This suggests, he worries, that the area can no longer support 
a larger population, or in other words, "the carrying capacity for Ujung Kulon 
may be going down."

 One concern, he notes, is that the reserve's protected trees have grown too 
tall for rhinos to nibble on and too dense to support shrubs that might serve 
as an alternate source of nutrition. For rhino managers, notes van Strien, this 
sets up a conflict.

"Some argue that as a national park, you shouldn't interfere but let the 
natural course of events proceed," he explains. "Others counter that Ujung 
Kulon is specifically meant for rhinos, so we should manipulate it," such as by 
regularly burning forest to create the clearings needed for new trees and 
shrubs.

 An alternative approach would be to establish one or more new populations away 
from the reserve. "I would personally prefer . . . captive breeding of some 
animals," he says. Once researchers stabilize such captive groups, they could 
move some animals to safe habitats, he says-probably on Indonesia's island of 
Sumatra.

 The idea is neither simple nor sure to succeed. Rhinos have remained elusive 
even in Ujung Kulon, so finding any to capture wouldn't be easy. If the animals 
prove vulnerable to stress, forced exile might compromise their health. 
Finally, as experience with Sumatran rhinos shows, some species simply fail to 
reproduce in captivity.

 Javan rhino photographed in an Indonesian wallow. (C Alain Compost/Bogor, 
Java, Indonesia)

 Indeed, these concerns fuel a reluctance on the part of Vietnam's rhino 
conservators to advocate moving its population out of Cat Loc and into 
potentially better habitat elsewhere in the park. So, a basic dilemma results: 
"Either the rhinos have to go somewhere else or the people must leave," van 
Strien told Science News by phone from Ujung Kulon.

 In a new report prepared for the Vietnam government and slated to be published 
soon by the Centre of Environmental Sciences at Leiden University in the 
Netherlands, Polet concedes there are no easy or inexpensive solutions. He 
favors relocating the people and leaving the rhinos be.

 New settlers "should be moved out of the park as a matter of urgency," he 
says, and the government should ban farming immediately outside this area to 
create a "buffer zone" around the rhinos' domain.

 Philip Wells, an Indonesia-based law-enforcement consultant with IRF, was 
recently invited to Cat Tien to evaluate its species-protection efforts and to 
train guards. Having spoken with local immigrant villagers, Wells notes that 
most seem sympathetic to the rhino's plight "and don't seem that unhappy about 
leaving-provided they got adequate compensation." Indeed, he notes, money seems 
available for this.

 Recognizing the importance of building support in local communities for 
Vietnam's rhino, the U.S. government has just funded a new program to produce 
fact sheets for local adults and posters and storybooks for village children. 
It also will fund town meetings and government seminars to stress everyone's 
need to cooperate in this animal's protection.

 At the beginning of this century, the Indian rhino had been hunted down to an 
estimated 20 animals. Today, Foose notes, "there are close to 2,000." Africa's 
southern white rhino, also down to perhaps 20 or 40 animals at the turn of the 
century, has bounced back even more spectacularly-to at least 8,500 animals.

 These successes fuel Foose's hope that even Vietnam's tiny population may 
recover. Admittedly, he says, "it will take a bit of luck-and strict 
protection."

 With the Javan rhino being confined to Cat Tien and Ujung Kulon, "we've got 
all our eggs in two very fragile baskets," says veterinarian Steve Osofsky, 
senior program officer for species conservation with the World Wildlife Fund in 
Washington, D.C. "Though it's not much solace," he says, "it's also not 
hopeless."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 10, September 4, 1999, p. 153. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
