Science News Online (9/18/99): Berry good protection for aging brains

 Berry good protection for aging brains 

 By J. Raloff

 Anthocyanin pigments give blueberries intense color and antioxidant power. 
(North American Blueberry Council) It's depressing to contemplate the memory 
loss and physical infirmity that so often accompany aging. Federal scientists, 
however, now report that the blues may constitute a palatable prescription for 
fighting the ravages of growing old-if, that is, those blues are berries.

 The body creates oxidants, chemically reactive molecular fragments, to 
eliminate old cells, infectious agents, and damaged tissue. When all goes well, 
natural antioxidants quickly step in to limit the process before it gets out of 
hand. As animals age, however, their antioxidant production wanes. Indeed, 
oxidation underlies many degenerative changes that come with aging (SN: 
8/10/96, p. 95).

 Last year, chemists at the Agriculture Department's Human Nutrition Research 
Center on Aging (HNRCA) at Tufts University in Boston found that blueberries 
are a rich source of pigments, called flavonoids, that show strong antioxidant 
activity. Their earlier data showed that spinach and strawberries contain 
copious amounts of other antioxidants.

 Colleagues in a neighboring lab have now supplemented the standard rodent food 
with a powdered form of blueberries, strawberries, or spinach. The researchers 
added the supplements in amounts having equal antioxidant activity. Ten 
19-month-old rats received each type of supplemented rations. In terms of life 
span, these animals were on par with people in their 60s.

 After 8 weeks, the scientists put each animal through a number of tests. These 
included mazes, walking a narrow plank, and balancing on a spinning rod. 
Afterward, the researchers removed and examined each animal's brain.

 Though all supplemented animals performed better on memory tests than the 10 
rats that got undoctored chow, only the blueberry group showed notable 
improvements over the control group in every test of motor coordination. James 
A. Joseph of HNRCA and his colleagues report their findings in the Sept. 15 
Journal of Neuroscience.

 After eating blueberry-laced chow for 2 months, 21-month-old animals 
outperformed unsupplemented, younger rats, Joseph says. "So, we got reversals 
in age-related declines." The blueberries that each animal downed were 
equivalent, when adjusted for body weight, to 1 cup daily in a person's diet, 
he notes.

 The scientists measured a variety of chemical-signaling characteristics in 
each rat's striatum, a brain region pivotal to coordination. Each supplement 
showed a different benefit pattern, Joseph says, suggesting that blueberries' 
protectiveness may trace to more than oxidant quenching.

"A next important step in the research will be to see if the improvements are 
long lasting," says Molly Wagster of the National Institute on Aging in 
Bethesda, Md., which funded the study in part.

 The differential benefits seen with the three diets reinforce what many other 
recent studies have suggested: "All antioxidants aren't alike," observes 
William A. Pryor of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge. Some reach 
different places in the body; others do more than halt oxidation, he says.

 It's therefore important, he argues, not to rely on supplements containing a 
single antioxidant, such as vitamin E. "You've still got to eat plenty of 
different fruits and vegetables," Pryor says. Since pigments can be very potent 
antioxidants, he prizes deeply colored foods-especially "anything blue."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 12, September 18, 1999, p. 180. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
