Slumber's Unexplored Landscape, Science News Online (9/25/99)

 Slumber's Unexplored Landscape People in traditional societies sleep in 
eye-opening ways

 By Bruce Bower

 A Gebusi woman in New Guinea, decked out in her dance costume, catches a few 
winks on a woodpile during a male initiation ceremony. (Eileen Knauft) Ah, the 
sweet simplicity of sleep. You tramp into your bedroom with sagging eyelids and 
stifle a yawn. After disrobing, you douse the lights and climb into bed. Maybe 
a little reading or television massages the nerves, loosening them up for 
slumber's velvet fingers. In a while, you nod off. Suddenly, an alarm clock's 
shrill blast breaks up the dozefest as the sun pokes over the horizon. You feel 
a bit drowsy but shake it off and face the new day. Images of a dream dissolve 
like sugar in the morning's first cup of coffee.

 There's a surprising twist, however, at the heart of this familiar ritual. It 
simply doesn't apply to people currently living outside of the modern Western 
world-or even to inhabitants of Western Europe as recently as 200 years ago.

 In such contexts, and probably throughout human evolution, solitary shut-eye 
organized around a regular bedtime and a single bout of sleep proves about as 
common as stock car racing or teleconferencing. Surprisingly, anthropologists 
have rarely scrutinized the sleep patterns and practices of different cultures, 
much less those of different classes and ethnic groups in the United States.

 An initial attempt to draw back the veils of sleep in hunter-gatherer groups 
and other traditional societies has uncovered a wide variety of sleep customs, 
reports anthropologist Carol M. Worthman of Emory University in Atlanta. None 
of these snooze styles, however, looks anything like what modern Western folk 
take for granted.

 This finding raises profound questions for the burgeoning discipline of sleep 
research, Worthman says. Over the past 50 years, scientists have avidly delved 
into slumber's biology. Early research identified periods of rapid-eye-movement 
(REM) sleep, during which intense dreams often occur. Current efforts pursue 
genes involved in wakefulness and sleeping (SN: 8/14/99, p. 100). Researchers 
have also taken strides toward treating insomnia and other sleep disturbances.

 While investigators readily concede that they don't yet know why people sleep 
and dream, they assume that they at least know how people should sleep: alone 
or with a partner for a solid chunk of the night. Sleep studies therefore take 
place in laboratories where individuals catch winks while hooked up to a bevy 
of brain and body monitors.

 However, the distinctive sleep styles of non-Western groups may mold sleep's 
biology in ways undreamed of in sleep labs, Worthman suggests. They may 
influence factors ranging from sleep-related genes to the brain's electrical 
output during various sleep phases.

"It's time for scientists to get out into natural sleep environments," Worthman 
remarks. "It's embarrassing that anthropologists haven't done this, and the 
lack of such work is impeding sleep research."

 A seemingly innocent question awakened Worthman to her discipline's ignorance 
of how people sleep. In 1994, she had a conversation with pediatrician Ronald 
E. Dahl of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, who studies the 
effects of mood disorders on sleep. He asked the Emory scientist to tell him 
what anthropologists know about the history and prehistory of sleep. "[My] 
bald, if somewhat overstated, answer was 'zero,'" she says.

 Sleep scarcely figures in the literature on either cross-cultural differences 
or human evolution, Worthman realized. Investigators generally relegate slumber 
to the sidelines, treating it as a biological given with little potential for 
variation from one place to another, she holds.

 A few researchers have bucked this trend. For instance, anthropologist James 
J. McKenna of the University of Notre Dame in Indiana has reported that babies 
in many countries outside the United States sleep next to or in the same room 
as their parents. Contact with a parent's body helps regulate an infant's 
breathing and other physiological functions, he asserts, perhaps lowering the 
risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SN: 12/4/93, p. 380).

 McKenna's work should have roused investigators of traditional societies out 
of their sleep-related torpor, Worthman says. Yet, even seasoned field-workers 
have tended to ignore sleep-at least in their published works-while describing 
food production, sexual practices, and other facets of daily life.

 So, Worthman contacted seven researchers who she knew had intimate knowledge 
of one or more traditional societies, including nomadic foragers, herders, and 
village-based farmers. Among these far-flung populations, none of the 
investigators, by their own admission, had systematically studied how people 
sleep. After plumbing what the researchers had absorbed about nighttime 
activities, Worthman has assembled a preliminary picture of sleep practices in 
10 non-Western populations.

 Worthman's findings rip the covers off any lingering suspicions that people 
everywhere sleep pretty much alike. Far from the wallpapered confines of 
middle-class bedrooms, sleep typically unfolds in shared spaces that feature 
constant background noise emanating from other sleepers, various domestic 
animals, fires maintained for warmth and protection from predators, and other 
people's nearby nighttime activities.

 Groups in Worthman's analysis include Ache foragers in Paraguay, !Kung 
hunter-gatherers in Africa, Swat Pathan herders in Pakistan, and Balinese 
farmers in Indonesia. For all these groups and six others, communal sleep 
equals safe sleep, because sleepers can count on there being someone else up or 
easily awakened at all hours of the night to warn others of a threat or 
emergency.

 Adult sleepers in traditional societies recline on skins, mats, wooden 
platforms, the ground, or just about anything except a thick, springy mattress. 
Pillows or head supports are rare, and people doze in whatever they happen to 
be wearing. Virtually no one, including children, keeps a regular bedtime. 
Individuals tend to slip in and out of slumber several times during the night. 
In these unplugged worlds, darkness greatly limits activity and determines the 
time allotted to sleep. Folks there frequently complain of getting too much 
sleep, not too little.

 Many rituals occur at night and exploit the need to sleep. For instance, 
initiation rites often force participants to cope with sleep deprivation. In 
other ceremonies, individuals enter somnolent, or near-sleep, states in order 
to magnify an occasion's psychological impact and to induce spiritual visions.

 Consider the communal sleep of the Gebusi, New Guinea, rainforest dwellers, 
who grow fruit in small gardens and occasionally hunt wild pigs. Women, girls, 
and babies crowd into a narrow section of a community longhouse to sleep on 
mats. Men and boys retreat to an adjacent, more spacious longhouse area, where 
they sleep on wooden platforms.

 Gebusi females retire at dark for about 10 hours of rest and sleep. In 
contrast, the men stay up later and frequently conduct rituals. About once a 
month, everyone attends an all-night dance and feast, catching up on sleep the 
next day.

 Each week or two, Gebusi men go to sances led by a "spirit medium," at which 
they try to keep spirits awake throughout the night. Participants attempt to 
slip in and out of a near-sleep state as the medium, who's usually adept at 
operating in this half-conscious condition, sings about the spirit world and 
other matters.

 As in most of the other studied societies, the Gebusi express concerns about 
exposure to ghosts, evil spirits, and witchcraft during sleep. They consider 
deep sleep risky, since a sleeper's spirit may wander off too far and fail to 
return. The Gebusi view group slumber as a way to lessen the danger of spirit 
loss, which they view as especially likely while a person dreams.

 Whether or not one believes that sleeping puts a person's spirit at risk, 
slumber appears to have crucial effects on body and mind. A culture's sleeping 
style serves as a growing child's training ground for managing biologically 
based systems of attention and alertness, Worthman contends. Balinese farmers 
provide a striking example of this sleep-related tutoring.

 Balinese infants are carried and held continuously by caregivers so that they 
learn to fall asleep even in hectic and noisy situations. This grooms them to 
exhibit what the Balinese call "fear sleep" later in life, Worthman says. 
Children and adults enter fear sleep by suddenly slumping over in a deep 
slumber when they or family members confront intense anxiety or an unexpected 
fright. They are literally scared into sleep.

 Infants in middle-class American homes, who usually sleep alone, may not learn 
to ground their sleeping and waking cycles in a flow of sensations that include 
bodily contact, smells, and background noises, Worthman proposes. In fact, 
babies forced to bounce back and forth between the sensory overload of the 
waking world and the sensory barrenness of dark, quiet bedrooms may often find 
it difficult to relax, fall asleep, wake up, or concentrate, she theorizes.

 Only cross-cultural studies of children's sleep and behavior can clarify such 
issues, Worthman says.

 She described her findings and their implications in June at the annual 
meeting of the Associated Professional Sleep Societies in Orlando, Fla.

 Sleep researchers at the meeting expressed considerable excitement about the 
potential for cross-cultural studies. "Worthman is doing innovative and 
important work," comments neuroscientist Robert A. Stickgold of the 
Massachusetts Mental Health Center in Boston. "It's awakening us to the many 
different ways in which people organize sleep."

 Stickgold has developed snug-fitting, electrode-studded caps that people can 
wear in their own beds to measure brain activity linked to REM and other sleep 
stages. Worthman plans to take these "nightcaps," which hook up to mobile 
recorders, into the field to study sleep biology in traditional societies.

"I've been hoping anthropologists would examine sleep cross-culturally for the 
past 20 years," remarks psychologist Mary A. Carskadon of the Brown University 
School of Medicine in Providence, R.I.

 Carskadon has directed studies that indicate that the body's so-called 
biological clock gets pushed back during adolescence. Teenagers may require 
more sleep than adults and may have a natural tendency to go to sleep later and 
wake up later than at other ages, she says.

 A related study, directed by neuroscientist Louis J. Pta-ek of the University 
of Utah in Salt Lake City, finds that a specific gene yanks the biological 
clock forward in some adults. People who have this gene tend to fall asleep by 
8:30 p.m. and to awaken before 5:30 a.m., the researchers report in the 
September Nature Medicine.

 In modern Western cultures, teens' backward shift in sleep timing is 
considered a nuisance or a sign of rebellion, while extreme early birds get 
diagnosed as sleep disordered. In traditional settings, however, highly 
variable sleep schedules among individuals and age groups prove invaluable, 
since they allow for someone to be awake or easily roused at all times should 
danger arise, Worthman holds.

 If sleeping patterns in traditional societies remain little known, those of 
prehistoric humans are a total mystery. Still, in settings that roughly mimic 
ancient nighttime conditions, sleep undergoes an intriguing shift, says 
psychiatrist Thomas A. Wehr of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) 
in Bethesda, Md.

 When prohibited from using artificial light from dusk until dawn, people who 
formerly slumbered in solid blocks of time begin to sleep in two periods 
separated by an hour or two of quiet rest and reflection.

 Wehr and his coworkers asked 15 healthy adults to rest and sleep in darkness 
for 14 hours (6 p.m. to 8 a.m.) each night for several weeks. Volunteers slept 
for 11 hours each of the first few nights, apparently to catch up on their 
sleep. They then settled into a pattern of lying awake for a couple of hours 
before falling asleep for 3 to 5 hours in the evening. An hour or so of quiet 
wakefulness ensued, followed by about 4 more hours of sleep in the early 
morning.

 Many mammals sleep in two major bouts during the night or day, Wehr says. 
Animals from rodents to giraffes and the experimental human sleepers secrete 
elevated amounts of the hormone prolactin when they rest quietly, even if they 
are not asleep. Prolactin may promote a state of calmness that accompanies 
sleep, the NIMH scientist suggests.

 Participants in Wehr's study usually awoke out of REM sleep to end their first 
slumber session. During REM sleep, the brain becomes about as active as it is 
when wide awake. One function of this sleep phase may be to set the stage for 
waking up, Wehr holds.

 If prehistoric people slept in two nightly periods, then regularly awakening 
out of REM sleep may have allowed them to reflect on and remember their dreams 
in a semiconscious state that's generally unavailable to modern sleepers. Sleep 
compressed into a single stint may thus encourage modern humans to lose touch 
with dreams, myths, and fantasies, Wehr argues.

 These results, first reported in 1993, also raise the possibility that people 
who wake up once or twice each night don't necessarily suffer from insomnia. "A 
natural human sleep pattern may reassert itself in an unwelcome world and get 
labeled as a disorder," Wehr says.

 The two-phase sleep pattern observed by Wehr corresponds remarkably closely to 
the way in which most Western Europeans slept between 500 and 200 years ago, 
according to historian A. Roger Ekirch of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University in Blacksburg. While doing research for a book on nighttime 
behaviors during that era, Ekirch came across several hundred references to 
what he identifies as "segmented sleep."

 From country farms and villages to city apartments, early modern Europeans 
usually sank each evening into what they called a "first sleep," which lasted 
for several hours. Shortly after midnight, they awoke and spent 1 or 2 hours in 
a "watching period." A "second," or "morning," sleep followed.

 The watching period presented many opportunities, Ekirch notes. People coming 
out of their first sleep often stayed in bed to pray, converse with a 
bedfellow, contemplate the day's events or the meaning of a dream, or simply 
let their minds wander in a semiconscious state of contentment that was prized 
at the time.

 A 16th-century physician wrote that many laborers dozed off exhausted at the 
start of each night. Sexual intercourse with their wives typically occurred in 
the watching period, after a recuperative first sleep.

 These days, Western societies treat sleep more as an unavoidable stretch of 
downtime than as a prelude to sex or a time for inner reflection. Only 
intensive investigations across cultures and classes will illuminate the 
lushness of sleep's landscape, Worthman predicts.

 Adds Wehr, "We're going to have to reconceptualize what it means to sleep 
normally."

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 13, September 25, 1999, p. 205. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
