Science News Online (9/4/99): A first: Scientists oust a marine invader

 A first: Scientists oust a marine invader 

 By J. Raloff

 Worms share a shell. (Culver/UCSB) California scientists announce they have 
evicted from local waters a South African worm that had been devastating area 
mollusks.

 If confirmed, it will be "the first successful eradication of a 
well-established [nonnative] marine pest" anywhere, says project leader Armand 
M. Kuris of the University of California, Santa Barbara.

 The spread of nonnative species is a large and growing problem (SN: 2/13/99, 
p. 103). Most go unnoticed until they are firmly established. Already widely 
dispersed-and lacking natural predators-they then prove all but impossible to 
eliminate.

 The invading worm first came to light 6 years ago, when a California abalone 
farmer reported that his native stock was failing to grow. Shells of the 
sickened mollusks were no longer fairly flat, striated, and hard, but instead 
domed, amorphous, and crumbly. They also lacked the respiratory holes used to 
release materials including feces and reproductive cells.

 Enter Kuris, an ecological parasitologist at the university's Marine Science 
Institute (MSI). Examining the shells, he discovered microscopic worms. Upon 
further investigation, the worms turned up in all of California's 17 other 
abalone farms. Carrie Culver, also of MSI, suspects that local growers 
unwittingly imported the pests in abalone from South Africa, where the worms 
had gone unnoticed.

 Taxonomists Kirk Fitzhugh of the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History 
and Greg Rouse of the University of Sydney in Australia now report that this 
abalone worm represents a new genus and species. In the fall Invertebrate 
Biology, they christen it Terebrasabella heterouncinata.

"In the worst case, there can be thousands of these worms per shell," observes 
Culver. She's found that they induce abalone to secrete a protective tubelike 
shell over them. Once covered, the worms thrive even if their host dies.

 Pore holes seen in healthy shell (left) are missing from deformed shell of 
infested abalone (right). (Culver/UCSB)

 Economic losses due to the worm have already put one pioneering California 
abalone grower out of business, notes Culver. The epidemic, however, didn't 
stay confined to shellfish farms. In 1996, she and Kuris discovered the worm in 
coastal waters just outside an abalone farm north of Morro Bay.

 The scientists immediately coaxed local public and private agencies into 
recruiting volunteers to cull the affected waters of aquaculture debris and 
some 1.5 million large snails, which the pests also infect. Their goal: to 
reduce local mollusks so that larval worms fail to find a host and simply die 
off.

"It's now been 2 years since we've seen any sign of infestation," Kuris says.

 Unable to swim, the microscopic worms must crawl in search of a host. Kuris' 
team owes its success to identifying and quickly "exploiting this slow 
dispersal-the pest's Achilles' heel," says Elliott A. Norse of the Marine 
Conservation Biology Institute in Redmond, Wash.

"It's a marvelous example of the way we should deal with eradications," agrees 
Roger Mann of the College of William and Mary's Virginia Institute of Marine 
Science in Gloucester Point, Va. He only wishes he could find a similar 
vulnerability in the life cycle of another new invader-a voracious oriental 
whelk threatening shellfish in the Chesapeake Bay.

 From Science News, Vol. 156, No. 10, September 4, 1999, p. 151. Copyright C 
1999, Science Service. 
